A Letter to the Rev. Dr. Horne
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 9 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
WHEN you spoke of “heresies making their periodical
revolutions,” of “Antinomianism rampant among us,” and,
immediately after, of “the new lights at the Tabernacle and
Foundery,” must not your hearers naturally think that Mr.
Whitefield and I were reviving those heresies? But do you
know the persons of whom you speak? Have you ever con
versed with them? Have you read their writings? If not,
is it kind, is it just, to pass so severe a censure upon them?
Had you only taken the trouble of reading one tract, the
“Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion,” you would have
seen that a great part of what you affirm is what I never
denied. To put this beyond dispute, I beg leave to transcribe
some passages from that treatise; which will show not only
what I teach now, but what I have taught for many years.
I will afterward simply and plainly declare wherein I as yet
differ from you: And the rather, that if I err therein, you
may, by God’s assistance, convince me of it.
I. 1. “Justification sometimes means our acquittal at the
last day. (Matt. xii. 37.) But this is altogether out of the
present question; that justification whereof our Articles and
Homilies speak, meaning present forgiveness, pardon of sins,
and, consequently, acceptance with God; who therein
‘declares his righteousness’ (or mercy, by or) “for the
remission of the sins that are past; saying, ‘I will be
merciful to thy unrighteousness, and thine iniquities I will
remember no more.” (Rom. iii. 25; Heb. viii. 12.)
“I believe the condition of this is faith. (Rom. iv. 5, &c.)
I mean, not only, that without faith we cannot be justified;
but also, that as soon as any one has true faith, in that moment
he is justified.
“Good works follow this faith, but cannot go before it:
(Luke vi. 43:) Much less can sanctification, which implies a
continued course of good works, springing from holiness of
heart. But it is allowed, that entire sanctification goes before
our justification at the last day. (Heb. xii. 14.)
“It is allowed, also, that repentance, and ‘fruits meet for
repentance, go before faith. (Mark i. 15; Matt. iii. 8.) Repent
ance absolutely must go before faith; fruits meet for it, if there
be opportunity. By repentance, I mean conviction of sin, pro
ducing real desires and sincere resolutions of amendment; and
by “fruits meet for repentance, forgiving our brother; (Matt.
vi. 14, 15;) ceasing from evil, doing good; (Luke iii. 8, 9,
&c.;) using the ordinances of God, and, in general, obeying
him according to the measure of grace which we have received.
(Matthew vii. 7; xxv. 29.) But these I cannot as yet term
good works; because they do not spring from faith and the
love of God.” (Farther Appeal. Vol. VIII. pp. 46, 47.)
2. “Faith alone is the proximate condition of present justi
fication.”
II. 1. I have shown here, at large, what is the doctrine I
teach with regard to justification, and have taught, ever since
I was convinced of it myself, by carefully reading the New
Testament and the Homilies. In many points, I apprehend,
it agrees with yours: In some it does not; these I come now
to consider. May God enable me to do it in love and meekness
of wisdom.
You say, “Happy times, when faith and a good life
were synonymous terms!” (Page 7.) I conceive, they never
were. Is not faith the root, a good life the tree springing
therefrom ?
“That good works are a necessary condition of our justifi
cation, may be proved, (1.) From express testimonies of Scrip
ture. So Isaiah i. 16, 17: “Cease from evil, learn to do well.’
Then ‘your sins, that were as scarlet, shall be white as snow.’
Here, ceasing from evil, and learning to do well, are the con
ditions of pardon.” I answer: Without them there is no par
don; yet the immediate condition of it is faith. He that
believeth, and he alone, is justified before God. “So Ezekiel
xxxiii. 14–16: If the sinner ‘turn from his evil ways, and
‘walk in the statutes of life, then “all his sins shall not be once.
mentioned to him.’” Most sure; that is, if he believe; else,
whatever his outward walking be, he cannot be justified.
The next scripture you cite, Matt. xi. 28, (Sermon, p. 10,)
proves no more than this, that none find “rest to their souls,”
unless they first come to Christ, (namely, by faith,) and then
obey him.
But, “He says, “Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I
command you.’” He does so; but how does it appear, that
this relates to justification at all?
“St. Peter also declares, “In every nation, he that feareth
God and worketh righteousness is accepted of him.’” (Acts
x. 35.) He is; but none can either fear God, or work right
eousness, till he believes according to the dispensation he is
under. “And St. John : “He that doeth righteousness is
righteous.’” I do not see that this proves anything. “And
again: “If we walk in the light, as God is in the light, then
have we communion with him, and the blood of Jesus Christ
his Son cleanseth us from all sin.’” (1 John i. 7.) This would
prove something, if it could be proved, that “cleansing us from
all sin” meant only justification.
“The Scriptures insist upon the necessity of repentance, in
particular, for that purpose. But repentance comprehends
compunction, humiliation, hatred of sin, confession of it, prayer
for mercy, ceasing from evil, a firm purpose to do well,
restitution of ill-got goods, forgiveness of all who have done us
wrong, and works of beneficence.” (Pages 11, 12.) I believe it
does.comprehend all these, either as parts or as fruits of it: And it
comprehends “the fear” but not “the love of God,” that flows
from a higher principle. And he who loves God is not barely
in the right way to justification: He is actually justified. The
rest of the paragraph asserts just the same thing which was
asserted in those words: “Previous to justifying faith must be
repentance, and, if opportunity permits, “fruits meet for repent
ance.’” But still I must observe, that “neither the one nor
the other is necessary, either in the same sense, or in the same
degree, with faith.” No scripture testimony can be produced,
which any way contradicts this.
2. “That works are a necessary condition of our justification,
may be proved, Secondly, from scripture examples; particu
larly those recited in the eleventh chapter of the Epistle to the
Hebrews. These all “through faith wrought righteousness;
without working righteousness, they had never obtained the
promises.” (Page 13.) I say the same thing: None are finally
saved, but those whose faith “worketh by love.”
“Even in the thief upon the cross, faith was attended by
repentance, piety, and charity.” It was; repentance went be
fore his faith; piety and charity accompanied it. “Therefore,
he was not justified by faith alone.” Our Church, adopting the
words of St. Chrysostom, expressly affirms, in the passage
above cited, he was justified by faith alone. And her authority
ought to weigh more than even that of Bishop Bull, or of any
single man whatever. Authority, be pleased to observe, I
plead against authority; reason against reason.
It is no objection, that the faith whereby he was justified
immediately produced good works.
3. How we are justified by faith alone, and yet by such a
faith as is not alone, it may be proper to explain. And this
also I choose to do, not in my own words, but in those of our
Church:
“Faith does not shut out repentance, hope, love, and the
fear of God, to be joined with faith in every man that is justi
fied: But it shutteth them out from the office of justifying. So
that although they be all present together in him that is justi
fied, yet they justify not all together. Neither doth faith shut
out good works, necessarily to be done afterwards, of duty
towards God. -
“That we are justified only by this faith in Christ, speak all
the ancient authors; specially Origen, St. Cyprian, St. Chry
sostom, Hilary, Basil, St. Ambrose, and St. Augustine.”
(Homily on the Salvation of Man.)
4. You go on: “Thirdly, if we consider the nature of faith,
it will appear impossible that a man should be justified by that
alone. Faith is either an assent to the gospel truths, or a
reliance on the gospel promises. I know of no other notion of
faith.” (Sermon, p. 15.) I do; an exeryxos of things not seen ;
which is far more than a bare assent, and yet toto genere differ
ent from a reliance. Therefore, if you prove that neither an
assent nor a reliance justifies, nor both of them together, still
you do not prove that we are not justified by faith, even by faith
alone. But how do you prove, that we cannot be justified by
faith as a reliance on the promises? Thus: “Such a reliance
must be founded on a consciousness of having performed the
conditions. And a reliance so founded is the result of works
wrought through faith.” No; of works wrought without faith;
else the argument implies a contradiction. For it runs thus:
(On the supposition that faith and reliance were synonymous
terms:) Such a reliance is the result of works wrought through
such a reliance.
5. Your Fourth argument against justification by faith alone,
is drawn from the nature of justification. This, you observe,
“implies a prisoner at the bar, and a law by which he is to be
tried; and this is not the law of Moses, but that of Christ,
requiring repentance and faith, with their proper fruits;” (page
16;) which now, through the blood of Christ, are accepted and
“counted for righteousness.” St. Paul affirms this concerning
faith, in the fourth chapter of his Epistle to the Romans. But
where does he say, that either repentance or its fruits are
counted for righteousness? Nevertheless, I allow that the law of
Christ requires such repentance and faith before justification,
as, if there be opportunity, will bring forth the “fruits of right
eousness.” But if there be not, he that repents and believes is
justified notwithstanding. Consequently, these alone are neces
sary, indispensably necessary, conditions of our justification.
6. Your Last argument against justification by faith alone
“is drawn from the method of God’s proceeding at the last day.
He will then judge every man ‘according to his works. If,
therefore, works wrought through faith are the ground of the
sentence passed upon us in that day, then are they a necessary
condition of our justification; ” (page 19;) in other words, “if
they are a condition of our final, they are a condition of our
present, justification.” I cannot allow the consequence. All
holiness must precede our entering into glory. But no holiness
can exist, till, “being justified by faith, we have peace with God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ.”
7. You next attempt to reconcile the writings of St. Paul
with justification by works. In order to this you say, “In the
three first chapters of his Epistle to the Romans, he proves
that both Jews and Gentiles must have recourse to the gospel
of Christ. To this end he convicts the whole world of sin; and
having stopped every mouth, he makes his inference, ‘There
fore, by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified.
We conclude, them, says he, “a man is justified by faith, with
out the deeds of the law. But here arise two questions: First,
What are the works excluded from justifying? Secondly, What
is the faith which justifies?” (Pages 20, 21, 22.)
“The works excluded are heathem and Jewish works, set up
as meritorious. This is evident from hence,—that Heathens
and carnal Jews are the persons against whom he is arguing.”
Not so : He is arguing against all mankind: He is convicting
the whole world of sin. His concern is to stop every mouth,
by proving that no flesh, none born of a woman, no child of
man, can be justified by his own works. Consequently, he
speaks of all the works of all mankind, antecedent to justifica
tion, whether Jewish or any other, whether supposed meritori
ous or not, of which the text says not one word. Therefore,
all works antecedent to justification are excluded, and faith is
set in flat opposition to them. “Unto him that worketh not,
but believeth, his faith is counted to him for righteousness.”
“But what is the faith to which he attributes justification?
That ‘which worketh by love;’ which is the same with the
‘new creature, and implies in it the keeping the command
ments of God.”
It is undoubtedly true, that nothing avails for our final salva
tion without catwm &tious, “a new creation,” and consequent
thereon, a sincere, uniform keeping of the commandments of
God. This St. Paul constantly declares. But where does he
say, this is the condition of our justification? In the Epistles
to the Romans and Galatians particularly, he vehemently
asserts the contrary; earnestly maintaining, that nothing is
absolutely necessary to this, but “believing in Him that justi
fieth the ungodly;” not the godly, not him that is already
a “new creature,” that previously keeps all the commandments
of God. He does this afterward; when he is justified by faith,
then his faith “worketh by love.”
“Therefore, there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus,” justified by faith in him, provided they “walk
in Him whom they have received, not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit.” (Page 23.) But should they turn back, and walk
again after the flesh, they would again be under condemnation.
But this no way proves that “walking after the Spirit” was
the condition of their justification.
Neither will anything like this follow from the Apostle's.
I 2
saying to the Corinthians, “Though I had all faith, so as to
remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.” This
only proves that miracle-working faith may be where saving
faith is not.
8. To the argument, “St. Paul says, “Abraham was justified
by faith,’” you answer, “St. James says, “Abraham was justi
fied by works.’” (Page 24.) True: But he neither speaks of
the same justification, nor the same faith, nor the same works.
Not of the same justification; for St. Paul speaks of that justi
fication which was five-and-twenty years before Isaac was born;
(Genesis;) St. James, of that wherewith he was justified when
he offered up Isaac on the altar. It is living faith whereby
St. Paul affirms we are justified: It is dead faith whereby St.
James affirms we are not justified. St. Paul speaks of works
antecedent to justification; St. James, of works consequent
upon it. This is the plain, easy, natural way of reconciling the
two Apostles.
The fact was manifestly this: (1.) When Abraham dwelt in
Haran, being then seventy-five years old, God called him
thence: He “believed God,” and He “counted it to him for
righteousness; ” that is, “he was justified by faith,” as St. Paul
strenuously asserts. (2.) Many years after Isaac was born,
(some of the ancients thought three-and-thirty,) Abraham,
showing his faith by his works, offered him up upon the altar.
(3.) Here the “faith” by which, in St. Paul's sense, he was
justified long before, “wrought together with his works;” and
he was justified in St. James’s sense, that is, (as the Apostle
explains his own meaning,) “by works his faith was made
perfect.” God confirmed, increased, and perfected the principle
from which those works sprang.
9. Drawing to a conclusion, you say, “What pity, so many
volumes should have been written upon the question,—whether
a man be justified by faith or works, seeing they are two essen
tial parts of the same thing!” (Page 25.) If by works you
understand inward and outward holiness, both faith and works
are essential parts of Christianity; and yet they are essentially
different, and by God himself contradistinguished from each
other; and that in the very question before us: “Him that
worketh not, but believeth.” Therefore, whether a man be jus
tified by faith or works, is a point of the last importance; other
wise, our Reformers could not have answered to God their spend
ing so much time upon it. Indeed, they were both too wise
and too good men to have wrote so many volumes on a trifling
or needless question.
10. If in speaking on this important point, (such at least it
appears to me,) I have said any thing offensive, any that im
plies the least degree of anger or disrespect, it was entirely
foreign to my intention; nor indeed have I any provocation:
I have no room to be angry at your maintaining what you
believe to be the truth of the gospel; even though I might
wish you had omitted a few expressions,
Quas aut incuria fudit,
Aut humana parum cavit natura."
In the general, from all I have heard concerning you, I cannot
but very highly esteem you in love. And that God may give
you both “a right judgment in all things, and evermore to
rejoice in his holy comfort,” is the prayer of,
Reverend Sir,
Your affectionate brother and servant,
