Thoughts on the Imputed Righteousness of Christ
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. A TRACT has lately been published in my name, con
cerning the imputed righteousness of Christ. This calls me
to explain myself upon that head; which I will do with all
the clearness I can. But I quarrel with no man for thinking
or speaking otherwise than I do: I blame none for using
those expressions which he believes to be scriptural. If he
quarrels with me for not using them, at least not so
frequently as himself, I can only pity him, and wish him
more of “the mind which was in Christ.”
2. “The righteousness of Christ” is an expression which I
do not find in the Bible. “The righteousness of God” is an
expression which I do find there. I believe this means,
First, the mercy of God; as 2 Peter i. 1 : “Them that have
obtained like precious faith with us, through the righteous
ness of God.” How does it appear that “the righteousness
of God” here, means either more or less than his mercy?
“My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness and thy
salvation;” thy mercy in delivering me. “I will make
mention of thy righteousness only. Thy righteousness, O
God, is very high.” (Psalm lxxi. 15, &c.) Here the “righte
ousness of God” is expressly mentioned; but I will not take
upon me to say, that it means the righteousness or mercy of
the Son, any more than of the Holy Ghost.
3. I believe this expression means, Secondly, God’s method
of justifying sinners. So Rom. i. 17: “I am not ashamed
of the gospel of Christ; for therein is the righteousness of
God,” his way of justifying sinners, “revealed.” “Now the
righteousness of God is manifested; even the righteousness
of God which is by faith;” (unless righteousness here also
means mercy;) “Jesus Christ, whom God hath set forth to
be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of the sins that are past; that
he might be just, and yet the justifier of him that believeth
in Jesus.” (iii. 21, &c.) “They being ignorant of God’s
righteousness,” (method of justifying sinners,) “and going
about to establish their own righteousness,” (a method of
their own opposite to his,) “have not submitted themselves
unto the righteousness of God.” (x. 3.)
4. Perhaps it has a peculiar meaning in 2 Cor. v. 21:
“He made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we
might be made the righteousness of God in ” (or through)
“him;” that we might be justified and sanctified, might
receive the whole blessing of God, through him.
5. And is not this the natural meaning of Phil. iii. 8, 9:
“That I may win Christ, and be found in him,” grafted into
the true vine, “not having my own righteousness,”—the method
of justification which I so long chose for myself, “which is of
the law; but the righteousness which is of God”—the
method of justification which God hath chosen—“by faith?’”
6. “But is not Christ termed “our righteousness?’” He
is: “This is the name whereby he shall be called, The Lord
our Righteousness.” (Jer. xxiii. 6.) And is not the plain,
indisputable meaning of this scripture, He shall be what he
is called, the sole Purchaser, the sole meritorious Cause, both
of our justification and sanctification?
7. Nearly related to this is the following text: “Jesus
Christ is made of God unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption.” (1 Cor. i. 30.) And what
does this prove, but that he is made unto us righteousness,
or justification, just as he is made unto us sanctification?
In what sense? He is the sole Author of one, as well as of
the other, the Author of our whole salvation.
8. There seems to be something more implied in Romans
x. 3. Does it not imply thus much “Christ is the end of
the law”—not only of the Mosaic dispensation, but of the
law of works, which was given to Adam in his original per
fection—“for righteousness to every one that believeth;”
to the end that “every one who believeth” in him, though
he have not kept, and cannot keep, that law, may be both
accounted and made righteous.
9. Accordingly, frequent mention is made, in Scripture, of
“faith counted for righteousness.” So Genesis xv. 6: “He”
(Abraham) “believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him
for righteousness:” A text repeated, with but little variation,
over and over in the New Testament: “To him that worketh
not, but believeth on him who justifieth the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness.” (Rom. iv. 5.) Thus it
was that “Noah became heir of the righteousness,” the
justification, “which is by faith.” (Heb. xi. 7.) Thus also
“the Gentiles,” when the Jews fell short, “attained to
righteousness, even the righteousness which is by faith.”
(Rom. ix. 30.) But that expression, “the righteousness of
Christ,” does not occur in any of these texts.
10. It seems, righteousness in the following texts means
neither more nor less than justification: “If righteousness
come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain.” (Gal. ii. 21.)
“If there had been a law which could have given life,” spiritual
life, or a title to life eternal, “then righteousness should have
been by the law;” (iii. 21;) though some may think it here
includes sanctification also; which it appears to do, Rev.
xix. 8: “The fine linen is the righteousness of the saints.”
11. “But when St. Paul says, (Rom. v. 18) ‘By the righte
ousness of one,’ (called in the following verse, ‘the obedience
of one, even his “obedience unto death, his dying for us,)
‘the free gift came, does he not mean the righteousness of
Christ?” Undoubtedly he does. But this is not the question.
We are not inquiring what he means, but what he says. We
are all agreed as to the meaning, but not as to the expression,
“the imputing the righteousness of Christ,” which I still say,
I dare not insist upon, neither require any one to use, because
I cannot find it in the Bible. If any one can, he has better
eyes than me; and I wish he would show me where it is.
12. Now, if by “the righteousness of Christ” we mean
anything which the Scripture does not mean, it is certain we
put darkness for light. If we mean the same which the
Scripture means by different expressions, why do we prefer
this expression to the scriptural? Is not this correcting the
wisdom of the Holy Ghost, and opposing our own to the
perfect knowledge of God?
13. I am myself the more sparing in the use of it, because
it has been so frequently and so dreadfully abused; and
because the Antinomians use it at this day to justify the
grossest abominations. And it is great pity that those who
love, who preach, and follow after, holiness, should, under
the notion of honouring Christ, give any countenance to
those who continually make him “the minister of sin,” and
so build on his righteousness as to live in such ungodliness
and unrighteousness as is scarce named even among the
Heathens.
14. And doth not this way of speaking naturally tend to
make Christ the minister of sin? For if the very personal
obedience of Christ (as those expressions directly lead me to
think) be mine the moment I believe, can anything be added
thereto? Does my obeying God add any value to the perfect
obedience of Christ? On this scheme, then, are not the
holy and unholy on the very same footing?
15. Upon the whole, I cannot express my thoughts better
than in the words of that good man, Mr. Hervey: “If people
may be safe and their inheritance secure without any know
ledge of these particularities, why should you offer to puzzle
their heads with a few unnecessary terms? We are not very
solicitous as to the credit or the use of any particular set of
phrases. Only let men be humbled as repenting criminals
at the Redeemer's feet; let them rely as devoted pensioners
on his precious merits; and they are undoubtedly in the way
to a blissful immortality.” (Dialogues, vol. i., p. 43. Dublin
edition.)
DUBLIN, April 5, 1762.
