How Far Is It the Duty of a Christian Minister to Preach Politics?
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. It is impossible to answer this question before it is
understood. We must, First, therefore endeavour to under
stand it; and then it will be easy to answer.
2. There is a plain command in the Bible, “Thou shalt
not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.” But notwith
standing this, many that are called religious people speak evil
of him continually. And they speak many things that are
palpably false; particularly when they affirm him to be a
MINISTER TO PREACII Politics? 155
weak man; whereas a Nobleman, who is not at all prejudiced
in his favour, when he was pressed to speak, made this honest
declaration: “Sir, I know him well; and I judge the King
to be one of the most sensible men in Europe. His Ministers
are no fools; but His Majesty is able to wind them all round
his finger.”
3. Now, when a Clergyman comes into a place where this
and many more stories, equally false, have been diligently
propagated against the King, and are generally believed, if
he guards the people against this evil-speaking, by refuting
those slanders, many cry out, “O, he is preaching politics!”
4. If you mean this by the term, it is the bounden duty of
every Christian Minister to preach politics. It is our bounden
duty to refute these vile aspersions, in public as well as in
private. But this can be done only now and then, when it
comes naturally in our way. For it is our main and constant
business to “preach Jesus Christ, and him crucified.”
5. Again: Many who do not so freely censure the King,
speak all manner of evil of his Ministers. If any misfortune
befals us at home or abroad, by sea or land, it is “all their
fault.” If one commander in America is surprised with all
his forces when he is dead drunk, “Lord North deserves to
be hanged.” If General Burgoyne or Lord Cornwallis is
betrayed into their enemy’s hand, all the blame is laid on our
Ministers at home. But still the King is wounded through
their sides; the blame glances from them to him. Yet if we
say a word in defence of them, (which is in effect defending
him,) this also is preaching politics.
6. It is always difficult and frequently impossible for private
men to judge of the measures taken by men in public offices.
We do not see many of the grounds which determine them to
act in this or the contrary manner. Generally, therefore, it
behoves us to be silent, as we may suppose they know their
own business best; but when they are censured without any
colour of reason, and when an odium is cast on the King by
that means, we ought to preach politics in this sense also; we
ought publicly to confute those unjust censures: Only remem
bering still, that this is rarely to be done, and only when fit
occasion offers; it being our main business to preach “repent
ance towards God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.”
JOHN WESLEY.
LEw Isua M, January 9, 1782.
AN ESTIMATE
OF
THE MANNERS OF THE PRESENT TIMES.
[PRINTED IN THE YEAR 1782.]
1. SoME years ago an ingenious man published a treatise
with this title. According to him, the characteristics of the
English at present are sloth and luxury. And thus much we
may allow, that neither the one nor the other ever abounded
in England as they do at this day. With regard to sloth, it
was the constant custom of our ancestors to rise at four in the
morning. This was the stated hour, summer and winter, for
all that werc in health. The two Houses of Parliament met
“at five;” hord quintá antemeridianá, says their Journal.
But how is it with people of fashion now? They can hardly
huddle on their clothes before eight or nine o'clock in the
morning; perhaps some of them not before twelve. And
when they are risen, what do they do?
They waste away
In gentle inactivity the day.
How many are so far from working with their hands, that
they can scarce set a foot to the ground ! How many, even
young, healthy men, are too lazy either to walk or ride :
They must loll in their carriages day by day; and these can
scarce be made easy enough ! And must not the minor
Gentry have their coaches too? Yea, if they only ride on
the outside. See here the grand cause (together with intem
perance) of our innumerable nervous complaints | For how
imperfectly do either medicines or the cold bath supply the
place of exercise ! without which the human body can no
