A Letter to the Author of 'The Enthusiasm of Methodists and Papists Compared'
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 9 (Zondervan)
Year: 1750
Author: John Wesley
---
SIR 1. In your late pamphlets you have undertaken to prove,
that Mr. Whitefield and I are gross enthusiasts; and that our
“whole conduct is but a counterpart of the most wild fana
ticisms of the most abominable communion in its most corrupt
ages.” (Preface, p. 3.)
You endeavour to support this charge against us by quota
tions from our own writings, compared with quotations from
celebrated writers of the Romish communion.
2. It lies upon me to answer for one. But I must not
burden you with too long an answer; lest, “for want either
of leisure or inclination,” (ibid. p. 5) you should not give
this, any more than my other tracts, a reading. In order
therefore to spare both you and myself, I shall consider only
your First Part; and that as briefly as possible. Accordingly, I
shall not meddle with your other quotations; but, leaving them
to whom they may concern, shall only examine whether those
you have made from my writings prove the charge of enthu
Slasm Or InC.
This I conceive will be abundantly sufficient to decide the
question between you and me. If these do prove the charge,
I am cast; if they do not, if they are the words of truth and
soberness, it will be an objection of no real weight against
sentiments just in themselves, though they should also be found
in the writings of Papists; yea, of Mahometans or Pagans.
* Thus translated by Boscawen :
“Now hear what briefly I reply.”-EDIT.
3. Let the eight pages you borrow stand as they are. I pre
sume they will do neither good nor harm. In the tenth you
say, “The Methodists act on the same plan with the Papists;
not, perhaps, from compact and design; but a similar con
figuration and texture of brain, or the fumes of imagination,
producing similar effects. From a commiseration of horror,
arising from the grievous corruptions of the world, perhaps
from a real motive of sincere piety, they both set out with warm
pretences to a reformation.” Sir, this is an uncommon thought,
—that sincere piety should arise from the “configuration and
texture of the brain l” as well as, that “pretences to a refor
mation” should spring from “a real motive of sincere piety l’’
4. You go on : “Both commonly begin their adventures
with field-preaching.” (Enthusiasm, &c., p. 11.) Sir, do you
condemn field-preaching toto genere, as evil in itself? Have a
care! or you (I should say, the gentleman that assists you)
will speak a little too plain, and betray the real motives of his
sincere antipathy to the people called Methodists.
Or do you condemn the preaching on Hannam-Mount, in
particular, to the colliers of Kingswood? If you doubt whether
this has done any real good, it is a very easy thing to be in
formed. And I leave it with all impartial men, whether the
good which has in fact been done by preaching there, and which
could not possibly have been done any other way, does not
abundantly “justify the irregularity of it.” (Page 15.)
5. But you think I am herein inconsistent with myself.
For I say, “The uncommonness is the very circumstance that
recommends it.” (I mean, that recommended it to the colliers
in Kingswood.) And yet I said, but a page or two before, “We
are not suffered to preach in the churches; else we should
prefer them to any places whatsoever.”
Sir, I still aver both the one and the other. I do prefer the
preaching in a church when I am suffered: And yet, when I
am not, the wise providence of God overrules this very cir
cumstance for good; many coming to hear, because of the
uncommonness of the thing, who would otherwise not
have heard at all.
6. Your Second charge is, that I “abuse the Clergy, throw
out so much gall of bitterness against them, and impute this
black art of calumny to the Spirit and power given from God.”
(Page 15.)
Sir, I plead Not Guilty to the whole charge. And you have
not cited one line to support it. But if you could support it,
what is this to the point in hand? I presume calumny is not
enthusiasm. Perhaps you will say, “But it is something as
bad.” True; but it is nothing to the purpose: Even the
imputing this to the Spirit of God, as you here represent it, is
an instance of art, not of enthusiasm.
7. You charge me, Thirdly, with “putting on a sanctified
appearance, in order to draw followers, by a demure look,
precise behaviour, and other marks of external piety. For
which reason,” you say, “Mr. Wesley made and renewed that
noble resolution, not willingly to indulge himself in the least
levity of behaviour, or in laughter, no, not for a moment; to
speak no word not tending to the glory of God, and not a
tittle of worldly things.” (Pages 18, 19.)
Sir, you miss the mark again. If this “sanctified appear
ance was put on to draw followers,” if it was for “this reason”
(as you flatly affirm it was) that “Mr. Wesley made and
renewed that noble resolution;” (it was made eleven or twelve
years before, about the time of my removal to Lincoln
College;) then it can be no instance of enthusiasm, and so
does not fall within the design of your present work; unless
your title-page does not belong to your book; for that
confines you to the enthusiasm of the Methodists.
8. But to consider this point in another view: You accuse
me of “putting on a sanctified appearance, a demure look,
precise behaviour, and other marks of external piety.” How
are you assured, Sir, this was barely external, and that it was
a bare appearance of sanctity? You affirm this as from per
sonal knowledge. Was you then acquainted with me three or
four and twenty years ago? “He made and renewed that noble
resolution,” in order to “draw followers.” Sir, how do you
know that? Are you in God's place, that you take upon you
to be the searcher of hearts? “That noble resolution, not
willingly to indulge himself in the least levity of behaviour.”
Sir, I acquit you of having any concern in this matter. But I
appeal to all who have the love of God in their hearts, whether
this is not a rational, scriptural resolution, worthy of the voca
tion wherewith we are called.—“Or in laughter, no, not for a
moment.” No, nor ought I to indulge it at all; if I am con
scious to myself, it hurts my soul. In which let every man
judge for himself. “To speak no word not tending to the glory
4. IETTER TO
of God.” A peculiar instance of enthusiasm this ! “And not
a tittle of worldly things.” The words immediately following
are, “Others may, may, must. But what is that to me?”
(words which, injustice, you ought to have inserted,) who was
then entirely disengaged from worldly business of every kind.
Notwithstanding which, I have often since engaged therein,
when the order of Providence plainly required it.
9. Though I did not design to meddle with them, yet I
must here take notice of three of your instances of Popish
enthusiasm. The First is, that “Mechtildis tortured herself for
having spo en an idle word.” (Page 19.) (The point of com
parison lies, not in torturing herself, but in her doing it on
such an occasion.) The Second, that “not a word fell from
St. Katherine of Sienna, that was not religious and holy.”
The Third, that “the lips of Magdalen di Pazzi were never
opened but to chant the praises of God.” I would to God the
comparison between the Methodists and Papists would hold in
this respect! yea, that you and all the Clergy in England
were guilty of just such enthusiasm :
10. You cite as a Fourth instance of my enthusiasm, that I
say, “A Methodist (a real Christian) cannot adorn himself, on
any pretence, with gold or costly apparel.” (Page 21.) If this
be enthusiasm, let the Apostle look to it. His words are clear
and express. If you can find a pretence to set them aside, do.
I cannot; nor do I desire it.
11. My seeming contempt of money,” (page 26,) you urge
as a Fifth instance of enthusiasm. Sir, I understand you.
You was obliged to call it seeming, lest you should yourself
confute the allegation brought in your title-page. But if it
be only seeming, whatever it prove besides, it cannot prove that
I am an enthusiast.
12. Hitherto you have succeeded extremely ill. You have
brought five accusations against me; and have not been able
to make one good. However, you are resolved to throw dirt
enough, that some may stick. So you are next to prove
upon me, “a restless impatience and insatiable thirst of tra
velling, and undertaking dangerous voyages, for the con
version of infidels; together with a declared contempt of all
dangera, pains, and sufferings; and the designing, loving,
and praying for ill usage, persecution, martyrdom, death, and
hell.” (Page 27.)
In order to prove this uncommon charge, you produce four
scraps of sentences, (page 31) which you mark as my words,
though, as they stand in your book, they are neither sense nor
£rammar. But you do not refer to the page, or even the treatise,
where any one of them may be found. Sir, it is well you hide
your name, or you would be obliged to hide your face from
every man of candour or even common humanity.
13. “Sometimes indeed,” you say, “Mr. Wesley complains
of the scoffs both of the great vulgar and the small;” (page 32;)
to prove which, you disjoint and murder (as your manner is)
another of my sentences. “But at other times the note is
changed, and ‘till he is despised, no man is in a state of salva
tion.’” The note is changed 1 How so? When did I say
otherwise than I do at this day, viz., “that none are children
of God but those who are hated or despised by the children
of the devil?”
I must beg you,Sir, in your Third Part to inform your reader,
that, whenever any solecism or mangled sentences appear in
the quotations from my writings, they are not chargeable upon
me; that if the sense be mine, (which is not always; sometimes
you do me too much honour, even in this,) yet I lay no claim
fo the manner of expression; the English is all your own.
14. “Corporal severities or mortification by tormenting the
flesh,” (page 31,) is the next thing you charge upon me.
Almost two sentences you bring in proof of this. The one,
“Our bed being wet,” (it was in a storm at sea,) “I laid me
down on the floor, and slept soued till morning; and I believe
I shall not find it needful to go to bed, as it is called, any
more.” But whether I do or not, how will you prove, that
my motive is, to “gain a reputation for sanctity?” I desire
(if it be not too great a favour) a little evidence for this.
The other fragment of a sentence speaks “of bearing cold on
the naked head, rain and wind, frost and snow.” (Page 32.)
True; but not as matter of “mortification, by tormenting the
flesh.” Nothing less. These things are not spoken of there
as voluntary instances of mortification; (you yourself know
perfectly well, they are not, only you make free with your
friend;) but as some of the unavoidable inconveniences which
attend preaching in the open air.
Therefore you need not be so “sure that the Apostle con
demns that abetöta aouatos, “not sparing the body, as useless
and superstitious; and that it is a false show of humility.”
(Page 33.) Humility is entirely out of the question, as well as
chastity, in the case of hardships endured (but not properly
chosen) out of love to the souls for which Christ died.
15. You add a word or two of my “ardent desire of going
to hell,” which, you think, I “adopted from the Jesuit Nierem
berg.” (Page 34.) Sir, I know not the man. I am wholly a
stranger both to his person and to his doctrine. But if this is
his doctrine, I disclaim it from my heart. I ardently desire,
that both you and I may go to heaven.
But “Mr. Wesley says, “A poor old man decided the ques
tion of disinterested love. He said, I do not care what place I
am in. Let God put me where he will, or do with me what he
will, so I may set forth his honour and glory.’” (Page 35.)
He did so. And what then? Do these words imply “an
ardent desire of going to hell?” I do not suppose the going
to hell ever entered into his thoughts. Nor has it any place
in my notion of disinterested love. How you may understand
that term, I know not.
But you will prove I have this desire, whether I will or no.
You are sure this was my “original meaning,” (page 36,) in
the words cited by Mr. Church,
“Doom, if thou canst, to endless pain,
Or drive me from thy face.”
“God’s power or justice,” you say, “must be intended; be
cause he speaks of God’s love in the very next lines,
“But if thy stronger love constrains,
Let me be saved by grace.’”
Sir, I will tell you a secret. Those lines are not mine. How
ever, I will once more venture to defend them, and to aver, that
your consequence is good for nothing: “If this love is spoken of
in the latter lines, then it is not in the former.” No! Why not?
I take it to be spoken of in both. The plain meaning of which
is, “If thou art not love, I am content to perish. But if thou
art, let me find the effects thereof; let me be saved by grace.”
16. You next accuse me of maintaining a stoical insensi
bility. This objection, also, you borrow from Mr. Church.
You ought likewise to have taken notice, that I had answered
it, and openly disowned that doctrine; I mean, according to
the rules of common justice. But that is not your failing.
17. Part of your thirty-ninth page rums thus: “With respect
to all this patient enduring hardships, &c., it has been
remarked by learned authors, that ‘some persons, by consti
tutional temper, have been fond of bearing the worst that
could befal them; that others, from a sturdy humour, and the
force of education, have made light of the most exquisite
tortures; that when enthusiasm comes in, in aid of this natural
or acquired sturdiness, and men fancy they are upon God’s
work, and entitled to his rewards, they are immediately all on
fire for rushing into sufferings and pain.’”
I take knowledge of your having faithfully abridged—your
own book, shall I say, or the learned Dr. Middleton’s? But
what is it you are endeavouring to prove?
Quorsum haec tam putida tendant * *
The paragraph seems to point at me. But the plain, natural
tendency of it is, to invalidate that great argument for Christi
anity which is drawn from the constancy of the martyrs. Have
you not here also spoken a little too plain? Had you not
better have kept the mask on a little longer?
Indeed, you lamely add, “The solid and just comforts which
a true martyr receives from above are groundlessly applied to
the counterfeit.” But this is not enough even to save appear
ancéS.
18. You subjoin a truly surprising thought: “It may more
over be observed, that both ancient and modern enthusiasts
always take care to secure some advantage by their sufferings.”
(Page 40.) O rare enthusiasts ! So they are not such fools
neither as they are vulgarly supposed to be. This is just of a
piece with the “cunning epileptic demoniacs,” in your other
performance. And do not you think, (if you would but speak
all that is in your heart, and let us into the whole secret,) that
there was a compact, likewise, between Bishop Hooper and
his executioner, as well as between the ventriloquist and the
exorcist?
But what “advantage do they take care to secure?” a good
salary? a handsome fortune? No; quite another matter;
“free communications with God, and fuller manifestations of
his goodness.” (Ibid.) I dare say, you do not envy them, no
* Thus translated from the Latin of Horace by Francis :
“Whither tends
This putid stuff?”—EDIT.
more than you do those “self-interested enthusiasts” of old
who “were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might
obtain a better resurrection.”
19. You proceed to prove my enthusiasm from my notions
of conversion. And here great allowances are to be made,
because you are talking of things quite out of your sphere;
you are got into an unknown world! Yet you still talk as
magisterially as if you was only running down the Fathers of
the primitive Church.
And, First, you say, I “represent conversion as sudden and
instantaneous.” (Ibid.) Soft and fair! Do you know what
conversion is? (A term, indeed, which I very rarely use,
because it rarely occurs in the New Testament.) “Yes; it
is to “start up perfect men at once.’” (Page 41.) Indeed, Sir,
it is not. A man is usually converted long before he is a
perfect man. It is probable most of those Ephesians to whom
St. Paul directed his Epistle were converted. Yet they were
not “come” (few, if any) “to a perfect man, to the measure of
the stature of the fulness of Christ.”
20. I do not, Sir, indeed, I do not undertake to make you
understand these things. I am not so vain as to think it is in
my power. It is the utmost of my hope to convince you, or,
at least, those who read your works, that you understand just
nothing about them.
To put this out of dispute, you go on : “Thus faith and
being born of God are said to be an instantaneous work, at
once, and in a moment, as lightning. Justification, the same as
regeneration, and having a lively faith, this always in a
moment.” (Ibid.) I know not which to admire most, the
English or the sense, which you here father upon me; but,
in truth, it is all your own; I do not thus confound faith and
Seing born of God. I always speak of them as different things;
it is you that thus jumble them together. It is you who dis
cover justification also to be the same as regeneration, and
having a lively faith. I take them to be three different things;
so different as not ever to come under one genus. And yet
it is true, that each of these, “as far as I know,” is at first
experienced suddenly; although two of them (I leave you to
find out which) gradually increase from that hour.
21. “After these sudden conversions,” say you, “they receive
their assurances of salvation.” (Page 43.) Sir, Mr. Bedford's
ignorance in charging this doctrine upon me might be involun
tary, and I am persuaded was real. But yours cannot be so.
It must be voluntary; if it is not rather affected. For you
had before you, while you wrote, the very tract wherein I
corrected Mr. Bedford’s mistake, and explicitly declared,
“The assurance whereof I speak is not an assurance of salva
tion.” And the very passages you cite from me prove the
same; every one of which (as you yourself know in your own
conscience) relates wholly and solely to present pardon, not
to future salvation.
Of Christian perfection (page 45) I shall not say anything
to you, till you have learned a little heathen honesty.
22. That this is a lesson you have not yet learned, appears,
also, from your following section; wherein you roundly
affirm, “Whatever they think, say, or do,” (that is, the
Methodists, according to their own account,) “is from God.
And whatever opposeth is from the devil.” I doubt not but
Mr. Church believed this to be true when he asserted it.
But this is no plea for you; who, having read the answer to
Mr. Church, still assert what you know to be false.
“Here we have,” say you, “the true spirit and very
essence of enthusiasm, which sets men above carnal reason
ing, and all conviction of plain Scripture.” (Page 49.) It
may, or may not; that is nothing to me. I am not above
either reason or Scripture. To either of these I am ready to
submit. But I cannot receive scurrilous invective, instead
of Scripture; nor pay the same regard to low buffoonery, as
to clear and cogent reasons.
23. With your two following pages I have nothing to do.
But in the fifty-second I read as follows: “‘A Methodist,’
says Mr. Wesley, ‘went to receive the sacrament; when God
was pleased to let him see a crucified Saviour.” Very well;
and what is this brought to prove? Why, (1.) That I am an
enthusiast: (2.) That I “encourage the notion of the real,
corporal presence, in the sacrifice of the mass.” How so?
Why, “this is as good an argument for transubstantiation
as several produced by Bellarmine.” (Page 57.) Very likely
it may; and as good as several produced by you for the
enthusiasm of the Methodists.
24. In that “seraphic rhapsody of divine love,” as you
term it, which you condemn in the lump, as rant and mad
Aness, there are several scriptural expressions, both from the
I0 LETTER TO
Old and New Testament. At first I imagined you did not
know them; those being books which you did not seem to be
much acquainted with. But upon laying circumstances
together, I rather suppose you was glad of so handsome an
opportunity to make as if you aimed at me, that you might
have a home stroke at some of those old enthusiasts.
25. The next words which you cite from me, as a proof of
my enthusiasm, are, “The power of God was in an unusual
manner present.” (Page 61.) I mean, many found an unusual
degree of that peace, joy, and love, which St. Paul terms,
“the fruit of the Spirit.” And all these, in conformity to his
doctrine, I ascribe to the power of God. I know you, in
conformity to your principles, ascribe them to the power of
nature. But I still believe, according to the old, scriptural
hypothesis, that whenever, in hearing the word of God, men
are filled with peace and love, God “confirms that word by
the Holy Ghost given unto those that hear it.”
26. As a further proof of my enthusiasm you mention
“special directions, mission, and calls by immediate revela
tion.” (Page 67.) For an instance of which, you cite those
words, “I know, and am assured, that God sent forth his
light and his truth.” I did know this. But do I say, “by
immediate revelation?” Not a tittle about it. This is your
own ingenious improvement upon my words.
“However, it was by a special direction. For your own
words in the same paragraph are, “From the direction I
received from God this day, touching an affair of the greatest
importance.’” (Pages 68, 69.)
What, are these words in the same paragraph with those,
“I know and am assured, God sent forth his light and his
truth?” Why then do you tear the paragraph in two, and
put part in your sixty-seventh, part in your sixty-eighth and
sixty-ninth pages? O, for a plain reason,-to make it look
like two instances of enthusiasm, otherwise it could have
made but one at the most.
But you cannot make out one, till you have proved that
these directions were by immediate revelation. I never
affirmed they were. I now affirm they were not. Now, Sir,
make your best of them.
You add, “Let me mention a few directions coming by
way of command: Mr. Wesley says, “I came to Mr. Dela
motte's, where I expected a cool reception; but God had pre
BISHOP LAVINGTON. l I
pared the way before me.’” (Page 69.) What, by a com
mand to Mr. Delamotte P Who told you so P Not I, nor
any one else, only your own fruitful imagination.
27. Your next discovery is more curious still: That
“itinerants order what they want at a public-house, and then
tell the landlord that he will be damned if he takes anything
of them.” (Page 69.)
I was beating my brain to find out what itinerant this
should be; as I could not but imagine, some silly man or
other, probably styling himself a Methodist, must somewhere
or other have given some ground for a story so punctually
delivered. In the midst of this, a letter from Cornwall
informed me, it was I: I myself was the very man, and ac
quainted me with the place, and the person to whom I said it.
But as there are some particulars in that letter (sent without
a name) which I did not well understand, I transcribe a few
words of it, in hopes that the author will give me fuller
information :
“As to the Bishop's declaring what the landlord of Mitchel
says, in respect to your behaviour, I do not at all wonder at
the story.” The Bishop's declaring ! Whom can he mean?
Surely not the Right Reverend Dr. George Lavington, Lord
Bishop of Exeter ! When, or to whom, did he declare it? at
Truro in Cornwall? or in Plymouth, at his Visitation ? to all
the Clergy who were assembled before God to receive his
pastoral instructions? His Lordship of Exeter must cer
tainly have more regard to the dignity of the episcopal office!
28. But to proceed: I was not “offended with the Mora
vians” for warning men “against mixing nature with
grace;” (page 71;) but for their doing it in such a manner
as tended to destroy all the work of grace in their souls. I
did not blame the thing itself, but their manner of doing it; and
this you know perfectly well: But with you, truth must always
give way to wit. At all events, you must have your jest.
29. Had you had any regard to truth, or any desire to
represent things as they really are, when you repeated Mr.
Church’s objection concerning lots, you would have acknow
ledged that I have answered it at large. When you have
replied to that answer, I may add a word more.
30. You are sadly at a loss under the article of ecstasies
and raptures, to glean up anything that will serve your pur
pose. At last, from ten or twelve tracts, you pick out two
l2 LETTER TO
lines; and those the same you had mentioned before: “My
soul was got up into the holy mount. I had no thought of
coming down again into the body.” And truly you might
as well have let these alone; for if by “ecstasy” you mean
trance, here is no account of any such; but only of one “re
joicing” in God “with joy unspeakable and full of glory.”
With the “girl of seven years old” (page 77) I have
nothing to do; though you honestly tack that relation to the
other, in order to make me accountable for both. But all is
fair toward a Methodist.
31. What I assert concerning Peter Wright (page 79) is
this: (1.) That he gave me that relation. (Whether I believed
it or no, I did not say.) (2.) That he died within a month
after. Now, Sir, give us a cast of your office. From these
two propositions extract a proof of my being an enthusiast.
You may full as easily prove it from these, as from the
words you quote next: “God does now give remission of
sins, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and often in dreams
and visions of God.” “But afterwards,” you say, “I speak
more distrustfully.” (Page 79.) Indeed I do not; but I
guard against enthusiasm in those words, part of which you
have recited. The whole paragraph runs thus:
“From those words, “Beloved, believe not every spirit;
but try the spirits, whether they be of God,” I told them
they were not to judge of the spirit whereby any one spoke,
either by appearances, or by common report, or by their own
inward feelings; no, nor by any dreams, visions, or revela
tions, supposed to be made to their souls, any more than by
their tears, or any involuntary effects wrought upon their
bodies. I warned them, all these were in themselves of a
doubtful, disputable nature; they might be from God, and
they might not; and were therefore not simply to be relied
on, any more than simply to be condemned, but to be tried by
a farther rule; to be brought to the only certain test, the law
and the testimony.” Sir, can you show them a better way?
32. The last proof that you produce of my enthusiasm, is,
my “talking of the great work which God is now beginning
to work upon earth.” (Page 80.) I own the fact. I do
talk of such a work. But I deny the consequence: For if
God has begun a great work, then the saying He has, is no
enthusiasm.
To bring sinners to repentance, to save them from their
sins, is allowed by all to be the work of God. Yea, and to
save one sinner is a great work of God; much more to save
many.
But many sinners are saved from their sins at this day, in
London, in Bristol, in Kingswood, in Cornwall, in Newcastle
upon-Tyne, in Whitehaven, in many other parts of England,
in Wales, in Ireland, in Scotland, upon the continent of
Europe, in Asia, and in America. This I term “a great
work of God; ” so great as I have not read of for several
ages.
You ask, how I know so great a work is wrought now—“by
inspiration?” No; but by common sense. I know it by the
evidence of my own eyes and ears. I have seen a considerable
part of it; and I have abundant testimony, such as excludes
all possible doubt, for what I have not seen.
33. But you are so far from acknowledging anything of this,
as to conclude, in full triumph, that “this new dispensation
is a composition of enthusiasm, superstition, and imposture.”
(Page 81.) It is not clear what you mean by a new dispen
sation. But the clear and undeniable fact stands thus: A.
few years ago, Great Britain and Ireland were covered with
vice from sea to sea. Very little of even the form of religion
was left; and still less of the power of it. Out of this dark
ness God commanded light to shine. In a short space He
called thousands of sinners to repentance. They were not only
reformed from their outward vices, but likewise changed in
their dispositions and tempers; “filled with a serious, sober
sense of true religion,” with love to God and all mankind,
with an holy faith, producing good works of every kind,
works both of piety and mercy.
What could the god of this world do in such a case, to
prevent the spreading of this “serious, sober religion?” The
same that he has done from the beginning of the world. To
hinder the light of those whom God hath thus changed, from
shining before men, he gave them all in general a nick-name;
he called them Methodists. And this name, as insignificant
as it was in itself, effectually answered his intention. For by
this means, that light was soon obscured by prejudice, which
could not be withstood by Scripture or reason. By the odious
and ridiculous ideas affixed to that name, they were con
demned in the gross, without ever being heard. So that now
any scribbler, with a middling share of low wit, not incum
bered with good nature or modesty, may raise a laugh on
those whom he cannot confute, and run them down whom he
dares not look in the face. By this means even a Comparer
of Methodists and Papists may blaspheme the great work of
God, not only without blame, but with applause; at least
from readers of his own stamp. But it is high time, Sir, you
should leave your skulking-place. Come out, and let us look
each other in the face. I have little leisure, and less inclina
tion, for controversy. Yet I promise, if you will set your
name to your Third Part, I will answer all that shall concern
me, in that, as well as the preceding. Till then
I remain, Sir,
Your friend and well-wisher,
JOHN WESLEY.
CANTERBURY,
February 1, 1749–50.
POSTSCRIPT.
WHEN you come to relate those “horrid and shocking
things,” there may be a danger you are not aware of Even
you yourself may fall (as little as you intend or suspect it)
into seriousness. And I am afraid, if once you put off your
fool’s coat, if you stand naked before cool and sober reason,
you yourself may appear as inconsiderable a creature, to use
