A Collection of Prayers for Families
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
SUNDAY MORNING.
ALMIGHTY and eternal God, we desire to praise thy holy
name for so graciously raising us up, in soundness of body
and mind, to see the light of this day.
We bless thee in behalf of all thy creatures; for “the
eyes of all look unto thee, and thou givest them their meat
in due season.” But above all we acknowledge thy inesti
mable benefits bestowed upon mankind in Christ Jesus. We
thank thee for his miraculous birth, for his most holy life,
his bitter agony and bloody death, for his glorious resurrec
tion on this day, his ascension into heaven, his triumph over
all the powers of darkness, and his sitting at thy right hand
for evermore.
O God, how great was thy love to the sinful sons of men,
to give “thy only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth
on him might not perish, but have everlasting life l’” How
great was that love which hath committed our souls to One
so “mighty to save;” which hath chosen us to be thy sons
and heirs, together with Christ Jesus, and set such an High
Priest over thy house and family, to make intercession for
us, to pour thy blessings upon us, and to send forth his
angels to “minister unto them who shall be heirs of salva
tion 1’’ O the riches of thy grace, in sending the Holy
Ghost to make us “abound in hope” that we shall one day
rise from the dead, and, after our short labours here, rest
with thee in thy eternal glory.
O that we could begin this day in devout meditations, in
joy unspeakable, and in blessing and praising thee, who hast
given us such good hope and everlasting consolation. Lift
up our minds above all these little things below, which are
apt to distract our thoughts; and keep them above, till our
hearts are fully bent to seek thee every day, in the way
wherein Jesus hath gone before us, though it should be with
the loss of all we here possess.
We are ashamed, O Lord, to think that ever we have
disobeyed thee, who hast redeemed us by the precious blood
of thine own Son. O that we may agree with thy will in
all things for the time to come; and that all the powers of
our souls and bodies may be wholly dedicated to thy service.
We desire unfeignedly that all the thoughts and designs of
our minds, all the affections and tempers of our hearts, and
all the actions of our life, may be pure, holy, and unreprovable
in thy sight.
“Search us, O Lord, and prove us; try out our reins and
our heart. Look well if there be any way of wickedness in
us, and lead us in the way everlasting.” Let thy favour be
better to us than life itself; that so in all things we may
approve our hearts before thee, and feel the sense of thy
acceptance of us, giving us a joy which the world cannot give.
Make it our delight to praise thee, to call to mind thy
loving-kindness, and to offer the sacrifice of thanksgiving.
Help us to “take heed to ourselves, lest at any time our
hearts be overcharged with surfeiting or drunkenness, or the
cares of this life;” to have our conversation without covetous
mess, and to be content with such things as we have ; to
possess our bodies in sanctification and honour; to love our
neighbour as ourselves; and as we would that others should
do to us, do even so to them; to live peaceably, as much as
lieth in us, with all men; to put on the ornament of a meek
and quiet spirit; and to take those who have spoken in the
name of our Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and
of patience; and when we suffer as Christians, not to be
ashamed, but to glorify thee our God on this behalf.
And accept, good Lord, of all the praises of all thy people
met together this day. O that “thy ways were known upon
all the earth, thy saving health among all nations;” and that
all Christian Kings, especially, may be filled with thy Holy
Spirit, and be faithful subjects of the Lord Jesus, “the King
of kings and Lord of lords.” O that thy “Priests may be
clothed with righteousness, and thy saints rejoice and sing;”
that all who are in distress may trust in thee, the “health of
their countenance and their God.” O Lord, hear us, and
make thy face to shine upon thy servants, that we may
“enter into thy gates with thanksgiving, and into thy courts
with praise; that we may be thankful unto thee and bless thy
name.” Amen, for Jesus Christ's sake; in whose words we
conclude our imperfect prayers, saying, “Our Father,” &c.
SUNDAY EVENING.
O THoU “high and holy One that inhabitest eternity,”
thou art to be feared and loved by all thy servants. “All
thy works praise thee, O God;” and we especially give thanks
unto thee for thy marvellous love in Christ Jesus, by whom
thou hast “reconciled the world to thyself.” Thou hast
“given us exceeding great and precious promises.” Thou
hast sealed them with his blood, thou hast confirmed them
by his resurrection and ascension, and the coming of the
Holy Ghost. We thank thee that thou hast given us so
many happy opportunities of knowing the “truth as it is in
Jesus,” even “the mystery which was hid from ages and
generations,” but is now revealed to them that believe.
Blessed be thy goodness for that great consolation, and
for the assistance of thy Holy Spirit. Blessed be thy good
ness, that we have felt it so often in our hearts, inspiring us
with holy thoughts, filling us with love and joy, and comfort
able expectations of “the glory that shall be revealed.” We
thank thee, that thou hast suffered us this day to attend on
thee in thy public service; and that we have begun, in any
measure, to pursue after that eternal “rest which remaineth
for the people of God.”
We offer up again our souls and bodies to thee to be
governed, not by our will, but thine. O let it be ever the
ease and joy of our hearts, to be under the conduct of thy
unerring wisdom, to follow thy counsels, and to be ruled in
all things by thy holy will. And let us never distrust thy
abundant kindness and tender care over us; whatsoever it is
thou wouldest have us to do or to suffer in this world.
O God, purify our hearts, that we may entirely love thee, and
rejoice in being beloved of thee; that we may confide in
thee, and absolutely resign ourselves to thee, and be filled with.
constant devotion toward thee. O that we may never sink.
into a base love of anything here below, nor be oppressed
with the cares of this life; but assist us to “abhor that which
is evil, and cleave to that which is good.” Let us “use this.
world as not abusing it.” Give us true humility of spirit,
that we may “not think of ourselves more highly than we
ought to think.” Keep us from being “wise in our own con
ceits.” “Let our moderation be known to all men.” Make
us “kindly affectioned one to another;” to delight in doing
good; to “show all meekness to all men;” to “render to all
their dues; tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honour to whom honour;” and to
“owe no man anything, but to love one another.” Make us so.
happy, that we may be able to “love our enemies, to bless
those that curse us, to do good to them that hate us; to rejoice
with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.”
Compose our spirits to a quiet and steady dependence on thy
good Providence, that we may “take no thought for our life,”
nor “be careful for anything, but by prayer and supplication,
with thanksgiving, still make known our requests to thee our
God.” And help us to “pray always and not faint; in every
thing to give thanks, and offer up the sacrifice of praise con
tinually; to rejoice in hope of thy glory;” to “possess our
souls in patience;” and to “learn in whatsoever state we are
therewith to be content.” Make us “know both how to be
abased, and how to abound; everywhere, and in all things,”
instruct us “both to abound and to suffer want,” being enabled
to “do all things through Christ which strengtheneth us.”
O that the light of all Christians did so “shine before
men,” that others might “glorify thee, our Father which art
in heaven l” “Send forth thy light and thy truth” into all
the dark corners of the earth, that “all Kings may fall down
before thee, and all nations do thee service l’’ Bless these
kingdoms, and give us grace at length to “bring forth
fruits meet for repentance.” O Lord, save the King, and
“establish his throne in righteousness.” Prosper the
endeavours of all those who faithfully feed thy people, and
increase the number of them. O that the seed which hath
been sown this day, may take deep root in all our hearts;
that being “not forgetful hearers, but doers of the word,
we may be blessed in our deeds.” Help us, in all the
week following to “set a watch before our mouth, and keep
the door of our lips;” and “let not our heart incline to any
evil thing,” or “to practise wicked works with men that work
iniquity.” But “as we have received how we ought to walk
and to please thee, so may we abound more and more.”
Protect us, we beseech thee, and all our friends everywhere
this night; and awaken in the morning those good thoughts
in our hearts, that the words of our Saviour may abide in us,
and we in Him, who hath taught us when we pray to say,
“Our Father,” &c.
MONDAY MORNING.
WE humble ourselves, O Lord of heaven and earth, before
thy glorious Majesty. We acknowledge thy eternal power,
wisdom, goodness, and truth; and desire to render thee most
unfeigned thanks, for all the benefits which thou pourest
upon us; but above all, for thine inestimable love, in the
redemption of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ.
We implore thy tender mercies in the forgiveness of all our
sins, whereby we have offended either in thought, word, or
deed. We desire to be truly sorry for all our misdoings, and
utterly to renounce whatsoever is contrary to thy will. We
desire to devote our whole man, body, soul, and spirit, to
thee. And as thou dost inspire us with these desires, so
accompany them always with thy grace, that we may every
day, with our whole hearts, give ourselves up to thy service.
We desire to be so holy and undefiled as our blessed
Master was. And we trust thou wilt fulfil all the gracious
promises which he hath made to us. Let them be dearer to
us than thousands of gold and silver; let them be the comfort
and joy of our hearts. We ask nothing, but that it may be
unto thy servants according to his word.
Thou hast mercifully kept us the last night; blessed be
thy continued goodness. Receive us likewise into thy
protection this day. Guide and assist us in all our thoughts,
words, and actions. Make us willing to do and suffer what
thou pleasest; waiting for the mercy of our Lord, Christ
Jesus, unto etermal life.
Blessed be thy goodness, which hath not suffered us to
wander without instruction after the foolish desires of our
own hearts; but hath clearly shown us where our happiness
lies. O may we receive, with all thankfulness, those holy
words which teach us the blessedness of poverty of spirit, of
mourning after thee, of meekness and gentleness, of hunger
ing and thirsting after righteousness, of mercifulness and
purity of heart, of doing good unto all, and patiently suffering
for doing the will of our Lord Christ.
O may we always be in the number of those blessed souls.
May we ever feel ourselves happy in having the kingdom of
God within us, in the comforts of the Holy One, in being
filled with all the fruits of righteousness, in being made the
children of the Highest, and, above all, in seeing thee, our
God. Let us abound in thy love more and more; and in
continual prayers and praises to thee, the Father of mercies
and God of all consolation, in Jesus Christ our Lord.
And we desire, thou knowest, the good of all mankind,
especially of all Christian people; that they may all walk
worthy of the gospel, and live together in unity and Christian
love. For which end, we pray that all Christian Kings,
Princes, and Governors, may be wise, pious, just, and merciful,
endeavouring that all their subjects may lead peaceable lives
in all godliness and honesty; and more particularly, that our
Sovereign, King George, may be blessed with a religious,
quiet, long, and prosperous reign, and that all in authority
under him may seek, in their several stations, to right the
oppressed, to comfort the afflicted, to provide for the poor
and needy, and to relieve all those that are in any misery.
Bless all those that watch over our souls; succeed their
labours, and give us grace to follow their godly admonitions,
and to “esteem them very highly in love for their work’s
sake.” The same blessings we crave for our friends,
relations, and acquaintance, that we may all live in perfect
love and peace together, and rejoice together at the great day
of the Lord Jesus; in whose holy words we sum up all our
wants: “Our Father,” &c.
MONDAY EVENING.
ALMIGHTY and most merciful Father, in whom we live,
move, and have our being; to whose tender compassions we
owe our safety the day past, together with all the comforts of
this life, and the hopes of that which is to come; we praise
thee, O Lord, we bow ourselves before thee, acknowledging we
have nothing but what we receive from thee. “Unto thee do we
give thanks,” O God, who daily pourest thy benefits upon us.
Blessed be thy goodness for our health, for our food and
raiment, for our peace and safety, for the love of our friends,
for all our blessings in this life, and our desire to attain that
life which is immortal. Blessed be thy love, for that we feel
in our hearts any motion toward thee. Behold, O Lord, we
present ourselves before thee, to be inspired with such a
vigorous sense of thy love, as may put us forward with a
greater earnestness, zeal, and diligence in all our duty.
Renew in us, we beseech, a lively image of thee, in all
righteousness, purity, mercy, faithfulness, and truth. O that
Jesus, the hope of glory, may be formed in us, in all humility,
meekness, patience, and an absolute surrender of our souls
and bodies to thy holy will; that we may not live, but Christ
may live in us; that every one of us may say, “The life I
mow live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God, who
loved me, and gave himself for me.”
Let the remembrance of his love, who made himself an
offering for our sins, be ever dear and precious to us. Let it
continually move us to offer up ourselves to thee, to do thy
will, as our blessed Master did. May we place an entire
confidence in thee, and still trust ourselves with thee, who
hast not “spared thine own Son, but freely given him up for
us all.” May we humbly accept of whatsoever thou sendest
us, and “in everything give thanks.” Surely thou “wilt
never leave us mor forsake us.” O guide us safe through all
the changes of this life, in an unchangeable love to thee, and
a lively sense of thy love to us, till we come to live with thee
and enjoy thee for ever.
And now that we are going to lay ourselves down to sleep,
take us into thy gracious protection, and settle our spirits in
such quiet and delightful thoughts of the glory where our
Lord Jesus lives, that we may desire to be dissolved and to
go to him who died for us, that, whether we wake or sleep,
we might live together with him.
To thy blessing we recommend all mankind, high and low,
rich and poor, that they may all faithfully serve thee, and
contentedly enjoy whatsoever is needful for them. And
especially we beseech thee, that the course of this world may
R 2
be so peaceably ordered by thy governance, that thy Church
may joyfully serve thee in all godly quietness. We leave all
we have with thee, especially our friends, and those who are
dear unto us; desiring that when we are dead and gone,
they may lift up their souls in this manner unto thee; and
teach those that come after, to praise, love, and obey thee.
And if we awake again in the morning, may we praise thee
again with joyful lips, and still offer ourselves a more accept
able sacrifice to thee, through Jesus Christ; in whose words
we beseech thee to hear us, according to the full sense and
meaning thereof: “Our Father,” &c.
TUESDAY MORNING.
O Most great and mighty Lord, the possessor of heaven
and earth, all the angels rejoice in blessing and praising thee,
the Father of spirits; for “thou hast created all things, and
in wisdom hast thou made them all,” and spread thy tender
mercies over all thy works. We desire thankfully to acknow
ledge thy bounty to us, among the rest of thy creatures, and
thy particular grace and favour to us in Jesus Christ, our
merciful Redeemer. O give us a deep sense of that love
which gave Him to die for us, that he might be “the Author
of eternal salvation to all them that obey him.”
And hast thou not said, that thou wilt “give thy Holy
Spirit to them that ask it?” O Father of mercies, let it be
unto us according to thy word. Cherish whatever thou hast
already given us, which is acceptable in thy sight. And
since at the best we are unprofitable servants, and can do no
more than it is our duty to do, enable us to do everything
which thou hast commanded us heartily, with good-will, and
true love to thy service.
O that we might ever approach thee with delight, and feel
it the joy of our hearts to think of thee, to praise thee, to give
thee thanks, and to offer ourselves with absolute resignation
to thee. O that mercy may always please us, as it pleaseth
thee; that we may be strictly just and righteous; may cheer
fully pass by injuries, freely deny ourselves whatever is not
for thy glory; willingly submit to thy fatherly corrections,
and perform the duties of our several relations with singleness
of heart. Render us so mindful of the great love of our
Lord, that we may be zealously concerned for his glory, and
use our utmost diligence to promote his religion in the world;
delighting to commemorate his death and passion, making a
joyful sacrifice of our souls and bodies to him, and earnestly
clesiring that his kingdom may come over all the earth.
Fulfil, most merciful Lord, all our petitions; and as thou
hast graciously protected us this night, so accompany us all
this day with thy blessing, that we may please thee in body
and soul, and be safe under thy defence, who art ever nigh
unto all those that call upon thee.
And O that all men may be awakened into a lively and
thankful sense of all thy benefits. Stir up especially the
minds of all Christian people to follow “the truth as it is in
Jesus,” and exercise themselves “to have a conscience void of
offence towards God and towards man.” Bless these king
qoms, and endue our Sovereign with such excellent wisdom
and holy zeal, that we may see many good days under his
government. O that true religion, justice, mercy, brotherly
kindness, and all things else that are praiseworthy, may so
flourish among us, that we may enjoy the blessings of peace
and plenty, and there may be no complaining in our streets.
We recommend to thee all our friends and neighbours, all
the poor, the sick, and the afflicted, desiring those mercies
for them which we should ask for ourselves, were we in their
condition. “O God, whose never-failing providence ordereth
all things both in heaven and earth, keep them and us, we
beseech thee, from all hurtful things, and give us those
things which are profitable for us, according to thine abundant
mercy in our Lord Jesus;” in whose words we conclude our
supplication unto thee, saying, “Our Father,” &c.
TUESDAY EVENING.
ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, the sovereign Lord of all
creatures in heaven and earth, we acknowledge that our
beings, and all the comforts of them, depend on thee, the
Fountain of all good. We have nothing but what is owing
entirely to thy free and bounteous love, O most blessed Creator,
and to the riches of thy grace, O most blessed Redeemer.
To thee, therefore, be given, by us and by all creatures
whom thou hast made to know how great and good thou art, all
honour and praise, all love and obedience, as long as we have
any being. “It is but meet, right, and our bounden duty, that
we should, at all times and in all places, give thanks unto thee,
O Lord,” and devoutly resign both soul and body to thee, to
be absolutely governed and ruled according to thy holy will.
Further, we pray thee, increase every good desire which
we feel already in our hearts; let us always live as becomes
thy creatures, as becomes the disciples of Jesus Christ.
Incline us to be more and more in love with thy laws, till
they are written upon our hearts. Stir up our wills to “love
them exceedingly,” and to cleave unto them as our very life.
O that we might heartily surrender our wills to thine; that
we may unchangeably cleave unto it, with the greatest and
most entire affection to all thy commands. O that there
may abide for ever in us such a strong and powerful sense of
thy mighty love towards us in Christ Jesus, as may constrain.
us freely and willingly to please thee, in the constant exercise
of righteousness and mercy, temperance and charity, meek
ness and patience, truth and fidelity; together with such an
humble, contented, and peaceable spirit, as may adorn the
religion of our Lord and Master. Yea, let it ever be the joy
of our hearts to be righteous, as thou art righteous; to be
merciful, as thou, our heavenly Father, art merciful; to be
“holy, as thou who hast called us art holy, in all manner of
conversation;” to be endued with thy divine wisdom, and to
resemble thee in faithfulness and truth. O that the example
of our blessed Saviour may be always dear unto us, that we
may cheerfully follow him in every holy temper, and delight
to do thy will, O God. Let these desires, which thou hast
given us, never die or languish in our hearts, but be kept
always alive, always in their vigour and force, by the
perpetual inspirations of the Holy Ghost.
Accept, likewise, of our thanks, for thy merciful preserva
tion of us all this day. We are bold again to commit
ourselves unto thee this night. Defend us from all the
powers of darkness; and raise up our spirits, together with
our bodies, in the morning, to such a vigorous sense of thy
continued goodness, as may provoke us all the day long to
an unwearied diligence in well-doing.
And the same mercies that we beg for ourselves, we desire.
for the rest of mankind; especially for those who are called
by the name of Christ. O that every one of these may do
his duty with all fidelity; that Kings may be tender-hearted,
as the fathers of their countries; and all their subjects may
be dutiful and obedient to them, as their children; that the
Pastors of thy Church may feed their flocks with true wisdom
and understanding, and the people all may submit unto them,
and follow their godly counsels; that the rich and mighty may
have compassion on the poor and miserable; and all such
distressed people may bless the rich, and rejoice in the pros
perity of those that are above them Give to husbands and
wives, parents and children, masters and servants, the grace
to behave themselves so in their several relations, that they
may adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things, and
may receive of him a crown of glory; in whose holy name and
words we continue to beseech thy grace and mercy towards us
and all thy people everywhere, saying, “Our Father,” &c.
WEDNESDAY MORNING.
O God, blessed for ever, we thank and praise thee for all
thy benefits, for the comforts of this life, and our hope of
everlasting salvation in the life to come. We desire to have
a lively sense of thy love always possessing our hearts, that
may still constrain us to love thee, to obey thee, to trust
in thee, to be content with the portion thy love allots unto us,
and to rejoice even in the midst of all the troubles of this life.
Thou hast delivered thine own Son for us all. How
shalt thou not with him also freely give us all things? We
depend upon thee especially for the grace of thy Holy Spirit.
O that we may feel it perpetually bearing us up, by the
strength of our most holy faith, above all the temptations
that may at any time assault us; that we may keep ourselves
unspotted from the world, and may still cleave to thee in
righteousness, in lowliness, purity of heart, yea, the whole
mind that was in Christ.
Let thy mighty power enable us to do our duty towards
thee, and towards all men, with care, and diligence, and zeal,
and perseverance, unto the end. Help us to be meek and gentle
in our conversation, prudent and discreet in ordering our affairs,
observant of thy fatherly providence in everything that befals
us, thankful for thy benefits, patient under thy chastisements,
and readily disposed for every good word and work. Preserve
in us a constant remembrance of thy all-seeing eye; of thy
inestimable love in Jesus Christ, whereof thou hast given us
so many pledges, and of the great account we must give to him
at the day of his appearing; that so we may continue stead
fast and unmovable, and be abundant in the work of the Lord,
knowing that our labour shall not be in vain in the Lord.
Deliver us, we beseech thee, from worldly cares and foolish
desires; from vain hopes and causeless fears; and so dispose
our hearts, that death itself may not be dreadful to us, but
we may welcome it with a cheerful countenance, when and
howsoever it shall approach.
O that our hearts may be so firmly established in grace, that
nothing may affright us, or shake our constancy, but we may
rather choose to die than to dishonour Him who died for us!
We resign ourselves to thy wisdom and goodness, who knowest
what is best for us; believing thou “wilt never suffer us to be
tempted above what we are able, and wilt with the temptation
also make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it.”
We commend unto thee all mankind; especially thy
Church, and more particularly these kingdoms, that we
may all believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, and be zealous
of good works. Bless our Sovereign, his Counsellors, his
Ministers, and all employed in public business, whether
spiritual or civil, that whatsoever they do may be for thy
glory, and the public good. Be gracious to all that are near
and dear to us, and keep us all in thy fear and love. Guide
us, good Lord, and govern us by the same Spirit, that we
may be so united to thee here, as not to be divided when
thou art pleased to call us hence, but together enter into thy
glory, to dwell with thee in love and joy that shall never die,
through Jesus Christ, our blessed Lord and Saviour; who
hath taught us when we pray to say, “Our Father,” &c.
WEDNESDAY EVENING,
“O LoRD, how manifold are thy works I in wisdom hast
thou made them all. The day is thine, the night also is thine;
thou hast prepared the light and the sun.” We render thee
thanks for all the benefits which thou hast bestowed on the
whole world; especially on us, whom thou hast called to the
knowledge of thy grace in Christ Jesus. It is a marvellous
love wherewith thou hast loved us. Thou hast not dealt so
with all people; and as for thy great and precious promises,
they have not known them.
Accept, O merciful Father, the good resolutions which thou
hast inspired us with by thy Spirit. Strengthen them, we
beseech thee, with thy continued grace, that no sudden desires,
vehement inclinations, ineffectual purposes, no, nor partial
performances, may lead us into a false opinion of ourselves;
but that we may bring forth actually, and with a constant
spirit, all the fruits of righteousness, which are by Christ Jesus.
Deny not, O Lord, the desires of those souls who would
offer up themselves entirely to thy service. But preserve us
always in seriousness of spirit. Let the sense of our weak
ness make us watchful and diligent, the sense of our former
negligence excite us to be fervent in spirit, and the goodness
of thy commands render us fruitful and abundant in the
work of the Lord. O that all our pious affections may be
turned into actions of piety and holiness; and may all our
actions be spirited with zeal, and all our zeal regulated with
prudence, and our prudence void of all guile, and joined with
perfect integrity of heart; that, adorning our most holy faith
here, by an upright, charitable, and discreet conversation, we
may receive praise in the day of the Lord, and be numbered
with thy saints in glory everlasting.
O lift up our affections to things above, that we may have
perfect contentment in well-doing and patient suffering, and
the good hope we have of being etermally beloved of thee
may make us rejoice evermore. Free us from the cares of
the world, from all distrust of thy good providence, from
repining at anything that befals us, and enable us in every
thing to give thanks, believing that all things are ordered
wisely, and shall work together for good.
Into thy hands we commend both our souls and bodies,
which thou hast mercifully preserved this day. We trust in
thy watchful providence, who “givest thy angels charge over
us,” who “art about our beds, and about our paths, and
spiest out all our” thoughts. O continue these holy thoughts
and desires in us till we fall asleep, that we may receive the
light of the morning, if thou prolongest our lives, with a new
joy in thee, and thankful affection to thee.
We desire likewise, O God, the good of the whole world
Pity the follies of mankind; deliver them from their miseries,
and forgive thou all their sins. Hear the groans of every
part of the creation, that is yet “subject to bondage,” and
bring them all “into the glorious liberty of the sons of
God.” Hear the daily prayers of the catholic Church.
Free her from all foul and dividing errors; let the truth as it
is in Jesus prevail, and “peace be in all her borders.” O.
that all Christian Governors may “seek peace and ensue it.”
Make thy Ministers the messengers of peace, and dispose all
who are called Christians to keep “the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace.”
Enlighten the minds of all Jews, Turks, and Infidels.
Strengthen all thy faithful servants. Bring back them that
wander out of the way; raise up those that are fallen; con
firm those that stand, and grant them steadily to persevere
in faith, love, and obedience. Relieve and comfort all that
are in distress. Let the earth bring forth her fruit in due
season; and let all honest and industrious people be blessed
in their labours.
Remember all those who have done good unto us, and
reward them sevenfold into their bosom. Grant forgiveness
and charity to all our enemies; and continue good-will
among all our neighbours. Support the sick with faith and
patience; assist those who are leaving this world. Receive
the souls which thou hast redeemed with thy Son’s precious
blood, and sanctified by the Holy Ghost: And give us all a
glorious resurrection and eternal life. “Our Father,” &c.
THURSDAY MORNING.
O LoRD, the God of our salvation, “thou art the hope of
all the ends of the earth.” Upon thee the eyes of all do wait;
for thou givest unto all life and breath and all things. Thou
still watchest over us for good; thou daily renewest to us our
lives and thy mercies; and thou hast given us the assurance
of thy word, that if we commit our affairs to thee, if we
acknowledge thee in all our ways, thou wilt direct our paths.
THURSDAY MORNING. 25I
We desire, O Lord, to be still under thy gracious conduct
and fatherly protection. We beg the guidance and help of thy
good Spirit, to choose our inheritance for us, and to dispose
of us, and all that concerns us, to the glory of thy name.
O Lord, withdraw not thy tender mercies from us, nor the
comforts of thy presence. Never punish our past sins, by
giving us over to the power of our sins; but pardon all our
sins, and save us from all our iniquities. And grant us, O
good God, the continual sense of thy gracious acceptance of
us, in the Son of thy love, that our souls may bless thee, and
“all that is within us may praise thy holy name.”
And O that we may find the joy of the Lord to be our
strength; to defend us from all our sins, and to make us more
zealous of every good work; that herein we may “exercise
ourselves, to have a conscience void of offence, both towards
God and towards men.” O help us “to walk circumspectly;
not as fools, but as wise,” carefully “redeeming the time,”
improving all those seasons and means of grace which thou
art pleased to put into our hands. Sanctify to us all our employ
ments in the world; our crosses, also, and our comforts; all
the estates we go through, and all the events that befal us;
till, through the merits of thy Son, and the multitude of thy
mercies, we are conducted safe to “be ever with the Lord.”
Thou “hast laid help for us upon One that is mighty;”
that is “able to save unto the uttermost all those who come
unto God through him.” Through him thou hast encouraged
us to come boldly, that we “may obtain mercy, and find grace.
to help in time of need.” Help us, we beseech thee, to demean
ourselves as becomes the children of God, the redeemed of
the Lord, the members of Christ. Put thy Spirit within us,
causing us to walk in thy statutes, and to keep thy judg
ments, and do them. Yea, let it be our meat and drink to
do thy will, and to run the way of thy commandments.
O gracious Father, keep us, we pray thee, this day in thy
fear and favour, and teach us, in all our thoughts, words, and
works, to live to thy glory. If thou guide us not, we go.
astray; if thou uphold us not, we fall. O let thy good pro
vidence be our defence, and thy good Spirit our guide, and
counsellor, and supporter in all our ways. And grant that
we may do always what is acceptable in thy sight, through
Jesus Christ our Lord; in whose holy name and words we
close these our imperfect prayers: “Our Father,” &c.
Let thy grace, O Lord Jesus, thy love, O heavenly Father,
and thy comfortable fellowship, O blessed Spirit, be with
us, and with all that desire our prayers, this day and for
eVermoree
THURSDAY EVENING.
O LoRD our God, thy glory is above all our thoughts, and
thy mercy is over all thy works. We are still living monu
ments of thy mercy: For thou hast not cut us off in our sins,
but still givest us a good hope and strong consolation through
grace. Thou hast sent thy only Son into the world, “that
whosoever believeth in him should not perish” in his sins,
“but have everlasting life.” O Lord, we believe; help our
unbelief; and give us the true “repentance towards God,
and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ,” that we may be in the
number of those who do indeed repent and “believe to the
saving of the soul. Being justified by faith,” let us “have
peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ;” let us
“rejoice in him through whom we have now redemption in
his blood;” and let “the love of God be shed abroad in our
hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.”
And as we pray that thou wilt be to us a Father of mercies
and a God of consolation, so that thou wilt make us “followers
of God as dear children,” ever jealous over our hearts, and
watchful over our ways; continually fearing to offend, and
•endeavouring to please thee. Thou knowest, O Lord, all our
temptations, and the sin that doth so easily beset us. Thou
knowest the devices of the enemy, and the deceitfulness of
•our own hearts. We pray thee, good Lord, that thou wilt
arm us with the whole armour of God. Uphold us with thy
tree Spirit, and watch over us for good evermore.
Let our supplications also ascend before thee for the whole
race of mankind. Send thy word unto all the ends of the
-earth, and let it be the savour of life unto all that hear it.
Be gracious to this our native land. O do thou rule all our
rulers, counsel all our counsellors, teach all our Teachers, and
order all the public affairs to thy glory. Turn from us the
judgments which we feel or fear; continue thy blessings to our
souls and bodies; and, notwithstanding all our provocations,
be thou still our God, and let us be thy people. Have
compassion on all the children of affliction, and sanctify thy
fatherly corrections to them. Be gracious to all our friends
and neighbours. Reward our benefactors. Bless our relations
with the best of thy blessings, with thy fear and love.
Preserve us from our enemies, and reconcile them both to us
and to thyself. O that all the habitations of Christians may
be houses of prayer ! And be thou especially kind to the
several families where thy blessed name is called upon.
Let thy blessing rest upon us of this family. Bless all our
present estates to us; and fit us all for whatsoever thou
shalt be pleased to call us to. O teach us how “to want
and how to abound.” In every condition secure our hearts
to thyself; and make us ever to approve ourselves sincere
and faithful in thy service.
And now, O Father of mercies, be pleased to accept our
evening sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. O that thou
wouldest imprint and preserve upon our hearts a lively sense
of all thy kindness to us; that our souls may bless thee, and
all that is within us may praise thy holy name. Yea, let us
give thee thanks from the ground of the heart, and praise
our God while we have our being: For all thy patience with
us, thy care over us, and thy continual mercy to us, blessed
be thy name, O Lord God, our heavenly Father; and unto
thee, with the Son of thy love, and Spirit of grace, be all
thanks and praise, now and for evermore.
FRIDAY MORNING.
“O LoRD God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering and
abundant in goodness and truth; thou keepest mercy for
thousands; thou pardonest iniquity and transgression and
sin. How excellent is thy loving-kindness, O God! The
children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of thy
wings.” And therefore do we still look up to that bountiful
hand, from whence we have received all our good things.
O Lord our God, be favourable unto us, as thou usest to be
unto those that love thy holy name! O look not upon the
sin of our nature, nor the sins of our hearts and lives, which
are more than we can remember, and greater than we can
express. It is of the Lord’s mercies that we are not consumed,
because thy compassions fail not. But thou lookest upon
the face of thine Anointed, who was manifested to take away
our sins; by whom it is that we have the access unto the
Majesty on high.
O God, be merciful to us miserable sinners, for his sake
whom “thou hast exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour, to
give repentance” unto thy people, “and forgiveness of sins.”
Be merciful, O God, be merciful unto our souls, which have
greatly sinned against thee. O heal our backslidings; renew
us to repentance; establish our hearts in thy fear and love;
and establish our goings in thy way, that our footsteps slip
not. Let us waver no more; let us never more be weary or
faint in our minds; let us not revolt from thee, or turn to
folly again, after thou hast spoken peace to our souls; but
may we go on conquering and to conquer all the enemies of
our souls, and all the hinderances of our salvation, till thou
hast bruised Satan under our feet.
Seeing there is in Christ Jesus an infinite fulness of all
that we can want or wish, O that we may all receive of his
fulness, grace upon grace; grace to pardon our sins, and
subdue our iniquities; to justify our persons and to sanctify
our souls; and to complete that holy change, that renewal of
our hearts, whereby we may be transformed into that blessed
image wherein thou didst create us. O make us all meet to
be partakers of the inheritance of thy saints in light.
And teach us, O God, to use this world without abusing it;
and to receive the things needful for the body, without losing
our part in thy love, which is better than life itself. What
ever we have of this world, O may we have the same with thy
leave and love; sanctified to us by the word of God and by
prayer; and by the right improvement thereof to thy glory.
And whatever we want of worldly things, leave us not
destitute of the “things that accompany salvation;” but adorn
our souls with all such graces of thy Holy Spirit, that we may
adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things.
And now that thou hast renewed our lives and thy mercies
to us this morning, help us to renew our desires and resolu
tions, and endeavours to live in obedience to thy holy will.
O restrain us from the sins into which we are most prone
to fall, and quicken us to the duties we are most averse to
perform; and grant that we may think and speak, and will
and do, the things becoming the children of our heavenly
Father; and so find the strong consolation of thy gracious
acceptance in Jesus Christ our Saviour, who, when we pray,
hath taught us to say, “Our Father,” &c.
FRIDAY EVENING.
O LoRD, thou wast before all, thou art above all, and thy
years shall not fail. Thou art the searcher of our hearts;
thou knowest the dulness and hardness, the vanity and
-deceitfulness, of them: We were born sinners, and so have
we lived. We have added sin to sin; we have abused thy great
and manifold mercies, tempted thy patience, and despised thy
goodness; and justly mightest thou have cast us into outer
darkness, where is wailing and gnashing of teeth.
But of thy loving-kindnesses there is no number. Thou
still callest us to return to thee; and “whosoever cometh
to thee, thou wilt in nowise cast out.” O meet us with thy
heavenly grace, that we may be able to come to thee. Be
thou graciously pleased to stretch forth thy hand, and loose
the chains wherewith our souls are entangled. O free us
from every weight of sin, from every yoke of bondage. O
help us to feel, and bewail, and forsake all our sins; and let
us never want the comfortable assurance of thy forgiveness
of them, thy acceptance of us, and thy love to us, in the
blessed Son of thy eternal love.
Thou art never weary, O Lord, of doing us good: Let us
never be weary of doing thce service. But, as thou hast plea
sure in the prosperity of thy servants, so let us take pleasure
in the service of our Lord, and abound in thy work, and in thy
love and praise evermore. O fill up all that is wanting, reform
whatever is amiss, in us, and perfect the thing that concerneth
us. Let the witness of thy pardoning love ever abide in all
our hearts. O speak into every one of our souls the peace
which passeth all understanding; and let us always look
upon thee as our Father, reconciled to us in Jesus Christ.
In his great name we cry unto thee in the behalf of the
whole race of mankind. O that all the ends of the earth may
see the salvation of our God. Continue thy mercies to this
sinful land; teach us at length to know thy will concerning
us; and O turn thou all our hearts unto thee, as the heart of
one man. Bless the King; O Lord, prolong his days and
prosper his government; make him always a “terror to evil
doers, and a praise to them that do well:” And grant unto.
all Magistrates and Ministers of thy word, a continual supply
of all the needful gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit. Be thou
a Father to the fatherless, a Husband to the widow, a Refuge
to the oppressed, a Physician to the sick, a Helper of the
friendless, a God of consolation to the sorrowful and distressed.
Bless to us whatsoever thou art pleased to allot us, and
everything that befals us. Make all work for our good, to
build us up in thy grace, and to help us on to thy glory.
Continue thy fatherly care over us this night. O preserve
and defend, and bless and keep us, that no evil may befalus,
“nor any plague come nigh our dwelling.” Give us comfort
able sleep to strengthen us for thy service; and whenever
thou callest us to the sleep of death, let us cheerfully resign
our spirits into thy hands, through the riches of thy grace,
and the worthiness of thy Son, in whose merits and mediation
alone we put our trust. And for all that he hath done and
suffered for us, to thy name, O blessed God of our salvation,
be the praise, and honour, and glory, given by us and all thy
people, now and for evermore. “Our Father,” &c.
SATURDAY MORNING.
WE present ourselves before thee, O Lord our God, to
pay our tribute of prayer and thanksgiving; desiring thee
mercifully to accept us and our services at the hands of
Jesus Christ. In his great name we come to beg thy pardon
and peace, the increase of thy grace, and the tokens of thy
love; for we are not worthy of the least of thy mercies:
But worthy is the Lamb that was slain to take away the sin
of the world; for whose sake thou wilt give us all things;
for he hath fulfilled those holy laws which we had broken,
and perfectly satisfied for our offences; and in him thou art
a God gracious and merciful to those who deserve nothing
but punishment.
Omerciful Father, regard not what we have done against thee;
but what our blessed Saviour hath done for us. Regard not
what we have made ourselves, but what He is made unto us of
thce our God. O that Christ may be to every one of our souls,
“wisdom and righteousness, sanctification and redemption;”
that his precious blood may cleanse us from all our sins; and
that thy Holy Spirit may renew and sanctify our souls.
May He crucify our flesh with its affections and lusts, and
mortify all our members which are upon earth. O let not
“sin reign in our mortal bodies, that we should obey it in
the lusts thereof;” but, “being made free from sin, let us
be the servants of righteousness.” Let us approve our
hearts to thee, and let all our ways be pleasing in thy sight.
O teach us to know thee our God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou hast sent; and enable us to do thy will on earth, as it
is done in heaven. Give us to fear thee and to love thee, to
trust and delight in thee, and to cleave to thee with full
purpose of heart, that no temptations may draw us or drive
us from thee; but that all thy dispensations to us, and thy
dealings with us, may be the messengers of thy love to our
souls. Quicken us, O Lord, in our dulness, that we may
not serve thee in a lifeless and listless manner; but may
abound in thy work, and be fervent in spirit, serving the
Lord. And make us faithful in all our intercourse with our
neighbour, that we may be ready to do good and bear evil,
that we may be just and kind, merciful and meek, peaceable
and patient, sober and temperate, humble and self-denying,
inoffensive and useful in the world; that so glorifying thee
here, we may be glorified with thee in thy heavenly
kingdom.
Day by day we magnify thee, O Lord, who makest every
day an addition to thy mercies. We bless thee for preserving
us the night past, and for the rest thou gavest us therein.
O cause us to hear thy loving-kindness in the morning; for
in thee do we trust. Cause us to know the way wherein we
shall go, for we lift up our souls unto thee. O take not thy
Holy Spirit from us; but direct all our ways to please thee
our God. Help us to see thy power, to own thy presence, to
admire thy wisdom, and to love thy goodness in all thy
creatures; and by all, draw our hearts still nearer to thee.
Such thy mercy and grace we beg for ourselves, and all ours
and thine everywhere in our great Mediator's blessed
words:—
“Our Father,” &c.
SATURDAY EVENING.
O LoRD our God, thou art infinitely good, and thou hast
showed us what is good. Thou sendest out thy light and thy
truth, that they may guide us, and makest plain thy way
before our face. Thou givest us many opportunities and
advantages, to quicken and further us in thy service. We
have “line upon line,” and “precept upon precept;” thy
messengers early and late to open and apply thy word, to call
and warn, to direct and exhort us, with all long-suffering.
But how little have we improved all the precious talents
which thou hast put into our hands ! O Lord, thou mightest
justly take away the gospel of thy kingdom from us, and
give it unto another people, who would bring forth the fruits
thereof. Because thou hast called, and we refused; thou
hast stretched forth thy hands, and we have not regarded;
thou mightest leave us to our own perverseness and
impenitence, till our iniquities become our ruin.
But, O Lord God, enter not thus into judgment with thy
servants. Pardon all our contempt of thy word, and our not
profiting thereby. And help us for the time to come better
to improve the blessed opportunities set before us. “As the
rain descends from heaven and returns not thither, but
waters the earth and maketh it fruitful; so let not thy word
return unto thee void, but prosper in the work whereunto
thou sendest it.” O make it effectual to build us all up, in
the true fear and love of God, and in the right knowledge
and faith of our Lord Jesus Christ.
O gracious God, may thy Spirit cause thy word to work
thoroughly and successfully in all our hearts. And as we
daily receive how we ought to walk and to please thee our
God; so help us to “walk worthy of the Lord unto all well
pleasing;” increasing in the knowledge and love of thee, and
abounding more and more in every good work which is
pleasing in thy sight through Jesus Christ.
At his hands, O Lord our God, we beg thy gracious
acceptance of our humble praise and thanksgiving for all thy
blessings, spiritual and temporal, so freely conferred upon us.
We praise thee for all the comforts and conveniences of this
life, and for all the means and hopes of a better; particularly
for what we have received this day; the food of our souls set
before us, the word of salvation sounding in our ears, and
ithe Spirit of God striving with our hearts. O withdraw not
thy tender mercies from us, but still continue thy accustomed
goodness, and increase thy grace and heavenly blessings
upon us, and rejoice over us to do us good.
In mercy pass by all which thy most pure and holy eyes
have seen amiss in us this day. Forgive the iniquities of
'our holy things; overlook all our sins and failings through
our great Mediator and Redeemer, who ever lives at thy
right hand to make intercession for us. And for Jesus
Christ, and all which thou art pleased to give us together
with him, “not unto us, O Lord, but unto thy name’” be aly
the praise, and honour, and glory, humbly ascribed by us,
and all thy Church, now and for evermore !
“Our Father,” &c.
