Advice to the People Called Methodists
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Year: 1745
Author: John Wesley
---
IT may be needful to specify whom I mean by this ambigu
ous term; since it would be lost labour to speak to Methodists,
so called, without first describing those to whom I speak.
* Thus translated by Francis:
“To the instruction of a humble friend,
Who would himself be better taught, attend.”-EDIT.
By Methodists I mean, a people who profess to pursue (in
whatsoever measure they have attained) holiness of heart and
life, inward and outward conformity in all things to the revealed
will of God; who place religion in an uniform resemblance of
the great object of it; in a steady imitation of Him they wor
ship, in all his imitable perfections; more particularly, in jus
tice, mercy, and truth, or universal love filling the heart, and
governing the life.
You, to whom I now speak, believe this love of human kind
cannot spring but from the love of God. You think there can
be no instance of one whose tender affection embraces every
child of man, (though not endeared to him either by ties of
blood, or by any natural or civil relation,) unless that affection
flow from a grateful, filial love to the common Father of all;
to God, considered not only as his Father, but as “the Father
of the spirits of all flesh;” yea, as the general Parent and
Friend of all the families both of heaven and earth.
This filial love you suppose to flow only from faith, which
you describe as a supernatural evidence (or conviction) of
things not seen; so that to him who has this principle,
The things unknown to feeble sense,
Unseen by reason's glimmering ray,
With strong commanding evidence
Their heavenly origin display.
Faith lends its realizing light,
The clouds disperse, the shadows fly;
The Invisible appears in sight,
And God is seen by mortal eye.
You suppose this faith to imply an evidence that God is mer
ciful to me a sinner; that he is reconciled to me by the death of
his Son, and now accepts me for his sake. You accordingly
describe the faith of a real Christian as “a sure trust and confi
dence ’’ (over and above his assent to the sacred writings)
“which he hath in God, that his sins are forgiven; and that
he is, through the merits of Christ, reconciled to the favour
of God.”
You believe, farther, that both this faith and love are wrought
in us by the Spirit of God; nay, that there cannot be in any
man one good temper or desire, or so much as one good
thought, unless it be produced by the almighty power of God,
by the inspiration or influence of the Holy Ghost.
If you walk by this rule, continually endeavouring to know
and love and resemble and obey the great God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, as the God of love, of pardoning mercy;
if from this principle of loving, obedient faith, you carefully
abstain from all evil, and labour, as you have opportunity, to
do good to all men, friends or enemies; if, lastly, you unite
together, to encourage and help each other in thus working
out your salvation, and for that end watch over one another
in love, you are they whom I mean by Methodists.
The First general advice which one who loves your souls
would earnestly recommend to every one of you is: “Con
sider, with deep and frequent attention, the peculiar circum
stances wherein you stand.”
One of these is, that you are a new people: Your name is
new, (at least, as used in a religious sense,) not heard of, till
a few years ago, either in our own or any other nation. Your
principles are new, in this respect, that there is no other set
of people among us (and, possibly, not in the Christian world)
who hold them all in the same degree and connexion; who so
strenuously and continually insist on the absolute necessity of
universal holiness both in heart and life; of a peaceful, joyous
love of God; of a supernatural evidence of things not seen; of
an inward witness that we are the children of God; and of the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, in order to any good thought,
or word, or work. And perhaps there is no other set of people,
(at least, not visibly united together,) who lay so much and yet
no more stress than you do on rectitude of opinions, on out
ward modes of worship, and the use of those ordinances which
you acknowledge to be of God. So much stress you lay even
on right opinions, as to profess, that you earnestly desire to
have a right judgment in all things, and are glad to use every
means which you know or believe may be conducive thereto;
and yet not so much as to condemn any man upon earth,
merely for thinking otherwise than you do; much less, to
imagine that God condemns him for this, if he be upright and
sincere of heart. On those outward modes of worship, wherein
you have been bred up, you lay so much stress as highly to
approve them; but not so much as to lessen your love to those
who conscientiously dissent from you herein. You likewise lay
so much stress on the use of those ordinances which you believe
to be of God, as to confess there is no salvation for you if you
wilfully neglect them: And yet you do not judge them that are
otherwise minded; you determine nothing concerning those
who, not believing those ordinances to be of God, do, out of
principle, abstain from them.
Your strictness of life, taking the whole of it together, may
likewise be accounted new. I mean, your making it a rule, to
abstain from fashionable diversions, from reading plays, ro
mances, or books of humour, from singing innocent songs, or
talking in a merry, gay, diverting manner; your plainness of
dress; your manner of dealing in trade; your exactness in ob
serving the Lord’s day; your scrupulosity as to things that
have not paid custom; your total abstinence from spirituous
liquors (unless in cases of necessity); your rule, “not to men
tion the fault of an absent person, in particular of Ministers
or of those in authority,” may justly be termed new: Seeing,
although some are scrupulous in some of these things, and
others are strict with regard to other particulars, yet we do
not find any other body of people who insist on all these rules
together. With respect, therefore, both to your name, prin
ciples, and practice, you may be considered as a new people.
Another peculiar circumstance of your present situation is,
that you are newly united together; that you are just gathered,
or (as it seems) gathering rather, out of all other societies
or congregations; nay, and that you have been hitherto, and
do still subsist, without power, (for you are a low, insignificant"
people,) without riches, (for you are poor almost to a man,
having no more than the plain necessaries of life,) and without
either any extraordinary gifts of nature, or the advantages of
education; most even of your Teachers being quite unlearned,
and (in other things) ignorant men.
There is yet another circumstance, which is quite peculiar
to yourselves: Whereas every other religious set of people, as
soon as they were joined to each other, separated themselves
from their former societies or congregations; you, on the con
trary, do not; nay, you absolutely disavow all desire of sepa
rating from them. You openly and continually declare you
have not, nor ever had, such a design. And whereas the con
gregations to which those separatists belonged have generally
spared no pains to prevent that separation; those to which you
belong spare no pains (not to prevent, but) to occasion this
separation, to drive you from them, to force you on that divi
sion to which you declare you have the strongest aversion.
Considering these peculiar circumstances wherein you stand,
you will see the propriety of a Second advice I would recom
mend to you: “Do not imagine you can avoid giving offence.”
Your very name renders this impossible. Perhaps not one in a
hundred of those who use the term Methodist have any ideas
of what it means. To ninety-nine of them it is still heathen
Sreek. Only they think it means something very bad,—either
a Papist, a heretic, an underminer of the Church, or some
unheard-of monster; and, in all probability, the farther it goes,
it must gather up more and more evil. It is vain, therefore,
for any that is called a Methodist ever to think of not giving
offence.
And as much offence as you give by your name, you will
give still more by your principles. You will give offence to
the bigots for opinions, modes of worship, and ordinances, by
laying no more stress upon them; to the bigots against them,
by laying so much; to men of form, by insisting so frequently
and strongly on the inward power of religion; to moral men,
(so called,) by declaring the absolute necessity of faith, in order
to acceptance with God. To men of reason you will give
offence, by talking of inspiration and receiving the Holy Ghost;
to drunkards, Sabbath-breakers, common swearers, and other
open sinners, by refraining from their company, as well as by
that disapprobation of their behaviour which you will often be
obliged to express. And indeed your life must give them con
tinual offence: Your sobriety is grievously offensive to a drunk
ard; your serious conversation is equally intolerable to a gay
impertinent: and, in general, that “you are grown so precise
and singular, so monstrously strict, beyond all sense and reason,
that you scruple so many harmless things, and fancy you are
obliged to do so many others which you need not,” cannot but
be an offence to abundance of people, your friends and relations
in particular. Either, therefore, you must consent to give up
your principles, or your fond hope of pleasing men.
What makes even your principles more offensive is, this
uniting of yourselves together: Because this union renders you
more conspicuous, placing you more in the eye of men; more
suspicious,—I mean, liable to be suspected of carrying on some
sinister design (especially by those who do not, or will not,
know your inviolable attachment to His present Majesty);
more dreadful, to those of a fearful temper, who imagine you
have any such design; and more odious to men of zeal, if
their zeal be any other than fervent love to God and man.
This offence will sink the deeper, because you are gathered
out of so many other congregations: For the warm men in
each will not easily be convinced, that you do not despise either
them or their teachers; nay, will probably imagine, that you
utterly condemn them, as though they could not be saved.
And this occasion of offence is now at the height, because you
are just gathered, or gathering rather, so that they know not
where it will end; but the fear of losing (so they account
it) more of their members, gives an edge to their zeal, and
keeps all their anger and resentment in its strength.
Add to this, that you do not leave them quite, you still rank
yourselves among their members; which, to those who knownot
that you do it for conscience’ sake, is also a provoking circum
stance. “If you would but get out of their sight !” But you are
a continual thorn in their side, as long as you remain with them.
And (which cannot but anger them the more) you have
neither power, nor riches, nor learning; yet, with all their
power, and money, and wisdom, they can gain no ground
against you.
You cannot but expect, that the offence continually arising
from such a variety of provocations will gradually ripen into
hatred, malice, and all other unkind tempers. And as they who
are thus affected will not fail to represent you to others in the
same light as you appear to them,-sometimes as madmen and
fools, sometimes as wicked men, fellows not fit to live upon the
earth; the consequence, humanly speaking, must be, that, toge
ther with your reputation, you will lose, first, the love of your
friends, relations, and acquaintance, even those who once loved
you the most tenderly; then your business, for many will em
ploy you no longer, nor “buy of such an one as you are;”
and, in due time, (unless He who governs the world interpose,)
your health, liberty, and life.
What further advice can be given to persons in such a situa
tion? I cannot but advise you, Thirdly, “Consider deeply with
yourself, Is the God whom I serve able to deliver me? I am
not able to deliver myself out of these difficulties; much less am
I able to bear them. I know not how to give up my reputation,
my friends, my substance, my liberty, my life. Can God give
me to rejoice in doing this; and may I depend upon him that
he will? Are the hairs of my head all numbered; and does He
never fail them that trust in him?” Weigh this throughly;
and if you can trust God with your all, then go on in the
power of his might.
Go on, I would earnestly advise you, Fourthly: “Keep in
the very path wherein you now tread. Be true to your prin
ciples.” Never rest again in the dead formality of religion.
Pursue with your might inward and outward holiness; a steady
imitation of Him you worship; a still increasing resemblance
of his imitable perfections,—his justice, mercy, and truth.
Let this be your manly, noble, generous religion, equally
remote from the meanness of superstition, which places religion
in doing what God hath not enjoined, or abstaining from what
he hath not forbidden; and from the unkindness of bigotry,
which confines our affection to our own party, sect, or opinion.
Above all, stand fast in obedient faith, faith in the God of
pardoning mercy, in the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who hath loved you, and given himself for you. Ascribe
to Him all the good you find in yourself; all your peace, and
joy, and love; all your power to do and suffer his will, through
the Spirit of the living God. Yet, in the mean time, carefully
avoid enthusiasm: Impute not the dreams of men to the all
wise God; and expect neither light nor power from him, but
in the serious use of all the means he hath ordained.
Be true also to your principles touching opinions and the
externals of religion. Use every ordinance which you believe is
of God; but beware of narrowness of spirit towards those who
use them not. Conform yourself to those modes of worship
which you approve; yet love as brethren those who cannot con
form. Lay so much stress on opinions, that all your own, if it
be possible, may agree with truth and reason; but have a care of
anger, dislike, or contempt towards those whose opinions differ
from yours. You are daily accused of this; (and, indeed, what
is it whereof you are not accused?) but beware of giving any
ground for such an accusation. Condemn no man for not
thinking as you think: Let every one enjoy the full and free
liberty of thinking for himself: Let every man use his own
judgment, since every man must give an account of himself to
God. Abhor every approach, in any kind or degree, to the
spirit of persecution. If you cannot reason or persuade a man
into the truth, never attempt to force him into it. If love will
not compel him to come in, leave him to God, the Judge of all.
Yet expect not that others will deal thus with you. No:
Some will endeavour to fright you out of your principles;
some to shame you into a more popular religion, to laugh and
rally you out of your singularity: But from none of these will
you be in so great danger, as from those who assault you with
quite different weapons; with softness, good-nature, and
earnest professions of (perhaps real) good-will. Here you
are equally concerned to avoid the very appearance of anger,
contempt, or unkindness, and to hold fast the whole truth of
God, both in principle and in practice.
This indeed will be interpreted as unkindness. Your former
acquaintance will look upon this,—that you will not sin or trifle
with them,-as a plain proof of your coldness towards them;
and this burden you must be content to bear: But labour to
avoid all real unkindness, all disobliging words, or harshness of
speech, all shyness, or strangeness of behaviour. Speak to.
them with all the tenderness and love, and behave with all
the sweetness and courtesy, you can ; taking care not to give
any needless offence to neighbour or stranger, friend or enemy.
Perhaps on this very account I might advise you, Fifthly,
“not to talk much of what you suffer; of the persecution you
endured at such a time, and the wickednessof your persecutors.”
Nothing more tends to exasperate them than this; and there
fore (although there is a time when these things must be men
tioned, yet) it might be a general rule, to do it as seldom as you
can with a safe conscience. For, besides its tendency to inflame
them, it has the appearance of evil, of ostentation, of magnifying.
yourselves. It also tends to puff you up with pride, and to
make you think yourselves some great ones, as it certainly does
to excite or increase in your heart ill-will, anger, and all unkind
tempers. It is, at best, loss of time; for, instead of the wicked
ness of men, you might be talking of the goodness of God.
Nay, it is, in truth, an open, wilful sin: It is tale-bearing,
back-biting, evil-speaking,—a sin you can never be sufficiently
watchful against, seeing it steals upon you in a thousand
shapes. Would it not be far more profitable for your souls,
instead of speaking against them, to pray for them ? to confirm
your love towards those unhappy men, whom you believe to
be fighting against God, by crying mightily to him in their
behalf, that he may open their eyes and change their hearts?
I have now only to commend you to the care of Him who
hath all power in heaven and in earth; beseeching Him, that,
in every circumstance of life, you may stand “firm as the
beaten anvil to the stroke;” desiring nothing on earth; ac
counting all things but dung and dross, that you may win
Christ; and always remembering, “It is the part of a good
champion, to be flayed alive, and to conquer!”
