A Dialogue between an Antinomian and His Friend
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
ANTINoM1AN.—WELL met, my friend. I am glad to
see you. But I am sorry to hear you have changed your
religion.
FRIEND.—Changed my religion I I do not know what you
Inean.
Ant.—Why, you once believed, we are saved by faith.
Friend.—Undoubtedly; and so I do still.
Ant.—Do you believe, then, that the “whole work of man’s
salvation was accomplished by Jesus Christ on the cross?”*
* The words printed as quotations, within inverted commas, are transcribed
rom \ate authors. I am not willing to name them.
Friend.—I believe, that, by that one offering, he made a
full satisfaction for the sins of the whole world.
Ant.—But do you believe that “Christ’s blood and our
sins went away together?”
Friend.—To say the truth, I do not understand it.
Ant.—No ! Why, did not Christ, “when he was upon the
cross, take away, put an end to, blot out, and utterly destroy,
all our sins for ever?”
Friend.—He did then pay the price, for the sake of which,
all who truly believe in him are now saved from their sins;
and, if they endure to the end, shall be saved everlastingly.
Is this what you mean?
Ant.—I mean, He did then “heal, take away, put an end
to, and utterly destroy, all our sins.”
Friend.—Did he then heal the wound before it was made,
and put an end to our sins before they had a beginning?
This is so glaring, palpable an absurdity, that I cannot
conceive how you can swallow it.
Ant.—I thought you would come to your “carnal reason
ing.” What has faith to do with reasoning?
Friend.—Do you ever read the Bible? Does not God himself
say to sinners, “Come now, and let us reason together?”
(Isaiah i. 18.) Does not our Lord reason continually with the
Scribes and Pharisees; St. Peter with the Jews; (Acts ii. 14,
&c.;) and St. Paul both with the Jews and Gentiles? Nay,
is not great part of his Epistles, both to the Romans and to
the Galatians, and the far greatest part of that to the Hebrews,
one entire chain of reasoning?
Ant.—You may do what you please. But I do not reason;
I believe.
Friend.—Now, I believe and reason too: For I find no
inconsistency between them. And I would just as soon put
out my eyes to secure my faith, as lay aside my reason.
Ant.—But do not men abuse their reason continually?
Therefore it is best to have nothing to do with it.
Friend.—So, now you are doing the very thing you con
demn ! You are reasoning against reasoning. And no
wonder; for it is impossible, without reasoning, either to
prove or disprove any thing.
Ant.—But can you deny the fact? Do not men abuse their
reason continually?
Friend.—They do. The fact I deny not. But I deny the
inference drawn from it. For if we must lay aside whatever
men abuse continually, we must lay aside the Bible; nay, and
meat and drink too.
Ant.—Well, but come to the point. In what do you trust
for justification and salvation?
Friend.—In the alone merits of Christ, which are mine, if
I truly believe that he loved me, and gave himself for me.
Ant.—If! So you make salvation conditional !
Friend.—And do not you? Else you make God a liar:
For his express words are, “He that believeth shall be
saved; he that believeth not shall be damned.” What is
this but to say, If thou believest, (there is the condition,)
thou shalt be saved ?
Ant.—But I do not like that word, condition.
Friend.—Then find a better, and we will lay it aside.
Ant.—However, I insist upon it, “nothing else beside
faith is required” in order to justification and salvation.
Friend.—What do you mean by nothing else is required?
Ant—I mean, “there is but one duty, which is that of
believing. One must do nothing, but quietly attend the voice
of the Lord. The gates of heaven are shut upon workers,
and open to believers. If we do nothing for heaven, we do
as much as God requires.”
Friend.—Do you really mean, we are to do nothing, in
order to present or final salvation, but “only to believe?”
Ant.—Do not I tell you so? “To believe certainly, that
Christ suffered death for us, is enough; we want no more.
We are justified by our submitting in our judgments to
the truth of God’s grace in Christ Jesus. It is not neces
sary that a man do any works, that he may be justified and
saved. God doth not require thee to do anything, that thou
mayest be saved or justified. The law sets thee to work;
but the gospel binds thee to do nothing at all. Nay, the
works are not only not required, but forbidden. God forbids
us to work for justification. And when the Apostle Paul
presses men to believe, it is as much as if he had bid them
not to work.”
Friend.—Let Paul be permitted to answer for himself. In
the twenty-sixth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, he relates
how our Lord sent him “to open the eyes of the Gentiles,—
that they might receive remission of sins.” (Verses 17, 18.)
“Whereupon,” saith he, “I was not disobedient to the
heavenly vision; but showed—to the Gentiles, that they should
repent, and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance.”
Observe: He “obeyed the heavenly vision,” by teaching the
Gentiles, before they were justified, before they had “received
forgiveness of sins,” to “repent and do works meet for repent
ance.”. So far was he from “bidding them not to work,”
while he was “pressing them to believe.”
Ant.—You are got to your “carnal reasoning” again.
Friend.—Carnal reasoning, I perceive, is a cant term, which
you use when you know not what else to say. But I have
not done with this instance yet. Did St. Paul, indeed,
preach to those Heathens according to the instructions given
him from heaven, or did he not?
Ant.—Without doubt, he did; otherwise he would have
been “disobedient unto the heavenly vision.”
Friend.—How then say you that a Minister of Christ ought
to preach nothing but “Believe, believe?” and, that to tell
men of doing anything, is “preaching the law?” Do you not
herein condemn, not only the great Apostle, but also Him
that sent and commanded him “thus to preach?”
Ant.—Why, surely, you would not have us to be “under
the law !”
Friend.—I fear you know not what that expression means.
St. Paul uses it thrice in his Epistle to the Romans, five
times in that to the Galatians, and in one passage of his
former Epistle to the Corinthians; where he declares in what
sense he was himself “under the law,” and in what sense he
was not. “Unto them that are under the law,” (that still
adhere to the whole Jewish dispensation,) “I became as under
the law,” (I conformed to their ceremonies,) “that I might
gain them that are under the law . But unto them that are
without the law,” (unto the Gentiles or Heathens,) “as
without the law: Being,” meantime, “not without law to
God, but under the law to Christ.” (1 Cor. ix. 20, 21.) It is
plain, therefore, the Apostle was “under the law” of Christ,
though he was not “under the law” of ceremonies.
Ant.—But does not St. Paul say to the believers at Rome,
“Ye are not under the law, but under grace?”
Friend.—He does; and his meaning is, “Ye are not under
the Jewish, but the gracious Christian, dispensation:” As
also in the next verse, where he says, “We are not under the
law, but under grace.”
Ant.—But what does he mean, when he says to the
Galatians, “Before faith came, we were kept under the law?”
Friend.—Doubtless he means, we were kept under the
Jewish dispensation, till we believed in Christ. (iii. 19.) And
so we read in the next chapter, “When the fulness of time
was come, God sent forth his Son, made under the law,” (the
Jewish dispensation,) “to redeem them that were under the
law, that we might receive the adoption of sons;” (verses 4,
5;) might serve God, without fear, in righteousness and
holiness, with a free, loving, child-like spirit.
Ant.—You cannot persuade me to this; I know better.
The law of works (the moral law, as you call it) is nothing
to me. “From any demand of the law, no man is obliged
to go one step, to give away one farthing, to eat, or omit one
morsel. For what did our Lord do with the law He
abolished it.”
Friend.—However, ought not we, after we believe in him,
to obey all the commandments of Christ?
Ant.—Obey law / works / commandments / O what “legal
ness is in your spirit !” So, I suppose, “your comforts
vanish away when you are not assured that you obey all
Christ’s commandments !” On the contrary, “a spiritual
man beholdeth justifying grace in believing, without his
obedience to commands for external worship and good works.”
Friend.—But how does this agree with numberless texts of
Scripture? in particular, with those words of our Lord, “Think
not that I am come to destroy” (or abolish) “the law: I am
not come to destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say unto you,
Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in nowise
pass from the law. Whosoever, therefore, shall break one of
these least commandments, he shall be called the least in the
kingdom of heaven.” (Matt. v. 17, &c.)
Ant.—I tell you plainly, I will not reason.
Friend.—That is as much as to say, “I will not be con
vinced: I love darkness rather than light.”
Ant.—No; it is you that are in darkness. I was so till a few
weeks since. But now my eyes are opened. I see my liberty
now. Now I am free. I was in bondage long enough.
Friend.—What are you free from ?
Ant.—From sin, and hell, and the devil, and the law.
Friend.—You put the law of God in goodly company.
But how came you to be free from the law 7
%
%
Ant.—Christ made me free from it.
Friend.—What I from his own law? Pray, where is that
written?
Ant.—Here, Galatians iii. 13: “Christ hath redeemed us
from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us.”
Friend.—What is this to the purpose? This tells me, that
“Christ hath redeemed us” (all that believe) “from the
curse,” or punishment, justly due to our past transgressions
of God’s law, But it speaks not a word of redeeming us from
the law, any more than from love or heaven.
But what do you mean by bondage?
Ant—Why, the being bound to keep the law.
Friend.—You have no tittle of Scripture for this. Bond
age to fear and bondage to sin are mentioned there; and
bondage to the ceremonial law of Moses: But, according
to your sense of the word, all the angels in heaven are in
bondage. , Ant.—Well, I am not bound. St. Paul himself says to
believers, “Why are ye subject to ordinances?” (Col.
ii. 20.)
Friend.—True; that is, Why are you Christian believers
subject to Jewish ordinances? such as those which are
mentioned in the very next verse, “Touch not, taste not,
handle not.”
Ant.—Nay, that is not all. I say, “Outward things do
nothing avail to salvation.” This is plain; for “if love to
God, and love to our neighbour, and relieving the poor, be
altogether unprofitable and unavailable either to justification
or salvation; then these outward works, in submitting to
outward ordinances, are much less available.”
Friend.—Do you speak of the ordinances of Christ?
Ant.—I do. “They bring in the most dangerous kind of
Popery, and pervert the pure gospel of Christ, who persuade
men, that if they do not submit to the ordinances of the Lord
Jesus, he will not confess them before his Father.” And I
affirm, “it is better not to practise outward ordinances at all,
than to practise them on these gospel-destroying principles,
to the ruining of our souls.”
Friend.—What scripture do you produce for this?
Ant.—I wish you would not build so much upon the
letter: It is your letter-learning too makes you talk of
inherent righteousness.
*
Friend.—Do you say then, a believer has no inherent
righteousness?
Ant.—That I do. I say, “God will save us to the utmost,
without any righteousness or holiness of our own.” To look
for inherent righteousness, “is to deny the Spirit, and trample
under foot the blood of the covenant. Believers have not
any inherent righteousness in them. Our righteousness is
nothing but the imputation of the righteousness of Christ.”
Friend.—Now, I believe that Christ by his Spirit works
righteousness in all those to whom faith is imputed for
righteousness.
Ant.—“By no means; all our righteousness is in Christ.
It is wholly imputed, not inherent. We are always righteous
in Christ, but never righteous in ourselves.”
Friend.—Is not, then, every believer righteous or holy?
Ant.—Doubtless; but he is holy in Christ, not in himself.
Friend.—Does he not live a holy life; and is he not holy of
heart 2
Ant.—Most certainly.
Friend.—Is he not, by plain consequence, holy in himself?
Ant.—No, no, in Christ only; not holy in himself: He
has no holiness at all in himself.
Friend.—Has he not in him the love of God, and of his
neighbour; yea, the whole image of God?
Ant.—He has. But this is not gospel holiness.
Friend.—What vain jangling is this ! You cavil at the
name, while you allow the whole thing I contend for. You
allow, a believer is holy both in heart and life. This is all I
mean by inherent righteousness or holiness.
Ant.—But I tell you, this is not gospel holiness. Gospel
holiness is faith.
Friend.—Stand to this, and you still give up the whole
cause. For, on your supposition, I argue thus:—Faith is
holiness or righteousness: But faith is in every believer:
Therefore, holiness or righteousness is in every believer.
Ant.—Alas, alas! I pity you. Take my word for it, you
are in utter darkness. You know nothing yet of true faith;
nothing at all about it.
Friend.—Will you then be so kind as to explain it to
me?
Ant.—I will. I will make it as clear as the sun. I will show
you the very marrow of that doctrine which “I recommend,
with all my heart, to all, as the most wholesome doctrine of
Jesus Christ.
“Many think they know it, when they have but crude,
carnal, indigested notions of it. And they imagine we rest
contented with such a faith as theirs; namely, that Christ has
died to ward off the wrath of God, to purchase his favour, and,
as an effect of that, to obtain certain inherent qualities and
dispositions, to make us meet for the kingdom of heaven.
Was this our faith, it would be requisite to seek after this sort
of sanctification, and not to be at rest, without we felt some
thing of it. But, on the contrary, we believe that the blood
shed upon the cross has put away and blotted out all our sins,
and that then there was an everlasting righteousness brought
in : By believing which, our hearts and consciences are made
as perfectly clean as though we had never sinned. In this
consists true purity of soul, and not in habitual qualities.
And whoso are thus made pure and perfect are delivered
from the dominion of sin. They do also bear forth the fruits
of righteousness, not in order to become more holy, but
because they are perfectly holy, through faith. It is true,
we have still the vile, sinful body, which continually disposes
the mind to evil. But the blood of Jesus makes us free
from sin, and, as it were, destroys the connexion.”
Friend.—Of all the accounts I have ever yet heard, this is
the most “crude and indigested.” But let us go over it step
by step. You first described what you judge a false faith,
viz., “A faith that Christ hath died, to ward off” (or appease)
“the wrath of God, and to purchase his favour;” (suppose,
for me, a lost sinner;) “and as an effect of that,” (of God’s
favour bought with the blood of Christ,) “to obtain” for
me “certain inherent qualities and dispositions, to make me
meet for the kingdom of heaven.” Now, how do you prove
this to be a false faith?
Ant.—Easily enough : for men “are obliged to support it
by frames, feelings, and works.”
Friend.—And did not you allow, just now, that whoever
has true faith is “holy both in heart and life?” that he has
in him “the love of God and of his neighbour; yea, the
whole image of God?”
Ant.—l did. And what then?
Friend.—Why, then you have abundantly confuted your
self: For you have allowed, that true faith not only cannot
be supported, but cannot exist, no, not for one moment,
without “certain inherent qualities and dispositions,” (viz.,
the love of God and of all mankind,) “which makes us
meet for the kingdom of heaven.” You have allowed, that
true faith cannot subsist without a holy frame of heart, a
continuance in good works, and a feeling sense of God’s love
to me, a sinner.
Ant.—I hear you. Go on.
Friend.—You said next, “Was this our faith, it would
be requisite to seek after this sort of sanctification.” From
your own words it appears, that this is your faith, if you have
any true faith at all. See then that you “seek after this sort
of sanctification,” viz., the love of God and of your neighbour.
For if you can be at rest, though you feel nothing of it, it is
plain your heart is not clean, but hardened.
Ant.—You may say what you please. You know no better.
Friend.—You went on: “On the contrary, we believe that
the blood shed upon the cross has put away and blotted out
all our sins.” Why, who believes otherwise? If you mean
only, that Christ then put away the punishment of all our
sins, who believe in him; what a marvellous discovery is
this ! I pray, whom doth this arguing reprove?
Ant.—It reproves you, who deny that “an everlasting
righteousness was then brought in.”
Friend.—I do not deny it: No more than you understand
it. But I ask, in what sense was it “brought in ?” What
was it brought into? Was it then first brought into the
world? You cannot say this, without saying that all who
went out of the world before that hour were lost. Or was it
brought into the souls of believers? Then believers have an
inward or inherent righteousness. You had better, therefore,
let this text alone. It will do no service at all to your cause.
Ant.—I see plain you are as blind as a beetle still. I am
afraid your head-knowledge will destroy you. Did not I tell
you, “Our hearts and consciences are made perfectly clean
by our believing; and that in this consists true purity of
soul, and not in habitual qualities? Thus we are made per
fectly holy.” And though “the vile, sinful body continually
disposes the mind to evil,” yet “the blood of Christ makes
us free from sin, and, as it were, destroys the connexion.”
Friend.—Destroys the connexion of what? I doubt you
have stumbled upon another word which you do not under
stand. But whether you understand yourself or no, it is
sure I do not understand you. How can my mind at the
same time it is “continually disposed to evil,” be “free from
sin, perfectly clean, perfectly holy?”
Ant.—O the dulness of some men ' I do not mean really
holy, but holy by imputation. I told you plainly, the holi
ness of which we speak is not in us, but in Christ. “The
fruits of the Spirit, (commonly called sanctification,) such as
love, gentleness, longsuffering, goodness, meekness, temper
ance, neither make us holy before God, nor in our own
consciences.”
Friend.—I know these cannot atone for one sin. This is
done by the blood of Christ alone: For the sake of which,
God forgives, and works these in us by faith. Do I reach
your meaning now?
Ant.-No, no; I wonder at your ignorance. I mean, “we
are not made good or holy by any inward qualities or dispo
sitions: But being made pure and holy in our consciences,
by believing in Christ, we bear forth, inwardly and outwardly,
the fruits of holiness.” Now, I hope, you understand me.
Friend.—I hope not. For, if I do, you talk as gross nonsense
and contradiction as ever came out of the mouth of man.
Ant.—How so?
Friend.—You say, “We are not made good or holy by
any inward qualities or dispositions.” No | are we not made
good by inward goodness? (observe, we are not speaking of
justification, but sanctification;) holy, by inward holiness?
meek, by inward meekness? gentle, by inward gentleness?
And are not all these, if they are anything at all, “inward
qualities or dispositions?”
Again: Just after denying that we have any inward holi
ness, you say, “We are made holy in our consciences, and
bear forth, inwardly and outwardly, the fruits of holiness.”
What heaps of self-contradictions are here !
Ant.—You do not take me right. I mean, these inward
dispositions “are not our holiness. For we are not more
holy, if we have more love to God and man, nor less holy, if
we have less.”
Friend.—No ! Does not a believer increase in holiness, as
he increases in the love of God and man?
Ant.—I say, No. “The very moment he is justified, he is
wholly sanctified. And he is neither more nor less holy, from
T2
that hour, to the day of his death. Entire justification and
entire sanctification are in the same instant. And neither of
them is thenceforth capable either of increase or decrease.
Friend.—I thought we were to grow in grace!
Ant.—“We are so; but not in holiness. The moment we
are justified, we are as pure in heart as ever we shall be. A
new-born babe is as pure in heart as a father in Christ.
There is no difference.”
Friend.—You do well to except against Scripture and
reason. For till a man has done with them, he can never
swallow this. I understand your doctrine now, far better
than I like it. In the main, you are talking much and
saying nothing; labouring, as if you had found out the most
important truths, and such as none ever knew before. And
what does all this come to at the last? A mere, empty
“strife of words.” All that is really uncommon in your
doctrine is a heap of broad absurdities, in most of which you
grossly contradict yourselves, as well as Scripture and common
sense. In the meantime, you boast and vapour, as if “ye
were the men, and wisdom should die with you.” I pray
God to “humble you, and prove you, and show you what is
in your hearts l”
