A Letter to the Rev. Mr. Thomas Maxfield
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Year: 1778
Author: John Wesley
---
I was a little surprised to read, in a late publication of
yours, the following assertions :
1. Thomas Maxfield was “some of the first-fruits of Mr.
Whitefield's ministry.” (Page 18.)
2. “When he went abroad, he delivered me, and many
thousands more, into the hands of those he thought he could
have trusted them with, and who would have given them
back to him again at his return. But, alas! it was not
so.” (Ibid.)
“I heard Mr. Whitefield say, at the Tabernacle, in the
presence of five or six Ministers, to Mr. — a little before
he left England for the last time, ‘I delivered thirty thou
sand people into the hands of your brother and you, when I
went abroad. And by the time I came back, you had so
turned their hearts against me, that not three hundred of
them would come to hear me.” I knew this was true.” (Ibid.)
3. “I heard Mr. Whitefield say, ‘When I came back
from Georgia, there was no speaking evil of each other. O
what would I not give, or suffer, or do, to see such times
again But O that division I that division ? What slaughter
jt has made l’
“It was doctrine that caused the difference; or, at least,
it was so pretended.” (Ibid.)
“He preached a few times in connexion with his old
friends. But, ah! how soon was the sword of contention
drawn l’’ (Page 19.)
4. “Where can you now find any loving ones, of either
party? They have no more love to each other than Turks.”
(Ibid.)
“Read their vile contentions, and the evil characters they
give of each other, raking the filthiest ashes, to find some
black story against their fellow-Preachers.” (Page 20.)
They “slay with the sword of bitterness, wrath, and
envy. Still more their shame is what they have sent out
into the world against each other, on both sides, about five or
six years ago, and till this very day.” (Page 21.)
To satisfy both friends and foes, I propose a few queries
on each of these four heads.
I. As to the first, I read a remarkable passage in the
third Journal, (vol.I., page 196,) the truth of which may be
still attested by Mr. Durbin, Mr. Westell, and several others
then present, who are yet alive:-" A young man who stood
behind, sunk down, as one dead; but soon began to roar
out, and beat himself against the ground, so that six men
could scarce hold him. This was Thomas Maxfield.” Was
this you? If it was, how are you “the first-fruits of Mr.
Whitefield's ministry?” And how is it, that neither I, nor
your fellow-labourers, ever heard one word of this during
all those years wherein you laboured in connexion with us?
II. “When he went abroad again, he delivered me, and
many thousands, into the hands of Mr. -.”
When? where? in what manner? This is quite new to
me! I never heard one word of it before !
But stay! here is something more curious still ! “I
heard Mr. Whitefield say, at the Tabernacle, in the presence
of five or six Ministers, a little before he left England the
last time, ‘I delivered thirty thousand people into the hands
of you and your brother when I went abroad.’”
Mr. Whitefield’s going abroad, which is here referred to,
was in the year 1741. Did he then deliver you into my
hands? Was you not in my hands before? Had you not
then, for above a year, been a member of the society under
my care? Nay, was you not, at the very time, one of my
Preachers? Did you not then serve me as a son in the
Gospel? Did you not eat my bread, and lodge in my house?
Is not this then a total misrepresentation? Would to God
it be not a wilful one !
“I heard,” you say, “Mr. Whitefield say, at the Taber
macle, in the presence of five or six Ministers, a little before
he left England the last time:”—Who then can doubt the
truth of what follows? For here is chapter and verse!
Here both the time, the place, and the persons present, are
specified. And they ought to be; seeing the crime alleged
is one of a very heinous mature. Many a man has been
justly sentenced to death for sins which, in the sight of
God, were not equal to this. The point, therefore, requires
a little more examination. And, first, I desire to know
what are the names of those five or six Ministers? and
which of them heard Mr. Whitefield say, “When I went
abroad (in 1741,) I delivered thirty thousand people into the
hands of you and your brother?” Thirty thousand people !
Whence did they come? Did they spring out of the earth?
Why, there were not, at that time, five thousand Methodists
in England, or in the world. The societies in London,
Bristol, and Kingswood, (the only ones. I had,) contained
fourteen or fifteen hundred members. I believe not so
many were in his societies. But were they fewer, or more,
they were nothing to me. He never entrusted me with
them. He never delivered into mine, or my brother's
hands, either his society at the Tabernacle in London, or
that in Bristol, or in Kingswood, or any other place what
ever. He never delivered (that I remember) one single
society into my hands. I bless God, I needed it not. I
did not need to build upon another man’s foundation. A
dispensation of the Gospel was given me also; and my
labour was not in vain. I was constrained to cry out (and
you yourself used the same words to God in my behalf),—
*O the fathomless love
Which has deign'd to approve
And prosper the work of my hands !
With my pastoral crook
I went over the brook,
And, behold ! I am spread into bands !”
With what view then can you charge me with that perfidy,
which I am no more guilty of than of high treason? For
what end can you affirm, “When he went abroad, he
delivered many thousands into the hands of those he thought
he could have trusted them with ?” Delivered ! when?
where? how? What can you mean? I flatly deny that
ever he delivered one thousand, or one hundred, souls into
my hands. Do you mean, “He spoke honourably of you
to them at Kennington-common and Rose-green?” True:
But not so honourably as I spoke of you, even at London;
yea, as late as the year 1763! Yet was this the same thing
with “delivering the people” at London “into your hands?”
Nay, but “Mr. Whitefield trusted that you would have given
them back at his return.” Them! whom? His society at
London, or Bristol 2 I had them not to give. He never
entrusted me with them. Therefore I could not “give them
back.”
But how melancholy is the exclamation that follows:
“Alas! It was not so !” Was not how? Why, I did not
give back what I never had received; but went straight on
my way, taking the best care I could of those who entrusted
themselves to me.
III. So much for the second article. As to the third,
your words are, “I heard Mr. Whitefield say, ‘O that
division I that division what slaughter it has made l’”
But who made that division? It was not I. It was not
my brother. It was Mr. Whitefield himself; and that
notwithstanding all admonitions, arguments, and entreaties.
Mr. Whitefield first wrote a treatise against me by name.
He sent it to my brother, who endorsed it with these words:
“Put up again thy sword into its place.” It slept a while;
but after a time he published it. I made no reply. Soon
after Mr. Whitefield preached against my brother and me by
name. This he did constantly, both in Moorfields, and in
all other public places. We never returned railing for
railing, but spoke honourably of him, at all times, and in all
places. But is it any wonder, that those who loved us should
no longer choose to hear him? Meantime, was it we that
“turned their hearts against him?” Was it not himself?
But you say, “It was doctrine that caused the difference;”
(oddly enough expressed !) “at least, it was so pretended !”
“It was so pretended !” What do you mean? that differ
ence of doctrine was only pretended ? that we were agreed at
the bottom, and only fought, like prize-fighters, to show
our skill ? Nay, here was no pretence. The thing was as
plain as the sun at noon-day. Did not Mr. Whitefield
proclaim, upon the house-top, the difference between us and
him? And yet it was not merely the difference of doctrine
that caused the division. It was rather the manner wherein
he maintained his doctrine, and treated us in every place.
Otherwise difference of doctrine would not have created any
difference of affection; but he might lovingly have held
particular redemption, and we general, to our lives’ end.
He did indeed “preach a few times in connexion with
his old friends; but how soon was the sword of contention
drawn l’” By whom? Truly, by himself. Do not you
know, (thousands do, if you do not,) that when he preached
in the very Foundery, and my brother sat by him, he
preached the absolute decrees in the most peremptory and
offensive manner? What was this, but drawing the sword
and throwing away the scabbard? Who then is chargeable
with the contention and division that ensued ?
IV. “But where,” you ask, “can you now find any loving
ones of either party?” Blessed be God, I can find many
thousands, both in London, in Bristol, in Kingswood, and in
various parts, not only of England, but also of Scotland and
Ireland; persons as full of love, both to God and man, as
any I knew forty years ago.
Some of these I find (and much rejoice to find) in Mr.
Whitefield's societies. And I pray God, they may increase
a thousand-fold, both in number and in strength. “Nay,
they have no more love to each other than Turks.” They !
who? This is not the case with our societies. They not
only love each other, but love their enemies, even those that
still despitefully use them. But “read their vile contentions,
and the evil character they give each other, raking the
filthiest ashes, to find some black story.” I will answer for
one. I give no “evil character” of my “fellow-Preachers.”
I “rake into no filthy ashes, for black stories.” Let him
who does, take it to himself. “They slay with the sword
of bitterness, wrath, and envy.” I do not. I plead, Not
guilty. As I envy no man, so neither my wrath nor bitter
ness slays any human creature. “Still more to their shame
is what they have sent out into the world, against each other,
on both sides, about five or six years ago, and till this very
day.”
“What they have sent out against each other, on both
sides, about five or six years ago.” Within five or six years
I have been vehemently called to answer for myself; twice
Ly Mr. Richard Hill, and afterwards by his brother. Have
you read what we “have sent out into the world, against
each other, on both sides?” If you have not, how can you
so peremptorily affirm what “both sides” have done? You
cannot possibly be a judge of what you have not read; and
if you had read, you could not have passed such a sentence.
Three tracts I have wrote; but in none of these do I “slay
with the sword of bitterness, or wrath, or envy.” In none
of them do I speak one bitter, or passionate, or disrespectful
word. Bitterness and wrath, yea, low, base, virulent invec
tive, both Mr. Richard and Mr. Rowland Hill (as well as
Mr. Toplady) have poured out upon me, in great abundance.
But where have I, in one single instance, returned them
railing for railing? I have not so learned Christ. I dare
not rail, either at them or you. I return not cursing, but
blessing. That the God of love may bless both them and
you, is the prayer of your injured,
Yet still affectionate brother,
JOHN WESLEY.
February 14, 1778.
A.
