The Nature, Design, and General Rules of the United Societies
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Year: 1743
Author: John Wesley
---
1. IN the latter end of the year 1739, eight or ten persons
came to me in London, who appeared to be deeply convinced
of sin, and earnestly groaning for redemption. They desired
(as did two or three more the next day) that I would spend
some time with them in prayer, and advise them how to flee
from the wrath to come; which they saw continually hanging
over their heads. That we might have more time for this
great work, I appointed a day when they might all come toge
ther, which from thenceforward they did every week, namely,
on Thursday, in the evening. To these, and as many more as
desired to join with them, (for their number increased daily,)
I gave those advices, from time to time, which I judged most
needful for them; and we always concluded our meeting with
prayer suited to their several necessities.
2. This was the rise of the United Society, first in London,
and then in other places. Such a society is no other than “a
company of men having the form and seeking the power of
godliness, united in order to pray together, to receive the
word of exhortation, and to watch over one another in love,
that they may help each other to work out their salvation.”
3. That it may the more easily be discerned, whether they
are indeed working out their own salvation, each society is
divided into smaller companies, called classes, according to
their respective places of abode. There are about twelve
persons in every class; one of whom is styled the Leader. It
is his business, (1.) To see each person in his class once a
week at least, in order to inquire how their souls prosper; to
advise, reprove, comfort, or exhort, as occasion may require;
to receive what they are willing to give toward the relief of the
poor. (2.) To meet the Minister and the Stewards of the society
once a week; in order to inform the Minister of any that are
sick, or of any that walk disorderly, and will not be reproved;
to pay to the Stewards what they have received of their several
classes in the week preceding; and to show their account of
what each person has contributed.
4. There is one only condition previously required in those
who desire admission into these societies,—a desire “to flee
from the wrath to come, to be saved from their sins:” But,
wherever this is really fixed in the soul, it will be shown by its
fruits. It is therefore expected of all who continue therein, that
they should continue to evidence their desire of salvation,
First, by doing no harm, by avoiding evil in every kind;
especially that which is most generally practised: Such is, the
taking the name of God in vain; the profaning the day of the
Lord, either by doing ordinary work thereon, or by buying or
selling; drunkenness, buying or selling spirituous liquors, or
drinking them, unless in cases of extreme necessity; fighting,
quarreling, brawling; brother going to law with brother; re
turning evil for evil, or railing for railing; the using many
words in buying or selling; the buying or selling uncustomed
goods; the giving or taking things on usury, that is, unlawful
interest; uncharitable or unprofitable conversation, particu
larly speaking evil of Magistrates or of Ministers; doing to
others as we would not they should do unto us; doing what we
know is not for the glory of God, as the “putting on of gold or
costly apparel;” the taking such diversions as cannot be used
in the name of the Lord Jesus; the singing those songs, or
reading those books, which do not tend to the knowledge or
love of God; softness, and needless self-indulgence; laying up
treasures upon earth; borrowing without a probability of
paying; or taking up goods without a probability of paying
for them.
5. It is expected of all who continue in these societies, that
they should continue to evidence their desire of salvation,
Secondly, by doing good, by being, in every kind, merciful
after their power; as they have opportunity, doing good of every
possible sort, and as far as is possible, to all men;—to their
bodies, of the ability which God giveth, by giving food to the
hungry, by clothing the naked, by visiting or helping them
that are sick, or in prison;—to their souls, by instructing
reproving, or exhorting all they have any intercourse with;
trampling under foot that enthusiastic doctrine of devils, that
“we are not to do good unless our heart be free to it:” By
doing good especially to them that are of the household of faith,
or groaning so to be; employing them preferably to others,
buying one of another; helping each other in business; and
so much the more, because the world will love its own, and them
only: By all possible diligence and frugality, that the gospel
the not blamed: By running with patience the race that is set
before them, “denying themselves, and taking up their cross
daily;” submitting to bear the reproach of Christ, to be as the
filth and offscouring of the world; and looking that men should
“say all manner of evil of them falsely for the Lord's sake.”
6. It is expected of all who desire to continue in these
societies, that they should continue to evidence their desir
of salvation,*
Thirdly, by attending upon all the ordinances of God. Such
are, the public worship of God; the ministry of the word, either
read or expounded; the supper of the Lord; family and private
prayer; searching the Scriptures; and fasting, or abstinence.
7. These are the General Rules of our societies; all which
we are taught of God to observe, even in his written word, the
only rule, and the sufficient rule, both of our faith and practice.
And all these, we know, his Spirit writes on every truly
awakened heart. If there be any among us who observe them
not, who habitually break any of them, let it be made known
unto them who watch over that soul as they that must give an
account. We will admonish him of the error of his ways; we
will bear with him for a season: But then if he repent not, he
hath no more place among us. We have delivered our own souls.
JOHN WESLEY,
CHARLES WESLEY.
