Thoughts upon Jacob Behmen
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 9 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
I HAVE considered the Memoirs of Jacob Behmen, of which
I will speak very freely.
I believe he was a good man. But I see nothing extra
ordinary either in his life or in his death. I have known
many, both men and women, who were far more exemplary
in their lives, and far more honoured of God in their death.
I allow he wrote many truths; but none that would have
appeared at all extraordinary, had he thrown aside his hard
words, and used plain and common language.
What some seem most to admire in his writings, is what I
most object to; I mean his philosophy and his phraseology.
These are really his own; and these are quite new ; therefore,
they are quite wrong.
I totally object to his blending religion with philosophy;
and as vain a philosophy as ever existed: Crude, indigested;
supported neither by Scripture nor reason, nor anything but
his own ipse dixit.-
I grant, Mr. Law, by taking immense pains, has licked it
into some shape. And he has made it hang tolerably together.
But still it admits of no manner of proof.
And all he writes concerning religion is what very many
have said before him, and in a far better manner.
To his whole scheme I object,
1. The whole foundation of it is wrong; the very attempt
to explain religion, which is the most simple thing in the
world, by an abstruse, complicated, philosophical theory, is
"the most absurd thing that can be conceived.
I pray, consider but one argument against it. Either St.
Paul and St. John knew this theory, or they did not. Mr.
Law supposes, they did not know it; but that Jacob knew
more than them both. I verily think this needs no confuta
tion. Let him believe it that can. But if they did know it,
how did they dare to conceal any part of the counsel of God?
Upon the theory itself I shall only repeat a very little of
what I observed in my printed “Letter to Mr. Law: ”—
“All that can be conceived,” says Mr. Law, quoting from
Jacob, “is God, or nature, or creature.”
Is nature created or not created ? It must be one or the
other; for there is no medium. If not created, it is God.
If created, is it not a creature? How then can these be
three, -God, nature, and creature; since nature must coin
cide either with God or creature?
“Nature is in itself a hungry, wrathful fire of life. Nature
is and can be only a desire. Desire is the very being of
nature.” “Nature is only a desire, because it is for the sake
of something else! Nature is only a torment, because it
cannot help itself to what it wants.”
Shame to human understanding, that any man should fall
in love with such stark, staring nonsense as this!
“Nature, as well as God, is antecedent to all creatures.
There is an eternal nature, as universal and as unlimited as
God.” Is then nature God? Or, are there two eternal,
universal, infinite beings?
“Nothing is before eternal nature, but God.” Nothing
but ! Is anything before that which is eternal?
“Nature, and darkness, and self, are but three different
expressions for one and the same thing.” “Nature has all
evil and no evil in it.”
“Nature has seven chief properties, and can have neither
more nor less, because it is a birth from the Deity in nature.”
(Is nature a birth from the Deity in nature ? Is not this a flat
contradiction?) “For God is tri-une, and nature is tri-une.”
(Nature triune 1 Prove it who can.) “And hence arise
properties, three and three.” (Why not four and four?)
“And that which brings these three and three into union is
another property.” Sublime jargon I
“The three first properties of nature are the whole essence of
that desire which is, and is called, nature.” A part of its pro
perties are the whole essence of it ! Flat contradiction again :
“The three first properties of nature are, attraction,
resistance, and whirling. In these three properties of the
desire, you see the reason of the three great laws of matter
and motion.”
How does it appear that these are any of the properties of
nature, if you mean by nature anything distinct from matter?
And how are they properties of desire?
“The fourth property is fire; the fifth, the form of light
and love;” (what is the form of love? and are light and
love the same thing?) “the sixth, sound or understanding;”
(the same thing doubtless!) “the seventh, a life of triumph
ing joy.” Is then “a life of triumphing joy,” “that which
brings the three and three properties into union?” If so,
how is it “the result of that union?”
Once more: “Attraction is an incessant working of three
contrary properties,—drawing, resisting, and whirling.”
That is, in plain terms, drawing is incessant drawing, resist
ance, and whirling.
Such is the philosophy which Jacob received by immediate
inspiration; (to mention only the first principles of it;) and
by which he is to explain all religion, and the whole revela
tion of God!
1. As to his divinity, I object, First, to the very design of
explaining religion by any philosophy whatever. The Scrip
ture gives us no direction, no, nor any permission, so to do.
I object, much more, to the execution of his design; the
attempting to explain it by that base, unmeaning, self
contradictory jargon, which is as far remote from all true,
genuine philosophy, as it is from the Scripture itself.
2. But be the foundation as it may, he builds no super
structure upon it, but what we knew before, either with
regard to internal or external holiness. We knew before,
“Neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircum
cision, but faith that worketh by love.” And what does he
teach us by all his hard, uncouth words, more than this plain
truth ?
We knew before that we “must be born again; ”
inwardly changed from all evil tempers to all good; “from
an earthly, sensual, devilish mind, to the mind that was in
Christ Jesus.” And what more does he teach us on this
head, by all his vain, precarious, mystical philosophy?
We knew before that “the loving God with all our heart,
and the loving our neighbour as ourselves, is the fulfilling of
the law, the end of the commandment,” the sum of all reli
gion. And what has he told us more than this, in all his
nineteen volumes?-
We knew before that the whole of religion is, a heart and
life totally devoted to God. Has he told us, or can he tell
us, any thing more? No, nor all the angels in heaven.
We knew before that the foundation and the superstruc
ture of religion are comprised in those words, “We love him
because he first loved us.” Does he teach us anything
higher or deeper? In a word, does he teach any single point,
either of inward or outward holiness, which we did not know
before ? If he does, what is it? I cannot find out one in
all his writings.
3. But if his matter is not new, if this is nothing uncom
mon, his manner of speaking is new indeed ! His language
is utterly new ; it was never used since the world began.
And this is the very reason for which he is so admired,—
because he speaks (which cannot be denied) as never man
spake. Indeed, I hardly know for which he is most
admired,—the novelty, or the obscurity, of his language.
But I cannot admire it at all; because it is quite unscrip
tural. There is no trace of it to be found in any part either
of the Old or New Testament. Therefore, I cannot recon
cile it to that express command, “If any man speak, let him
speak as the oracles of God.”
I cannot admire it, because, Secondly, it is barbarous in
the highest degree : Whatever is peculiar in his phraseology,
is not authorized by any good writer whatever. It is queer
ness itself. It is mere dog-Latin. It is an insult upon the
ear and the understanding of all mankind.
One allows, “None can understand it without much pains;
perhaps not without reading him thrice over.” I would not
read him thrice over on any consideration. (1.) Because it
would be enough to crack any man's brain to brood so long
over such unintelligible nonsense; and, (2.) Because such a
waste of time might provoke God to give me up to a strong
delusion, to believe a lie.
But I doubt whether any man understands it at all: For
it is so dark and indeterminate, that I have not found any
two persons in England who understand it alike. I thought,
if any man living understood Behmen, Mr. Law did. “No,”
says one who has been studying him these forty years, “Mr.
Law never understood a page of him.”
4. The whole of Behmenism, including both phrase and
sense, is useless. It stuns and astonishes its admirers. It
fills their heads, but it does not change their hearts. It
makes no eminent Christians. For many years I have dili
gently inquired concerning the grand patrons of it. And I
have found none of them who were burning and shining
lights; none who adorned the doctrine of God our Saviour.
5. But it is not barely useless; it is mischievous, and that
in a high degree. For it strikes at the root of both internal and
external religion, (suppose Mr. Law understood it,) by sapping
the foundation of justification by faith. For Jacob affirms,
“God was never angry at sinners.” But, if so, he was never
reconciled to them. His wrath was never turned away, if it
never existed. And, admitting this, there is no place for
justification; nor, consequently, for faith in a pardoning
God, which is the root of both inward and outward holiness.
More particularly, it strikes at the root of humility, tending
to make men admire themselves, and despise others. Never
was a more melancholy proof of this than Mr. Law, who seri
ously believed himself the most knowing man in the kingdom,
and despised all that contradicted him, even in the tenderest
manner, as the mire in the streets. It strikes at the root of
charity, inspiring into its strictest votaries deep censorious
ness toward the world in general, and an inexpressible bitter
ness toward all who do not receive their new apostle. This
may be observed in all the authors of the memoirs, though,
in other respects, good men; and in all I have conversed
with in my life who were thorough Behmenists.
Above all, it strikes at the root of external religion, by
destroying zeal for good works; by laying little stress on
either works of piety or mercy, and still less upon Christian
society; it particularly tends to make all men of sense and
learning bury their talent in the earth, the natural effect of
continually declaiming, in a loose and indiscriminate manner,
against reason and learning.
It strikes at the root of all revealed religion, by making
men think meanly of the Bible; a natural effect of thinking
Behmen more highly illuminated than any or all of the
Apostles. So Mr. S. frankly acknowledged, “While I admired
him, I thought St. Paul and St. John very mean writers.”
Indeed it quite spoils the taste for plain, simple religion,
such as that of the Bible is; and gives a false taste, which can
relish nothing so well, as high, obscure, unintelligible jargon.
