Free Thoughts on the Present State of Public Affairs
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
YoU desire me to give you my thoughts freely on the
present state of public affairs. But do you consider? I am
no politician; politics lie quite out of my province. Neither
have I any acquaintance, at least no intimacy, with any that
bear that character. And it is no easy matter to form any
judgment concerning things of so complicated a nature. It
is the more difficult, because, in order to form our judgment,
such a multitude of facts should be known, few of which can
be known with tolerable exactness by any but those who are
eye-witnesses of them. And how few of these will relate
what they have seen precisely as it was, without adding,
omitting, or altering any circumstance, either with or with
out design And may not a slight addition or alteration
give a quite different colour to the whole?
And as we cannot easily know, with any accuracy, the facts
on which we are chiefly to form our judgment; so, much less
can we expect to know the various springs of action which
gave rise to those facts, and on which, more than on the bare
actions themselves, the characters of the actors depend. It
is on this account that an old writer advises us to judge
* Thus translated by Francis :
“You treat adventurous, and incautious tread
On fires with faithless embers overspread.”—EDIT.
nothing before the time; to abstain, as far as possible, from
judging peremptorily, either of things or persons, till thc
time comes, when “the hidden things of darkness,” the facts
now concealed, “will be brought to light,” and the hidden
springs of action will be discovered,—“the thoughts and
intents of" every human “heart.”
Perhaps you will say, “Nay, every Englishman is a politi
cian; we suck in politics with our mother's milk. It is as
natural for us to talk politics as to breathe; we can instruct
both the King and his Council. We can in a trice reform the
State, point out every blunder of this or that Minister, and
tell every step they ought to take to be arbiters of all Europe.”
I grant, every cobbler, tinker, porter, and hackney-coachman
can do this; but I am not so deep learned: While they are
sure of everything, I am in a manner sure of nothing;
except of that very little which I see with my own eyes, or
hear with my own ears. However, since you desire me to
tell you what I think, I will do it with all openness. Only
please to remember, I do not take upon me to dictate eithcr
to you or to any one. I only use the privilege of an English
man, to speak my naked thoughts; setting down just what
appears to me to be the truth, till I have better information.
At present, indeed, I have not much information, having
read little upon this head but the public papers; and you
know these arc mostly on one side; in them little is to be seen
on the other side; and that little is seldom wrote by masterly
writers. How few of them have such a pen as Junius !
But supposing we have cver so much information, how
little can one rely on it! on the information given by either
party For is not onc as warm as the other? And who does
mot know how impossible it is for a man to sce things right
when he is angry? Does not passion blind the eyes of the
understanding, as smoke does the bodily eyes? And how
little of the truth can we learn from those who sec nothing
but through a cloud 7
This advantage then I have over both parties,—the being
angry at neither. So that if I have a little understanding
from nature or experience, it is (in this instance at least)
unclouded by passion. I wish the same happiness which I
wish to myself, to those on one side and on the other. I
would not hurt either in the lcast degree; I would not
willingly give them any pain.
I have likewise another advantage, that of having no bias
one way or the other. I have no interest depending; I want
no man’s favour, having no hopes, no fears, from any man;
and having no particular attachment of any kind to either of
the contending parties.
But am I so weak as to imagine, that because I am not
angry at them, they will not be angry at me? No; I do not
imagine any such thing. Probably both will be angry
enough; that is, the warm men on both sides, were it only
for this, -that I am not as warm as themselves. For what
is more insufferable to a man in a passion, than to see you
keep your temper? And is it not a farther provocation, that
I do not behave as he does to his opponent; that I call him
no ill names; that I give him no ill words? I expect, there
fore, to be abused on all sides; and cannot be disappointed,
unless by being treated with common humanity.
This premised, I come to the point, to give you my “free
thoughts on the present state of public affairs;” the causes
and consequences of the present commotions. But permit me
to remind you, that I say nothing peremptorily. I do not take
upon me to affirm, that things are thus or thus. I just set down
my naked thoughts, and that without any art or colouring.
“What then do you think is the direct and principal
cause of the present public commotions, of the amazing
ferment among the people, the general discontent of the
nation?” which now rises to an higher degree than it has
done in the memory of man; insomuch that I have heard it
affirmed with my own ears, “King George ought to be treated
as King Charles was 1” Is it the extraordinary bad character
of the King? I do not apprehend it is. Certainly, if he is
not, as some think, the best Prince in Europe, he is far from
being the worst. One not greatly prejudiced in his favour
does not charge him with want of virtue, (of this he judges
him to have more than enough,) but with wanting those
royal vices, which (with Machiavel and the ingenious Doctor
Mandeville) he supposes would be public benefits.
“But does he not likewise want understanding?” So it
has been boldly affirmed. And it must be acknowledged, this
charge is supported by facts which cannot be denied. The
First is, he believes the Bible; the Second, he fears God; the
Third, he loves the Queen. Now, suppose the First of these,
considering the prejudice of education, might consist with some
share of understanding, yet how can this be allowed with
regard to the Second? For although, in the times of igno
rance and barbarism men imagined, “the fear of God” was
“the beginning of wisdom,” our enlightened age has discovered
it is the end of it; that whenever the fear of God begins,
wisdom is at an end. And with regard to the Third, for a
man to love his wife, unless perhaps for a month or two,
must argue such utter want of sense, as most men of rank are
now ashamed of. But, after all, there are some who, allowing
the facts, deny the consequence; who still believe, and that
after the most accurate inquiry, from such as have had the best
means of information, that there are few noblemen or gentle
men in the nation, (and we have many not inferior to most in
Europe,) who have either so good a natural understanding, or
so general a knowledge of all the valuable parts of learning.
“But suppose something might be said for His Majesty's
understanding, what can be said in excuse of his bad actions;
as, First, his pardoning a murderer?” I really think some
thing may be said on this head also. Can you or I believe
that the King knew him to be such? understood him to be
a wilful murderer? I am not sure of it at all; neither have
you any rational proof, even supposing this to have been the
case, which is far from being clear. And if he did not know
or believe him to be such, how can he be blamed for pardon
ing him ? Not to have pardoned him in this case would
have been inexcusable before God and man.
“But what can be said in excuse of his being governed by
his mother, and fixing all his measures at Carlton-House?”
It may be said, that if it was so, it is past, and so is no
matter of present complaint. But who informed you that it
was ? any eye and ear witness? “O, it is in every body's
mouth.” Very well; but every body is nobody; so this proof
is no proof at all. And what better proof have you, or any
man, of his fixing any of his measures there? This has been
affirmed an hundred times, but never was proved yet. “Nay,
but is it not undeniable fact, that he spent hour after hour
with her; and especially when he was hard pressed, and
knew not which way to turn?” And what then ? Who
loves him better than his parent? And whom has he a right
to love better than her? Who is more faithful to him, more
steadily desirous of his welfare? And whom can he trust
better? Suppose then it was true, (which is more than any
man can prove,) that he did consult her on all occasions, and
particularly when he was in trouble and perplexity, who can
blame him for so doing?
“Well, be this as it may, who can help blaming him for
giving so many pensions?” This is a thing which I do not
understand, and can therefore neither praise nor blame.
Some indeed, I think, are well bestowed on men eminent in
their several professions. All, I believe, are well designed,
particularly those given to men who are removed from public
employments. Yet, I fear, some of these are ill bestowed on
those who not only fly in the face of their benefactor, but
avail themselves of his favours to wound the deeper. “For
were he not in the wrong, these would never turn against
him!” What pity they should enjoy them another day,
after such foul and flagrant ingratitude I
This fault (if it were really such) would argue too great
easiness of temper. But this is quite the reverse of what is
commonly objected,—inflexible stubbornness. “Nay, what
else could occasion the settled disregard of so many petitions
and remonstrances, signed by so many thousand hands, and
declaring the sense of the nation?” The sense of the nation /
Who can imagine this that knows the manner wherein nine
in ten, I might say ninety-nine in an hundred, of those
petitions are procured ? A Lord or Squire (sometimes two
or more) goes, or sends his steward, round the town where
his seat is, with a paper, which he tells the homest men is for
the good of their King and country. He desires each to set
his name or mark to this. And who has the hardiness to
gainsay; especially if my Lord keeps open house? Mean
time, the contents of it they know nothing about.
I was not long since at a town in Kent, when one of these
petitions was carrying about. I asked one and another,
“Have you signed the petition?” and found none that had
refused it. And yet not one single person to whom I spoke
had either read it, or heard it read.
Now, I would ask any man of common sense, what stress
is to be laid on these petitions; and how they do declare
“the sense of the nation;” nay, of the very persons that
have signed them? What a shocking insult is it then on
the whole kingdom, to palm these petitions upon us, of
which the very subscribers have not read three lines, as the
general “sense of the nation l”
But suppose they had read all that they have subscribed,
what judges are they of these matters? To put this beyond
dispute, let us only propose one case out of a thousand.
Step back a few years, and suppose Mr. Pitt at the head of
the administration. Here comes up a petition from New
castle-upon-Tyne, signed by five hundred hands, begging
His Majesty to dismiss that corrupt Minister, who was
taking such measures as tended to the utter ruin of the
nation. What would Mr. Pitt say to this? Would he not
ask, “How came these colliers and keelmen to be so well
acquainted with affairs of State? How long have they been
judges of public administration ? of naval and military
operations? How came they to understand the propriety or
impropriety of the measures I take? Do they comprehend
the balance of Europe? Do they know the weakness and
strength of its several kingdoms; the characters of the
Monarchs and their Ministers; the springs of this and that
public motion? Else, why do they take upon them to scan
my conduct? Ne sutor ultra crepidam / ‘Let them mind
their own work, keep to their pits and keels, and leave State
affairs to me.”
“But surely you do not place the citizens of London on a
level with the colliers of Newcastle !” I do not. And yet I
suppose they were equally incompetent judges of the measures
which Mr. Pitt took. And I doubt they are full as incom
petent judges of the measures taken by the present ministry.
To form a tolerable judgment of them requires, not only a
good understanding, but more time than common tradesmen
can spare, and better information than they can possibly
procure. I think, therefore, that the encouraging them to
pass their verdict on Ministers of State, yea, on King, Lords,
and Commons, is not only putting them out of their way,
but doing them more mischief than you are aware of.
“But the remonstrance I Surely the King ought to have
paid more regard to the remonstrance of the city of London.”
Consider the case: The city had presented a petition which
he could by no means approve of, as he judged it was
designed not so much to inform him as to inflame his subjects.
After he had rejected this, as mildly as could be done, whilst
he viewed it in this light, they present a remonstrance to the
same effect, and (as he judged) with the same design. What
then could he do less than he did? Could he seem to approve
what he did not approve? If not, how could he testify his
full disapprobation in more inoffensive terms?
As to the idle, shameless tale of his bursting out into
laughter at the Magistrates, any who know His Majesty's
temper would as soon believe that he spit in their faces, or
struck them a box on the ear.
His Majesty’s character, then, after all the pains which
have been taken to make him odious, as well as contemptible,
remains unimpeached; and therefore cannot be, in any
degree, the cause of the present commotions. His whole
conduct, both in public and private, ever since he began his
reign, the uniform tenor of his behaviour, the general course
both of his words and actions, has been worthy of an
Englishman, worthy of a Christian, and worthy of a King.
“Are not, then, the present commotions owing to his
having extraordinary bad Ministers? Can you say that his
Ministers are as blameless as himself?” I do not say this;
I do not think so. But I think they are not one jot worse
than those that went before them; nor than any set of
Ministers who have been in place for at least thirty years last
past. I think they are not a jot worse than their opponents,
than those who bawl the loudest against them, either with
regard to intellectual or moral abilities, with regard to sense
or honesty. Set twenty against twenty, or ten against tem;
and is there a pin to choose?
“However, are not these commotions owing to the extra
ordinary bad measures they have taken ? Surely you will
not attempt to defend all their measures !” No, indeed. I
do not defend General Warrants. But I observe, 1. The
giving these, be it good or bad, is no extraordinary measure.
Has it not been done by all Ministers for many years, and
that with little or no objection? 2. This ordinary measure
is of exceeding little importance to the mation in general:
So little, that it was never before thought worthy to be put
into the list of public grievances: So little, that it never
deserved the hundredth part of the outcry which has been
made concerning it.-
I do not defend the killing of Mr. Allen. But I would
have the fact truly represented. By the best information I
can gain, I believe it stands just thus: About that time the
mob had been very turbulent. On that day they were likely
to be more insolent than ever. It was therefore judged proper
*o send a party of soldiers to prevent or repress their violence.
Their presence did not prevent it; the mob went so far as to
throw stones at the soldiers themselves. One of them hit
and wounded a soldier; two or three pursued him; and fired
-at one whom, being in the same dress, they supposed to be
the same man. But it was not; it was Mr. Allen. Now,
"though this cannot be excused, yet, was it the most horrid
villany that ever was perpetrated? Surely, no. Notwith
standing all the tragical exclamations which have been made
concerning it, what is this to the killing a man in cool blood?
And was this never heard of in England?
I do not defend the measures which have been taken relative
to the Middlesex election. But let it be remembered, First,
that there was full as much violence on the one side as on
the other. Secondly, that a right of expulsion, of putting a
member out of the House, manifestly implies a right of
exclusion, of keeping him out; otherwise that right amounts
to just nothing at all. Thirdly, that consequently, a member
“expelled is incapable of being re-elected, at least during that
session; as incapable as one that is disqualified any other
way. It follows, Fourthly, that the votes given for this
disqualified person are null and void, being, in effect, given
for nobody. Therefore, Fifthly, if the other candidate had
two hundred votes, he had a majority of two hundred.
Let it be observed farther, if the electors had the liberty
of choosing any qualified person, it is absolute nonsense
to talk of their being deprived of the liberty of choosing,
because they were not permitted to choose a person utterly
unqualified.
But suppose a single borough or county were deprived of
this in a single instance; (which undoubtedly is the case,
whenever a person duly elected does not sit in the House;)
how is this depriving the good people of England, the nation,
of their birthright? What an insult upon common sense is
this wild way of talking ! If Middlesex is wronged (put it
so) in this instance, how is Yorkshire or Cumberland affected
by it; or twenty counties and forty boroughs besides; much
less all the nation? “O, but they may be affected by and
by.” Very true ! And the sky may fall !
To see this whole matter in the clearest light, let any one
read and consider the speech of Lord Chief Justice Mansfield,
on a motion, made by Lord Chatham, “to repeal and rescind
the Resolutions of the House of Commons, in regard to the
expulsion and incapacitation of Mr. Wilkes:”—
“In this debate, though it has been already spoken to.
with great eloquence and perspicuity, I cannot content
myself with only giving a single vote; I feel myself under a
strong necessity of saying something more. The subject
requires it; and though the hour is late,” (it being then near
ten o’clock,) “I shall demand your indulgence, while I offer.
my sentiments on this motion.
“I am sure, my Lords, many of you must remember, from
your reading and experience, several persons expelled the
House of Commons, without ever this House once pretending:
to interfere or call in question by what authority they did so
I remember several myself;” (here his Lordship quoted
several cases;) “in all which, though most of the candidates
were sure to be re-chosen, they never once applied, resting
contented with the expulsatory power of the House, as the.
only self-sufficient, dernier resort of application.
“It has been echoed on all sides, from the partisans of this
motion, that the House of Commons acted illegally, in accept
ing Colonel Luttrel, who had but two hundred and ninety
six votes, in preference to Mr. Wilkes, who had one thousand.
one hundred and forty-three. But this is a mistake of the
grossest nature imaginable, and which nothing but the intem-.
perature of people's zeal could possibly transport them to, as
Mr. Wilkes had been previously considered by the laws as an
unqualified person to represent the people in Parliament;.
therefore it appears very plainly, that Colonel Luttrel had a.
very great majority, not less than two hundred and ninety
six, Mr. Wilkes being considered as nobody in the eye of the
law; consequently, Colonel Luttrel had no legal opposition.
“In all contested elections, where one of the parties think
themselves not legally treated, I should be glad to know to.
whom it is they resort? Is it to the freeholders of the borough
or the county they would represent? Or is it to the people at
large? Who cannot see at once the absurdity of such a ques
tion? Who so ignorant of our laws, that cannot immediately
reply and say, ‘It is the House of Commons who are the only
judges to determine every nicety of the laws of election; and
from whom there is no appeal, after they have once given their
determination?’ All the freeholder has to do is to determine
on his object, by giving him his vote; the ultimate power lies.
with the House of Commons, who is to judge of his being a
legal object of representation in the several branches of his
qualifications. This, my Lords, I believe, is advancing no
new doctrine, nor adding an iota to the privilege of a member
of the House of Commons, more than what the constitution
long ago has given him; yet here is a cry made, in a case
that directly applies to what I have been speaking of, as if it
was illegal, arbitrary, and unprecedented.
“I do not remember, my Lords, in either the course of my
reading or observation ever to have known an instance of a
person's being re-chosen, after being expelled, till the year
1711; then, indeed, my memory serves me with the case of Sir
Robert Walpole. He was expelled the House of Commons,
and was afterwards re-chosen: But this last event did not take
place till the meeting of the next Parliament; and during that
interval, I find no debate about the illegality of his expulsion, no
interference of the House of Lords, nor any addresses from the
public, to decry that measure by a dissolution of Parliament.
“Indeed, as for a precedent of one House interfering with
the rules, orders, or business of another, my memory does
not serve me at present with the recollection of a single one.
As to the case of Titus Oates, as mentioned by the noble
Lord in my eye, (Lord Chatham,) he is very much mistaken
in regard to the mode; his was a trial in the King's Bench,
which, on a writ of error, the House of Commons interfered
in, and they had an authority for so doing. A Judge
certainly may be mistaken in points of law; the wisest and
the best of us may be so at times; and it reflects no discredit,
on the contrary, it does particular honour, when he finds
himself so mistaken, to reverse his own decree. But for one
House of Parliament interfering with the business, and
reversing the resolutions, of another, it is not only
unprecedented, but unconstitutional to the last degree.
“But suppose, my Lords, that this House coincided with
this motion; suppose we all agreed, nem. con., to repeal and
rescind the Resolutions of the House of Commons, in regard
to the expulsion and incapacitation of Mr. Wilkes;-Good
God ! what may be the consequence 1 The people are violent
enough already; and to have the superior branch of legisla
tion join them, would be giving such a public encouragement
to their proceedings, that I almost tremble while I even
suppose such a scene of anarchy and confusion.”
What then can we think of the violent outcry, that the
nation is oppressed, deprived of that liberty which their
ancestors bought with so much treasure and blood, and
delivered down through so many generations? Do those
who raise this cry believe what they say? If so, are they
not under the highest infatuation? seeing that England,
from the time of William the Conqueror, yea, of Julius
Caesar, never enjoyed such liberty, civil and religious, as it
does at this day. Nor do we know of any other kingdom or
state in Europe or in the world, which enjoys the like.
I do not defend the measures which have been taken with
regard to America: I doubt whether any man can defend
them, either on the foot of law, equity, or prudence. But
whose measures were these? If I do not mistake, Mr.
George Grenville's. Therefore the whole merit of these
measures belongs to him, and not to the present ministry.
“But is not the general dissatisfaction owing, if not to any
of the preceding causes, to the extraordinary bad conduct of
the Parliament, particularly the House of Commons?” This
is set in so clear a light by a late writer, that I need only
transcribe his words:
“The last recess of Parliament was a period filled with
unprecedented troubles; and the session opened in the midst
of tumults. Ambitious men, with a perseverance uncommon
in indolent and luxurious times, rung all the changes of
popular noise for the purpose of intimidation. The ignorant,
who could not distinguish between real and artificial clamours,
were alarmed; the lovers of their own ease wished to sacrifice
the just dignity of the House of Commons to a temporary
relief, from the grating sound of seditious scurrility.
“Hence the friends of the constitution saw the opening of
the session with anxiety and apprehension. They were afraid
of the timidity of others, and dreaded nothing more than
that panic to which popular assemblies, as well as armies, are
sometimes subject. The event has shown that their fears
were groundless: The House supported its decisions against
the current of popular prejudice; and, in defending their
own judicial rights, secured the most solid part of the liberties
of their constituents.
“Their firm adherence to their Resolutions was not more
noble than their concessions in the matter of their own rights
was disinterested and generous. The extensive privileges which,
in a series of ages, had accumulated to the members of both
Houses, were certainly inconsistent with the impartial distri
bution of justice. To sacrifice these privileges was not only
diametrically opposite to the idea of self-interest, with which
some asperse the Legislature, but it has also thrown a greater
weight into the scale of public freedom than any other Act passed
since the Revolution. And it has reflected honour on the present
administration, that a bill, so very favourable to the liberty of
the subject, was brought in and carried through by them.
“The arbitrary manner of determining petitions about
elections has been a serious complaint, and of long continu
ance. I shall not deny to Mr. Grenville the merit of bringing
in a bill for remedying this grievance; but its passing as it
did is a certain proof that the pretended influence of admi
mistration over a majority of the House is a mere bugbear,
held forth for private views by the present opposition.
“During the whole session, the House of Lords behaved
with that dignity and unalterable firmness which became the
first assembly in a great nation. Attacked with impertinent
scurrility, they smiled upon rage, and treated the ravings of
a despotic tribune with contempt. When, with an infamous
perversion of his pretended love to freedom, he attempted to
extend the control of the Peers to the resolutions of the
representatives of the people, they nobly rejected the golden
bait; and scorned to raise the dignity of their House upon
the ruins of the other. They, in short, throughout the
session, showed a spirit that disdained to be braved, a
magnanimity that diminished their own personal power for
the ease and comfort of the inferior subject.
“If the conduct of Parliament is in any instance blamable,
it is in a lenity that is inconsistent with the vulgar idea of
political courage. They have been attacked with scurrility
in the Lower House; in the Upper, they have been treated
with indecency and disrespect. Their prudence and love for
the public peace prevailed over their resentment. They
knew that legal punishment is in these times the road to
popularity; and they were unwilling to raise insignificant
men into a consequence that might disturb the State.”
So far we have gained. We have removed the imaginary
causes of the present commotions. It plainly appears, they are
not owing to the extraordinary badness, either of the King,
of his Parliament, of his Ministers, or of the measures which
they have taken. To what then are they owing? What are
the real causes of this amazing ferment among the people?
Before I say anything on this subject, let me remind you:
once more, that I do not dictate; I do not take upon me to:
affirm anything, but simply tell you what I think. I think,
the first and principal spring of the whole motion is French.
gold. “But why do you think so?” I will tell you as
plainly as I can:—
A person of a complete, uniform character, encumbered with:
no religion, with no regard to virtue or morality, squanders
away all that he has. He applies for a place, but is disap
pointed. He is thoroughly exasperated, abuses the ministry,
asperses the King's mother in the grossest manner, is prose
cuted, (not for this, but other achievements,) and retires to
France. After some time, he suddenly returns to London,
sets up for a patriot, and vehemently inveighs against evil
counsellors, grievances, and mal-administration. The cry
spreads; more and more espouse his cause, and second him
with all their might. He becomes head of the party; and
not only the vulgar but the world runs after him. He drives
on with still increasing numbers, carrying all before him,
inflaming the nation more and more, and making their
minds evil-affected, in appearance towards the Ministers of
State, but in reality towards the King. Now, can any reason
able man believe that the French are ignorant of all this; or
that they have no hand at all therein, but are mere uncon
cerned spectators? Do they not understand their own interest
better? If they did not kindle the fire, will they not use all
means to prevent its going out? Will they not take care to
add fuel to the flame? Will they not think forty or fifty thou
sand louis-d'ors well bestowed on so important an occasion?
I cannot but think this is (at least) one principal spring of
all the present commotions. But may not other causes like
wise concur? As, First, covetousness; a love of English as
well as of French gold. Do not many hunger after the
lucrative employments which their neighbours enjoy? They
had rather have them themselves. And will not those that
are hungry naturally cry for food? Secondly, ambition. How
many desire honour, perhaps more than they do money itself!
and how various are the shapes which they will put on in
order to attain it! Thirdly, those who are not so much under
the power of these, are yet susceptible of pride or envy; and
frequently of both together. To these we may, Fourthly,
add resentment. Many doubtless look upon themselves as
injured, were it only on this account, that they are not
regarded, yea, and recompensed, as their merits or services
deserve. Others are angry because they are disappointed;
because, after all their schemes, which they imagined could
not fail of success, they are not able to carry their point.
Now, all these, united by these various motives, some
encouraged by good pay in hand, (and perhaps by promises
of more,) others animated by covetousness, by ambition, by
envy, pride, and resentment, by every means animate all
they have access to. They treat both rich and poor, according
to their rank, with all elegance and profuseness. They talk
largely and vehemently. They write abundantly, having
troops enough in their service. They publish addresses,
petitions, remonstrances, directed nominally to the King,
(otherwise they would not answer the end,) but really to the
people. Herein their orators make use of all the powers of
rhetoric. They bring forth their strong reasons,—the very
best which the cause will bear. They set them off with all
the beauty of language, all the poignancy of wit. They spread
their writings in pamphlets, newspapers, magazines, &c., to
every corner of the land. They are indefatigable in their
work; they never stop to take breath; but as they have
tongues and pens at command, when one has done, another
begins, and so on and on with a continuance. By this means.
the flame spreads wider and wider; it runs as fire among the
stubble. The madness becomes epidemic, and no medicine
hitherto has availed against it. The whole mation sees the:
State in danger, as they did the Church sixty years ago; and
the world now wonders after Mr. Wilkes, as it did then after.
Dr. Sacheverel.
One means of increasing the ferment is the suffering no
contradiction; the hooting at all who labour for peace, and
treading them down like dirt; the using them just as they do
the King, without either justice or mercy. If any writes on
that head, presently the cry is raised, “O, he only writes for
pay !” But, if he does, do not those on the other side too?.
Which are paid best I do not know; but doubtless both are:
paid, a very few old-fashioned mortals excepted, who, having
nothing to hope, and nothing to fear, simply consider the
good of their country.
“But what do you think the end will be?” It is easy to
foresee this. Supposing things to take their natural course,
they must go from bad to worse.
In stipulam veluti cum flamma furentibus Austris
Incidit, aut rapidus montano flumine torrens
Eriit, oppositasque evicit gurgite moles.*
The people will be inflamed more and more; the torrent will
swell higher and higher, till at length it bursts through all
opposition, and overflows the land. The consequences of
these commotions will be (unless an higher hand interpose)
exactly the same as those of the like commotions in the last
century. First, the land will become a field of blood; many
thousands of poor Englishmen will sheathe their swords in
each other’s bowels, for the diversion of their good neigh
bours. Then either a commonwealth will ensue, or else a
second Cromwell. One must be; but it cannot be determined
which, King W , or King Mob.
“But that case is not parallel with this.” It is not, in all
particulars. In many respects it is widely different. As,
First, with regard to the King himself. Few will affirm the
character of King Charles, even allowing the account given by
Lord Clarendon to be punctually true in every respect, to be
as faultless as that of King George. But other passions, as
well as love, are blind. So that when these are raised to a
proper height, especially when Junius has thrown a little
more of his magic dust into the eyes of the people, and con
vinced them, that what are virtues in others, are mere vices
ân him, the good patriots will see no manner of difference
Between a King George and King Charles, or even a Nero.
The case is also widely different, Secondly, with regard to
the ministry. King George has no such furious drivers about
him as poor King Charles had. But a skilful painter may
easily add a few features, either to one or the other, and by a
little colouring make Lord North the very picture of Lord
Strafford, and Archbishop Cornwallis of Archbishop Laud.
How different likewise is the case, Thirdly, with regard to
*These quotations from Virgil are thus translated by Pitt :
“Thus o'er the corn, while furious winds conspire,
Rolls on a wide-devouring blaze of fire;
Or some big torrent, from a mountain's brow,
Bursts, pours, and thunders down the vale below,”
“And" rolls “resistless o'er the levell'd mounds.”-EDIT.
the administration of public affairs! The requiring tonnage
and poundage, the imposing ship-money, the prosecutions in
the Bishops’ Courts, in the High Commission Court, and in
the Star Chamber, were real and intolerable grievances. But
what is there in the present administration which bears any
resemblance to these ? Yet if you will view even such an
affair as the Middlesex election through Mr. Horne's
magnifying-glass, it will appear a more enormous instance
of oppression than a hundred Star Chambers put together.
The parallel does not hold, Fourthly, with regard to the
opposers of the King and his ministry. Is Mr. Burke the
same calm, wise, disinterested man that Mr. Hampden was?
And where shall we find twenty noblemen and twenty gentle
men (to name no more) in the present opposition, whom any
impartial man will set on a level with the same number of
those that opposed King Charles and his ministry.
Nor does the parallel hold, Fifthly, in this respect: That
was in great measure a contest about religion; at least, about
rites, and ceremonies, and opinions, which many supposed to
be religion. But all religion is out of the question now :
This is generally allowed, both by the one side and the
other, to be so very a trifle, that they do not give themselves
the least concern about it.
In one circumstance more there is an obvious difference.
The Parliament were then the King's enemies: Now they are
his firmest friends. But indeed this difference may easily be
removed. Let the King only take Mr. Wilkes's advice, and
dissolve Parliament. The Parliament of 1640, the first which
sat after the troubles began, although many therein were
much dissatisfied with the measures which had been taken, yet
would never have been prevailed upon to join in the schemes
which afterwards prevailed. But when that Parliament was
so seasonably dissolved, and a few men, wise in their
generation, practising with unwearied industry on the heated
spirits of the people, had procured a new Parliament to be
chosen after their own heart; then it was not long ere the
train took fire, and the whole constitution was blown up !
But, notwithstanding the disparity between the present
and past times in the preceding respects, yet how surprisingly
does the parallel hold in various particulars! 1. An handful
of people laid a scheme, which few would have believed had a
man then declared it unto them; though indeed it is probable
that at the beginning they had no settled scheme at all.
2. These professed great zeal for the good of their country,
were vehement contenders for liberty, cried aloud against evil
Ministers and the evil measures which they pursued, and
were continually declaiming against either real or imaginary
grievances. 3. They were soon joined by men eminent for
probity as well as for understanding, who undoubtedly were
what the others appeared, lovers of their King and country,
and desired nothing but the removal of bad Ministers, and
the redress of real grievances. 4. The spirits even of these
were gradually sharpened and embittered against the King.
And they were drawn farther and farther by the art of their
leaders, till they had gone so far, they knew not how to
retreat; yea, till they, passively at least, concurred in those
measures which at first their very souls abhorred. 5. Mean
time, the nation in general was inflamed with all possible
diligence, by addresses, petitions, and remonstrances, admir
ably well devised for the purpose; which were the most
effectual libels that could be imagined against the King and
Government, and were continually spread throughout the
land, with all care and assiduity. 6. Among the most inflamed
and embittered in all England were the people of London, as
the managers had the best opportunity of practising upon
them. 7. All this time they professed the highest regard for
the King, for his honour as well as safety; an authentic
monument whereof we have in the Solemn League and
Covenant. And these professions they continued with equal
vehemence till within a short time of the cutting off his head |
Now, what man that has the least degree of understanding
may not see, in the clearest light, how surprisingly the
parallel holds in all these circumstances?
“But do not you think it is in the power of the King to
put an end to all these commotions, by only sending his
mother away, changing his Ministers, and dissolving the
Parliament?” He may send his mother away; and so he
may his wife, if they please to rank her among his evil coun
sellors. He may put out his present Ministers, and desire the
Lord Mayor to put others in their place. He may likewise
dissolve the present Parliament, (as King Charles did that of
1640,) and exchange it for one chosen, animated, and tutored
by Mr. Wilkes and his friends. But can you really believe
this would mend the matter? would put an end to all these
commotions? Certainly the sending his mother to the Indies
would avail nothing, unless he removed his Ministers too.
Nor would the putting out these, yea, every man of them,
avail anything, unless at the same time he put in every man
whom Lord Chatham chose. But neither would this avail,
unless he struck the finishing-stroke, by dissolving the
Parliament. Then indeed he would be as perfectly safe as
the “sheep that had given up their dogs.”
It would puzzle the wisest man alive to tell what the King
-can do. What can he do, that will still the raging of the sea,
or the madness of the people? Do you imagine it is in his
power to do anything which will please all parties? Can he
do anything that will not displease one as much as it will
please the other? Shall he drive his mother out of the
land? * Will this then please all parties? Nay, will not
some be apt to inquire, “How has she deserved it at his
hands?” “Why, she is an evil counsellor.” How does this
appear? Who are the witnesses of it? Indeed we have
read as grave and formal accounts of the conferences at
Carlton-House, as if the relater had stood all the time behind
the curtain, and taken down the whole matter in short-hand.
But what shadow of proof of all this? No more than of the
conferences related in Tristram Shandy.
“But she is a bad woman.” Who ever said or thought
so, even while she was in the flower of her age? From the
time she first set foot in England, was there a more faultless
character in the nation? Nay, was not her whole behaviour
as a wife, as a mother, as a mistress, and as a Princess, not
only blameless but commendable in the highest degree, till
that period of time arrived, when it was judged proper, in
order to blacken her (supposed) favourite, to asperse her too?
And then she was illud quod dicere nolo 't One would
think that even the ignobile vulgus, “the beasts of the people,”
the lowest, basest herd who wore the human form, would be
ashamed of either advancing or crediting so senseless, shame
less a tale. Indeed I can hardly think it is credited by one
in an hundred even of those who foul their mouths with
repeating it. Let it die and be forgotten | Let it not be
remembered that ever any Englishman took so dirty a
slander into his mouth.
* This was wrote before the Princess Dowager went abroad.
+ What I am reluctant to express.-EDIT.
“However, become what will of his mother, let him put
away his bad Ministers.” Suppose they really are bad, do you
know where he can find better? Whore can he find twenty
men, we will not say of Christian but of Roman integrity?
Point them out, -men of sound judgment, of clear appre
hension, of universal benevolence, lovers of mankind, lovers
of their country, lovers of their King; men attached to no.
party, but simply pursuing the general good of the nation;
not haughty or overbearing, not addicted to passion, not of a
revengeful temper; superior to covetousness on the one hand,
free from profuseness on the other. I say, show me the men,
only this small number; or rather, show them to His Majesty.
Let clear and satisfactory proof be given that this is their
character; and if these worthy men are not employed in the
place of the unworthy ones, you will then have some reason
to stretch your throat against evil Ministers.
“But if the matter were wholly left to him, would not Lord
immediately employ twenty such?” That may bear
some doubt. It is not certain that he would; perhaps he
knows not where to find them. And it is not certain to a
demonstration, that he would employ them if he did. It is
not altogether clear, that he is such himself, that he perfectly
answers this character. Is he free from pride; from anything
haughty in his temper, or overbearing in his behaviour? Is
he neither passionate nor revengeful? Is it indisputably
plain, that he is equally clear of covetousness on the one
hand, and profuseness on the other? Is he steady and
uniform in his conduct; always one thing? Is he attached
to no party, but determined at all events singly to pursue the
general good of the nation? Is he a lover of the King? Is
he remarkably grateful to him, from whom he has received
no common favours? If not, though he has a strong under
standing, and a large share of manly eloquence, still it may
be doubted, whether he and his friends would behave a jot
better than the Ministers we have already.
And suppose the King were to dissolve the Parliament, what
hope is there of having a better, even though the nation were as
quiet and peaceable as it was ten years ago? Are not the pre
sent members, generally speaking, men of the greatest property
in the land? And are they not, the greater part of them at
least, as honest and wise as their neighbours? How then should
we mend ourselves at any time; but especially at such a time
as this? If a new Parliament were chose during this epidemic
madness, what probability of a better than the present?
Have we not all the reason in the world to apprehend it
would be a much worse? that it would be the Parliament of
1641, instead of the Parliament of 1640? Why, this is the
very thing we want, the very point we are aiming at. Then
would Junius and his friends quickly say, “Sir King, know
your place! Es et ipse lignum.* Take your choice 1 Be
King log, or to the block l”
Does it not then appear, upon the whole, that it is by no
means in the power of the King, by any step which he can
possibly take, to put a stop to the present commotions;
that especially he cannot make concessions without making a
bad matter worse; that the way he has taken, the standing
his ground, was as wise a method as he could take, and as
likely to restore the peace of the nation, as any the wit
of man could devise? If any is more likely, would it not
be, vigorously to execute the laws against incendiaries;
against those who, by spreading all manner of lies, inflame
the people even to madness; to teach them, that there is
a difference between liberty, which is the glory of English
men, and licentiousness, a wanton abuse of liberty, in
contempt of all laws, divine and human? Ought they not
to feel, if they will not see, that scandalum regis, “scandalizing
the King,” is as punishable as scandalum magnatum ?t that
for the future none may dare to slander the King, any more
than one of his nobles; much less to print and spread that
deadly poison among His Majesty's liege subjects? Is not
this little less than high treason? Is it not sowing the seeds
of rebellion ?
It is possible this might restore peace, but one cannot affirm
it would. Perhaps God has “a controversy with the land,”
for the general neglect, nay, contempt, of all religion.
Perhaps he hath said, “Shall not my soul be avenged on
such a nation as this?” And if this be the case, what can
avail, unless his anger be turned away from us? Was there
ever a time in which there was a louder call for them..that
fear God to humble themselves before him? if haply general
humiliation and repentance may prevent general destruction!
*You are yourself also a log of wood.-EDIT.
+ Scandalizing the nobility.-EDIT.
