A Letter to the Rev. Mr. Downes
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 9 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. IN the Tract which you have just published concerning
the people called Methodists, you very properly say, “Our first
care should be, candidly and fairly to examine their doctrines.
For, as to censure them unexamined would be unjust; so to do
the same without a fair and impartial examination would be
ungenerous.” And again: “We should, in the first place,
carefully and candidly examine their doctrines.” (Page 68.)
This is undoubtedly true. But have you done it? Have you
ever examined their doctrines yet? Have you examined them
fairly? fairly and candidly? candidly and carefully? Have you
read over so much as the Sermons they have published, or the
“Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion?” I hope you have
not; for I would fain make some little excuse for your uttering
so many senseless, shameless falsehoods. I hope you know
nothing about the Methodists, no more than I do about the
Cham of Tartary; that you are ignorant of the whole affair,
and are so bold, only because you are blind. Bold enough !
Throughout your whole Tract, you speak satis pro imperio,"—
as authoritatively as if you was, not an Archbishop only, but
Apostolic Vicar also; as if you had the full papal power in your
hands, and fire and faggot at your beck! And blind enough;
so that you blunder on, through thick and thin, bespattering all
that come in your way, according to the old, laudable maxim,
“Throw dirt enough, and some will stick.”
2. I hope, I say, that this is the case, and that you do not
knowingly assert so many palpable falsehoods. You say, “If I
am mistaken, I shall always be ready and desirous to retract my
error.” (Page 56.) A little candour and care might have pre
vented those mistakes; this is the first thing one would have
desired. The next is, that they may be removed; that you
may see wherein you have been mistaken, and be more wary
for the time to come,
3. You undertake to give an account, First, of the rise and
principles, Then, of the practices, of the Methodists.
On the former head you say, “Our Church has long been
infested with these grievous wolves, who, though no more than
two when they entered in, and they so young they might rather
be called wolflings,” (that is lively and pretty!) “have yet spread
their ravenous kind through every part of this kingdom.
Where, what havoc they have made, how many of the sheep
they have torn, I need not say.” (Pages 4, 5.) “About twenty
five years ago, these two bold though beardless Divines,”
(pity, Sir, that you had not taught me, twenty-five years ago
sapientem pascere barbam,t and thereby to avoid some part
of your displeasure,) “being lifted with spiritual pride, were
* With authority enough.—EDIT.
+ This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Boscawen :
“What time, by his instructions cheer'd,
He bade me train his sapient beard.”-EDIT.
presumptuous enough to become founders of the sect called
Methodists.” (Page 6.) “A couple of young, raw, aspiring twigs
of the ministry dreamed of a special and supernatural call to
this.” (Page 25.) No, Sir; it was you dreamed of this, not we.
We dreamed of nothing twenty-five years ago, but instructing
our pupils in religion and learning, and a few prisoners in the
common principles of Christianity. You go on: “They were
ambitious of being accounted Missionaries, immediately de
legated by Heaven to correct the errors of Bishops and Arch
bishops, and reform their abuses; to instruct the Clergy in the
true nature of Christianity, and to caution the laity not to
venture their souls in any such unhallowed hands as refused to
be initiated in all the mysteries of Methodism.” (Pages 20, 21.)
Well asserted indeed; but where is the proof of any one of these
propositions? I must insist upon this; clear, cogent proof:
Else they must be set down for so many glaring falsehoods.
4. “The Church of Rome (to which on so many accounts
they were much obliged, and as gratefully returned the obliga
tion) taught them to set up for infallible interpreters of Scrip
ture.” (Page 54.) Pray on what accounts are we “obliged
to the Church of Rome?” And how have we “returned the
obligation?” I beg you would please, (1.) To explain this;
and, (2.) To prove that we ever yet (whoever taught us) “set
up for infallible interpreters of Scripture.” So far from it, that
we have over and over declared, in print as well as in public
preaching, “We are no more to expect any living man to be
infallible than to be omniscient.” (Vol. VI. p. 4.)
5. “As to other extraordinary gifts, influences, and operations
of the Holy Ghost, no man who has but once dipped into their
Journals, and other ostentatious trash of the same kind, can
doubt their looking upon themselves as not coming one whit
behind the greatest of the Apostles.” (Methodism Examined,
p. 21.)
I acquit you, Sir, of ever having “once dipped into that
ostentatious trash.” I do not accuse you of having read so
much as the titles of my Journals. I say, my Journals; for
(as little as you seem to know it) my brother has published
none. I therefore look upon this as simple ignorance. You
talk thus, because you know no better. You do not know, that
in these very Journals I utterly disclaim the “extraordinarygifts
of the Spirit,” and all other “influences and operations of the
Holy Ghost” than those that are common to all real Christians.
And yet I will not say, this ignorance is blameless. For
ought you not to have known better? Ought you not to have
taken the pains of procuring better information, when it
might so easily have been had 7 Ought you to have publicly
advanced so heavy charges as these, without knowing whether
they were true or no?
6. You proceed to give as punctual an account of us, tan
quam intus et in cute nosses : * “They outstripped, if pos
sible, even Montanus, for external sanctity and severity of
discipline.” (Page 22.) “They condemned all regard for tem
poral concerns. They encouraged their devotees to take no
thought for any one thing upon earth; the consequence of
which was, a total neglect of their affairs, and an impoverish
ment of their families.” (Page 23.) Blunder all over ! We
had no room for any discipline, severe or not, five-and-twenty
years ago, unless college discipline; my brother then residing
at Christ Church, and I at Lincoln College. And as to our
“sanctity,” (were it more or less,) how do you know it was
only external 7 Was you intimately acquainted with us? I
do not remember where I had the honour of conversing with
you. Or could you (as the legend says of St. Pabomius)
“smell an heretic ten miles” off? And how came you to dream,
again, that we “condemned all regard for temporal concerns,
and encouraged men to take no thought for any one thing
upon earth?” Vain dream ! We, on the contrary, severely
condemn all who neglect their temporal concerns, and who
do not take care of everything on earth wherewith God hath
entrusted them. The consequence of this is, that the Meth
odists, so called, do not “neglect their affairs, and impoverish
their families; ” but, by diligence in business, “provide things
honest in the sight of all men.” Insomuch, that multitudes
of them, who, in time past, had scarce food to eat or raiment
to put on, have now “all things needful for life and godli
ness;” and that for their families, as well as themselves.
7. Hitherto you have been giving an account of two wolf
lings only; but now they are grown into perfect wolves. Let
us see what a picture you draw of them in this state, both as
to their principles and practice.
You begin with a home stroke: “In the Montanist you
may behold the bold lineaments and bloated countenance of the
* This accommodated quotation from Persius may be thus rendered:—“As if
you had the most intimate knowledge of ns.”-EDIT.
Methodist.” (Page 17.) I wish you do not squint at the honest
countenance of Mr. Venn, who is indeed as far from fear as
he is from guile. But if it is somewhat “bloated,” that is not
his fault; sickness may have the same effect on yours or mine.
But to come closer to the point: “They have darkened re
ligion with many ridiculous fancies, tending to confound the
head, and to corrupt the heart.” (Page 13.) “A thorough
knowledge of them would work, in every rightly-disposed
mind, an abhorrence of those doctrines which directly tend to
distract the head, and to debauch the heart, by turning faith
into frenzy, and the grace of God into wantonness.” (Pages
101, 102.) “These doctrines are unreasonable and ridiculous,
clashing with our natural ideas of the divine perfections, with
the end of religion, with the honour of God, and man’s both
present and future happiness. Therefore we pronounce them
‘filthy dreamers, turning faith into fancy, the gospel into
farce; thus adding blasphemy to enthusiasm.” (Pages 66,68.)
Take breath, Sir; there is a long paragraph behind. “The
abettors of these wild and whimsical notions are, (1.) Close
friends to the Church of Rome, agreeing with her in almost
everything but the doctrine of merit: (2.) They are no less
kind to infidelity, by making the Christian religion a mere
creature of the imagination : (3.) They cut up Christianity by
the roots, frustrating the very end for which Christ died,
which was, that by holiness we might be ‘made meet for the
inheritance of the saints: (4.) They are enemies not only to
Christianity, but to “every religion whatsoever, by labouring
to subvert or overturn the whole system of morality: (5.)
Consequently, they must be enemies of society, dissolving
the band by which it is united and knit together.” In a
word: “All ancient heresies have in a manner concentred in
the Methodists; particularly those of the Simonians, Gnos
tics, Antinomians,” (as widely distant from each other as Pre
destinarians from Calvinists 1) “Valentinians, Donatists, and
Montanists.” (Pages 101, 102.) While your hand was in, you
might as well have added, Carpocratians, Eutychians, Nesto
rians, Sabellians. If you say, “I never heard of them; ” no
matter for that; you may find them, as well as the rest, in
Bishop Pearson’s index.
Well, all this is mere flourish; raising a dust, to blind the
eyes of the spectators. Generals, you know, prove nothing.
So, leaving this as it is, let us come to particulars.
But, first, give me leave to transcribe a few words from a
tract published some years ago. “Your Lordship premises,
‘It is not at all needful to charge the particular tenets upon
the particular persons among them.” Indeed, it is needful
in the highest degree. Just as needful as it is not to put a
stumbling-block in the way of our brethren; not to lay them
under an almost insuperable temptation of condemning the
innocent with the guilty.” (Letter to the Bishop of London.
And it is now far more needful than it was then; as that title
of reproach, Methodist, is now affixed to many people who are
not under my care, nor ever had any connexion with me. And
what have I to do with these? If you give me a nick-name,
and then give it to others whom I know not, does this make me
accountable for them? either for their principles or practice?
In nowise. I am to answer for myself, and for those that are
in connexion with me. This is all that a man of common
sense can undertake, or a man of common humanity require.
Let us begin then upon even ground; and if you can prove
upon me, John Wesley, any one of the charges which you
have advanced, call me not only a wolf, but an otter, if you
please.
8. Your First particular charge (which, indeed, runs
through your book, and is repeated in twenty different places)
is, that we make the way to heaven too broad, teaching, men
may be saved by faith without works. Some of your words
are, “They set out with forming a fair and tempting model of
religion, so flattering the follies of degenerate man, that it
could not fail to gain the hearts of multitudes, especially of
the loose and vicious, the lazy and indolent. They want to
get to heaven the shortest way, and with the least trouble:
Now, a reliance on Christ, and a disclaiming of good works,
are terms as easy as the merest libertine can ask. They per
suade their people that they may be-saved by the righteous
ness of Christ, without any holiness of their own; nay, that
good works are not only unnecessary, but also dangerous; that
we may be saved by faith, without any other requisite, such
as gospel obedience, and an holy life. Lastly: The Valenti
nians pretended, that if good works were necessary to salva
tion, it was only to animal men, that is, to all who were not
of their clan; and that, although sin might damn others, it
could not hurt them. In consequence of which, they lived in
all lust and impurity, and wallowed in the most unheard-of
bestialities. The Methodists distinguish much after the same
manner.” (Methodism Examined, pp. 52, 31, 38, 14.)
Sir, you are not awake yet. You are dreaming still, and
fighting with shadows of your own raising. The “model of
religion with which the Methodists set out” is perfectly well
known; if not to you, yet to many thousands in England who
are no Methodists. I laid it before the University of Oxford,
at St. Mary’s, on January 1, 1733. You may read it when
you are at leisure; for it is in print, entitled, “The Circumci
sion of the Heart.” And whoever reads only that one dis
course, with any tolerable share of attention, will easily judge,
whether that “model of religion flatters the follies of degene
rate man,” or is likely to “gain the hearts of multitudes, es
pecially of the loose and vicious, the lazy and indolent !” Will
a man choose this, as “the shortest way to heaven, and with
the least trouble?” Are these “as easy terms as any libertine”
or infidel “can desire?” The truth is, we have been these thirty
years continually reproached for just the contrary to what you
dream of; with making the way to heaven too strait; with
being ourselves “righteous overmuch,” and teaching others,
they could not be saved without so many works as it was im
possible for them to perform. And to this day, instead of
teaching men that they may be saved by a faith which is without
good works, without “gospel-obedience and holiness of life,”
weteach exactly the reverse, continually insisting on all outward
as well as all inward holiness. For the notorious truth of this
we appeal to the whole tenor of our sermons, printed and un
printed; in particular to those upon “Our Lord’s Sermon on the
Mount,” whereinevery branch ofgospelobedienceisboth asserted
and proved to be indispensably necessary to eternal salvation.
Therefore, as to the rest of the “Antinomian trash ’’ which
you have so carefully gathered up, as, “that the regenerate
are as pure as Christ himself; that it would be criminal for
them to pray for pardon; that the greatest crimes are no crimes
in the saints,” &c. &c., (page 17) I have no concern therewith
at all, no more than with any that teach it. Indeed I have
confuted it over and over, in tracts published many years ago.
9. A Second charge which you advance is, that “we suppose
every man’s final doom to depend on God’s sovereign will and
pleasure;” (I presume you mean, on his absolute, unconditional
decree;) that we “consider man as a mere machine;” that we
suppose believers “cannot fall from grace.” (Page 31.) Nay, I
suppose none of these things. Let those who do, answer for
themselves. I suppose just the contrary in “Predestination
Calmly Considered,” a tract published ten years ago.
10. A Third charge is, “They represent faith as a super
natural principle, altogether precluding the judgment and
understanding, and discerned by some internal signs; not
as a firm persuasion founded on the evidence of reason, and
discernible only by a conformity of life and manners to such a
persuasion.” (Page 11.)
We do not represent faith “as altogether precluding,” or
at all “precluding, the judgment and understanding;” rather
as enlightening and strengthening the understanding, as clear
ing and improving the judgment. But we do represent it as
the gift of God, yea, and a “supernatural gift; ” yet it does not
preclude “the evidence of reason; ” though neither is this its
whole foundation. “A conformity of life and manners” to
that persuasion, “Christ loved me, and gave himself for me,”
is doubtless one mark by which it is discerned; but not the only
one. It is likewise discerned by internal signs,—both by the
witness of the Spirit, and the fruit of the Spirit; namely, “love,
peace, joy, meekness, gentleness; ” by all “the mind which
was in Christ Jesus.”
11. You assert, Fourthly, “They speak of grace, that it is
as perceptible to the heart as sensible objects are to the senses;
whereas the Scriptures speak of grace, that it is conveyed
imperceptibly; and that the only way to be satisfied whether
we have it or no, is to appeal, not to our inward feelings, but
our outward actions.” (Page 32.)
We do speak of grace, (meaning thereby, that power of God
which worketh in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure,)
that it is “as perceptible to the heart” (while it comforts,
refreshes, purifies, and sheds the love of God abroad therein)
“as sensible objects are to the senses.” And yet we do not
doubt, but it may frequently be “conveyed to us imperceptibly.”
But we know no scripture which speaks of it as always conveyed,
and always working, in an imperceptible manner. We likewise
allow, that outward actions are one way of satisfying us that we
have grace in our hearts. But we cannot possibly allow, that
“the only way to be satisfied of this is to appeal to our outward
actions, and not our inward feelings.” On the contrary, we
believe that love, joy, peace, are inwardly felt, or they have no
being; and that men are satisfied they have grace, first by feel
ing these, and afterward by their outward actions.
12. You assert, Fifthly, “They talk of regeneration in
every Christian, as if it was as sudden and miraculous a conver
sion as that of St. Paul and the first converts to Christianity,
and as if the signs of it were frightful tremors of body, and
convulsive agonies of mind; not as a work graciously begun
and gradually carried on by the blessed Spirit, in conjunction
with our rational powers and faculties; the signs of which
are sincere and universal obedience.” (Page 33.)
This is part true, part false. We do believe regeneration, or,
in plain English, the new birth, to be as miraculous or super
natural a work now as it was seventeen hundred years ago. We
likewise believe, that the spiritual life, which commences when
we are born again, must, in the nature of the thing, have a first
moment, as well as the natural. But we say again and again,
we are concerned for the substance of the work, not the circum
stance. Let it be wrought at all, and we will not contend whe
therit be wrought gradually or instantaneously. “But what are
the signs that it is wrought?” We never said or thought, that
they were either “frightful tremors of body,” or “convulsive
agonies of mind; ” (I presume you mean, agonies of mind at
tended with bodily convulsions;) although we know many per
sons who, before this change was wrought, felt much fear and
sorrow of mind, which in some of these had such an effect on the
body as to make all their bones to shake. Neither did we ever
deny, that it is “a work graciously begun by the Holy Spirit,”
enlightening our understanding, (which, I suppose, you call
“our rational powers and faculties,”) as well as influencing our
affections. And it is certain, he “gradually carries on this
work,” by continuing to influence all the powers of the soul;
and that the outward sign of this inward work is, “sincere and
universal obedience.”
13. A Sixth charge is: “They treat Christianity as a wild,
enthusiastic scheme, which will bear no examination.” (Page
30.) Where or when? In what sermon? In what tract,
practical or polemical? I wholly deny the charge. I have
myself closely and carefully examined every part of it, every
verse of the New Testament, in the original, as well as in our
own and other translations.
14. Nearly allied to this is the threadbare charge of enthu
siasm, with which you frequently and largely compliment us.
But as this also is asserted only, and not proved, it falls to the
ground of itself. Meantime, your asserting it, is a plain
proof that you know nothing of the men you talk of Be
cause you know them not, you so boldly say, “One advantage
we have over them, and that is reason.” Nay, that is the
very question. I appeal to all mankind, whether you have
it, or no. However, you are sure we have it not, and are
never likely to have. For “reason,” you say, “cannot do
much with an enthusiast, whose first principle is, to have no
thing to do with reason, but resolve all his religious opinions
and notions into immediate inspiration.” Then, by your own
account, I am no enthusiast; for I resolve none of my notions
into immediate inspiration. I have something to do with rea
son; perhaps as much as many of those who make no account
of my labours. And I am ready to give up every opinion
which I cannot by calm, clear reason defend. Whenever,
therefore, you will try what you can do by argument, which
you have not done yet, I wait your leisure, and will follow
you step by step, which way soever you lead.
15. “But is not this plain proof of the enthusiasm of the
Methodists, that they despise human learning, and make a
loud and terrible outcry against it?” Pray, Sir, when and
where was this done? Be so good as to point out the time
and place; for I am quite a stranger to it. I believe, indeed,
and so do you, that many men make an ill use of their learn
ing. But so they do of their Bibles: Therefore, this is no
reason for despising or crying out against it. I would use it
just as far as it will go; how far I apprehend it may be of
use, how far I judge it to be expedient at least, if not neces
sary, for a Clergyman, you might have seen in the “Earnest
Address to the Clergy.” But, in the meantime, I bless God
that there is a more excellent gift than either the knowledge
of languages or philosophy. For tongues, and knowledge,
and learning, will vanish away; but love never faileth.
16. I think this is all you have said which is any way
material concerning the doctrines of the Methodists. The
charges you bring concerning their spirit or practice may be
dispatched in fewer words.
And, First, you charge them with pride and uncharitable
ness: “They talk as proudly as the Domatists, of their being
the only true Preachers of the gospel, and esteem themselves,
in contra-distinction to others, as the regenerate, the children
of God, and as having arrived at sinless perfection.” (Page 15.)
All of a piece. We neither talk nor think so. We doubt
not but there are many true Preachers of the gospel, both in
England and elsewhere, who have no connexion with, no
knowledge of, us. Neither can we doubt but that there are
many thousand children of God who never heard our voice or
saw our face. And this may suffice for an answer to all the
assertions of the same kind which are scattered up and down
your work. Of sinless perfection, here brought in by head
and shoulders, I have nothing to say at present.
17. You charge them, Secondly, “with boldness and blas
phemy, who, triumphing in their train of credulous and crazy
followers, the spurious” (should it not be rather the genu
ine *) “offspring of their insidious craft, ascribe the glorious
event to divine grace, and, in almost every page of their
paltry harangues, invoke the blessed Spirit to go along with
them in their soul-awakening work; that is, to continue to
assist them in seducing the simple and unwary.” (Page 41.)
What we ascribe to divine grace is this: The convincing
sinners of the errors of their ways, and the “turning them
from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God.”
Do not you yourself ascribe this to grace? And do not you
too invoke the blessed Spirit, to go along with you in every
part of your work? If you do not, you lose all your labour.
Whether we “seduce men into sin,” or by his grace save
them from it, is another question.
18. You charge us, Thirdly, with “requiring a blind and
implicit trust from our disciples; ” (p. 10;) who, accordingly,
“trust as implicitly in their Preachers, as the Papists in
their Pope, Councils, or Church.” (Page 51.) Far from it:
Neither do we require it; nor do they that hear us place any
such trust in any creature. They “search the Scriptures,”
and hereby try every doctrine whether it be of God: And
what is agreeable to Scripture, they embrace; what is con
trary to it, they reject.
19. You charge us, Fourthly, with injuring the Clergy in
various ways: (1) “They are very industrious to dissolve or
break off that spiritual intercourse which the relation wherein
we stand requires should be preserved betwixt us and our
people.” But can that spiritual intercourse be either pre
served or broke off, which never existed? What spiritual
intercourse exists between you, the Rector of St. Michael,
and the people of your parish 2 I suppose you preach to
them once a week, and now and then read Prayers. Perhaps
you visit one in ten of the sick. And is this all the spiritual
intercourse which you have with those over whom the Holy
Ghost hath made you an overseer? In how poor a sense then
do you watch over the souls for whom you are to give an ac
count to God! Sir, I wish to God there were a truly spiritual
intercourse between you and all your people ! I wish you
“knew all your flock by name, not excepting the men
servants and women-servants!” Then you might cherish
each, “as a nurse her own children,” and “train them up in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord.” Then might you
“warn every one, and exhort every one,” till you should
“present every one perfect in Christ Jesus.”
“But they say our sermons contradict the Articles, Homi
lies, and Liturgy of our own Church; yea, that we contradict
ourselves, saying one thing in the desk, and another in the
pulpit.” And is there not cause to say so? I myself have
heard several sermons preached in churches, which flatly con
tradicted both the Articles, Homilies, and Liturgy; particu
larly on the head of justification. I have likewise heard more
than one or two persons, who said one thing in the desk, and
another in the pulpit. In the desk, they prayed God to
“cleanse the thoughts of their hearts by the inspiration of
his Holy Spirit.” In the pulpit, they said there was “no
such thing as inspiration since the time of the Apostles.”
“But this is not all. You poison the people by the most
peevish and spiteful invectives against the Clergy, the most
rude and rancorous revilings, and the most invidious calum
nies.” (Page 51.) No more than I poison them with arsenic.
I make no peevish or spiteful invectives against any man.
Rude and rancorous revilings (such as your present tract
abounds with) are also far from me. I dare not “return
railing for railing,” because (whether you know it or no) I
fear God. Invidious calumnies, likewise, I never dealt in;
all such weapons I leave to you.
20. One charge remains, which you repeat over and over,
and lay a peculiar stress upon. (As to what you talk about
perverting Scripture, I pass it by, as mere unmeaning common
place declamation.) It is the poor old worn-out tale of “get
ting money by preaching.” This you only intimate at first.
“Some of their followers had an inward call to sell all that
they had, and lay it at their feet.” (Page 22.) Pray, Sir,
favour us with the name of one, and we will excuse you as to
all the rest. In the next page you grow bolder, and roundly
affirm, “With all their heavenly-mindedness, they could not
help casting a sheep’s eye at the unrighteous mammon. Nor
did they pay their court to it with less cunning and success
than Montanus. Under the specious appearance of gifts and
offerings, they raised contributions from every quarter. Be
sides the weekly pensions squeezed out of the poorer and
lower part of their community, they were favoured with very
large oblations from persons of better figure and fortune;
and especially from many believing wives, who had learned
to practise pious frauds on their unbelieving husbands.”
I am almost ashamed (having done it twenty times before)
to answer this stale calumny again. But the bold, frontless
manner wherein you advance it, obliges me so to do. Know
then, Sir, that you have no authority, either from Scripture
or reason, to judge of other men by yourself. If your own
conscience convicts you of loving money, of “casting a
sheep’s eye at the unrighteous mammon,” humble yourself
before God, if haply the thoughts and desires of your heart
may be forgiven you. But, blessed be God, my conscience is
clear. My heart does not condemn me in this matter. I
know, and God knoweth, that I have no desire to load myself
with thick clay; that I love money no more than I love the
mire in the streets; that I seek it not. And I have it not,
any more than suffices for food and raiment, for the plain con
veniences of life. I pay no court to it at all, or to those that
have it, either with cunning or without. For myself, for my
own use, I raise no contributions, either great or small. The
weekly contributions of our community, (which are freely
given, not squeezed out of any,) as well as the gifts and offer
ings at the Lord’s table, never come into my hands. I have no
concern with them, not so much as the beholding them with
my eyes. They are received every week by the Stewards of
the society, men of well-known character in the world; and
by them constantly distributed, within the week, to those
whom they know to be in real necessity. As to the “very large
oblations wherewith I am favoured by persons of better figure
and fortune,” I know nothing of them. Be so kind as to
refresh my memory by mentioning a few of their names. I
have the happiness of knowing some of great figure and
fortune; some right honourable persons. But if I were to
say, that all of them together had given me seven pounds in
seven years, I should say...more than I could make good. And
yet I doubt not, but they would freely give me anything I
wanted; but, by the blessing of God, I want nothing that
they can give. I want only more of the Spirit of love and
power, and of an healthful mind. As to those “many be
lieving wives who practise pious frauds on their unbelieving
husbands,” I know them not, no, not one of that kind; there
fore I doubt the fact. If you know any such, be pleased to
give us their names and places of abode. Otherwise you must
bear the blame of being the lover, if not the maker, of a lie.
Perhaps you will say, “Why, a great man said the same
thing but a few years ago.” What, if he did? Let the
frog swell as long as he can, he will not equal the ox. He
might say many things, all circumstances considered, which
will not come well from you, as you have neither his wit,
nor sense, nor learning, nor age, nor dignity.
Tibi parvula res est:
Metiri se quemque suo modulo ac pede verum est."
If you fall upon people that meddle not with you, without
either fear or wit, you may possibly find they have a little
more to say for themselves than you was aware of. I “follow
peace with all men; ” but if a man set upon me without
either rhyme or reason, I think it my duty to defend myself, so
far as truth and justice permit. Yet still I am, (if a poor
enthusiast may not be so bold as to style himself your brother,)
Reverend Sir,
Your servant for Christ's sake,
JOHN WESLEY.
LONDON, November 17, 1759.
• You are not upon a level with Bishop Warburton. Let every man know his
