A Thought on Necessity
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
apprehensions, all our actions, passions, and judgments are
ultimately resolvable into the vibrations of the brain. And
all of them together follow each other in one connected chain.
4. “But you will say,” (says the Doctor) “This infers the
universal necessity of human actions. I am sorry for it; but
I cannot help it.” But since he saw, this destroyed that very
essence of morality, leaving no room for either virtue or vice,
why did he publish it to the world? Why? Because his
brain vibrated in such a manner, that he could not help it.
Alas for poor human nature ! If this is so, where is “the
dignity of man?”
II. 1. But other great men totally disapprove of the doctrine
of vibration. They give an entirely different account of this
whole affair. They say, the delicate, soft, and almost fluid
substance, of which the brain is composed, is absolutely
incapable of such vibrations as the Doctor ascribes to it; but
that the animal spirits, whatever they are, continually moving
through that soft substance, naturally form various traces
therein; first, very simple, then less or more compounded;
that these are afterward varied innumerable ways; and that
from these simple or compounded traces arise simple or
compounded ideas, whether of sensation or reflection. From
these result the judgments we form, with all our train of
reasonings; and, at a little farther remove, our passions, our
tempers, and from these our words and actions.
2. It is easy to observe, that this scheme equally infers the
universal necessity of human actions. The premises indeed
are a little different, but the conclusion is one and the same.
If every thought, word, and action necessarily depends upon
those traces in the brain, which are formed whether we will
or no, without either our consent or knowledge; then the
man has no more liberty in thinking, speaking, or acting,
than the stone has in falling.
III. That great man, President Edwards, of New-England,
places this in a still stronger light. He says,—
1. The whole frame of this world wherein we are placed is
so constituted, that, without our choice, visible objects affect
our eyes, sounds strike upon the ear, and the other things
which surround us affect the other bodily organs, according
to their several natures.
2. The nerves, which are spread all over the body, without
anv choice of ours, convey the impression made on the out
ward organ to the common sensory; supposed to be lodged
either in the pineal gland, or in some other part of the brain.
3. Immediately, without our choice, the perception or
sensation follows: And from this,
4. The simple apprehension, (analogous to sensation,) which
furnishes us with simple ideas.
5. These ideas are more and more associated together, still
without our choice; and we understand, judge, reason accord
ingly; yea, love, hate, joy, grieve, hope, or fear.
6. And according to our passions we speak and act. Where
is liberty then? It is excluded. All you see, is one con
nected chain, fixed as the pillars of heaven.
IV. To the same effect, though with a little variation,
speaks the ingenious Lord Kames. He says,—
The universe is one immense machine, one amazing piece
of clock-work, consisting of innumerable wheels fitly framed,
and indissolubly linked together. Man is one of these wheels,
fixed in the middle of this vast automaton. And he moves
just as necessarily as the rest, as the sun or moon, or earth.
Only with this difference, (which was necessary for completing
the design of the great Artificer,) that he seems to himself
perfectly free; he imagines that he is unnecessitated, and
master of his own motion; whereas in truth he no more directs
or moves himself, than any other wheel in the machine.
The general inference then is still the same; the point
which all these so laboriously endeavour to prove is, that
inevitable necessity governs all things, and men have no
more liberty than stones.
V. 1. But allowing all this; allowing (in a sense) all that
Dr. Hartley, Edwards, and their associates contend for;
what discovery have they made? What new thing have they
found out? What does all this amount to? With infinite
pains, with immense parade, with the utmost ostentation of
mathematical and metaphysical learning, they have discovered
just as much as they might have found in one single line of
the Bible.
“Without me ye can do nothing !” absolutely, positively
nothing ! seeing, in Him all things live and move, as well as
have their being; seeing, he is not only the true primum
mobile, containing the whole frame of creation, but likewise the
inward, sustaining, acting principle, indeed the only proper
agent in the universe; unless so far as he imparts a spark of
his active, self-moving nature to created spirits. But more
especially “ye can do nothing” right, nothing wise, nothing
good, without the direct, immediate agency of the First
Cause.
2. Let the trial be made. And First, what can reason,
all-sufficient reason, do in this matter? Let us try, upon
Dr. Hartley’s scheme. Can it prevent or alter the vibrations
of the brain? Can it prevent or alter the various compo
sitions of them ? or cut off the cqnnexion between these, and
our apprehensions, judgments, reasonings? or between these
and our passions? or that between our passions, and our
words and actions? Not at all. Reason can do nothing in
this matter. In spite of all our reason, nature will keep its
course, will hold on its way, and utterly bear down its feeble
opponent.
3. And what can reason do, upon the second supposition?
Can it prevent or alter the traces in the brain? Not a jot
more than it could the vibrations. They laugh at all its
power. Can it cut off the connexion between those traces
and our apprehensions; or that between our apprehensions
and our passions; or between our passions and actions? No
thing at all of this. It may see the evil, but it cannot help it.
4. Try what reason can do, upon the third supposition,
that of President Edwards. Can it change the appearances
of the things that surround us? or the impression which the
nerves convey to the common sensory? or the sensation that
follows? or the apprehension? Or can it cut off the con
nexion between our apprehensions of things and our
passions? or that between our passions and our actions?
Poor, impotent reason It can do neither more nor less in
any of these matters. It cannot alter the outward constitu
tion of things; the nature of light, sound, or the other objects
that surround us. It cannot prevent their affecting our senses
thus and thus. And then, will not all the rest follow 7
5. Make a trial, if reason can do any more, upon Lord
Kames’s supposition. Can it in any degree alter the nature
of the universal machine? Can it change or stop the
motion of any one wheel? Utterly impossible.
6. Has free-will any more power in these respects than
reason? Let the trial be made upon each of these schemes.
What can it do upon Dr. Hartley’s scheme? Can our
free-will alter one vibration of the brain? What can it do
upon the second scheme? Can it erase or alter one of the
traces formed there? What can it do upon Mr. Edwards's?
Can it alter the appearances of the things that surround us?
or the impressions they make upon the nerves? or the
natural consequences of them? Can it do anything more on
Lord Kames’s scheme? Can it anyways alter the constitu
tion of the great clock 2 Stand still ! Look awhile into
your own breast ! What can your will do in any of these
matters? Ah, poor free-will! Does not plain experience
show, it is as impotent as your reason? Let it stand then as
an eternal truth, “Without me ye can do nothing.”
VI. 1. But in the same old book there is another word:
“I can do all things through Christ strengthening me.”
Here the charm is dissolved ! The light breaks in, and the
shadows flee away.
One of these sentences should never be viewed apart from
the other: Each receives light from the other. God hath
joined them together, and let no man put them asunder.
Now, taking this into the account, I care not one pin for
all Dr. Hartley can say of his vibrations. Allowing the
whole which he contends for, allowing all the links of his
mathematical chain to be as indissolubly joined together as
are the propositions in Euclid; suppose vibrations, per
ceptions, judgments, passions, tempers, actions, ever so
naturally to follow each other: What is all this to the God of
nature? Cannot he stop, alter, annihilate any or all of these,
in whatever manner, and in whatever moment he pleases?
Away then with all these fine-wrought speculations ! Sweep
them off as a spider's web | Scatter them in the wind
How helpless soever they may be “who are without God in
the world;” however they may groan under the iron hand of
dire necessity; necessity has no power over those “who have
the Lord for their God.” Each of these can say, through
happy experience, “I can do all things through Christ
strengthening me.”
2. Again: Allowing all the minute philosophers can say, of
the traces formed in the brain, and of perceptions, judgments,
passions, tempers, words, and actions naturally flowing there
from: Whatever dreadful consequences may follow from
hence, with regard to those who know not God, who have
only natural reason and free-will to oppose the power of
nature; (which we know to have no more force than a thread
of tow that has touched the fire;) under the influence of the
God of nature, we laugh all our enemies to scorn. He can
alter or efface all these traces in a moment, in the twinkling
of an eye. Still, although “without Him I can do nothing,”
“I can do all things through Christ strengthening me.”
3. Yet again: Let Mr. Edwards say all he will or can,
concerning the outward appearances of things, as giving rise
to sensations, association of ideas, passions, dispositions, and
actions; allowing this to be the course of nature: What then?
See One superior to nature ! What is the course of nature
to Him? By a word, a nod, he turneth it upside down!
His power inverted Nature owns,
Her only law his sov’reign word.
Let your chain be wrought ever so firm; He nods, and it
flies in pieces; He touches it, and all the links fall asunder,
as unconnected as the sand.
4. Once more: After Lord Kames has said all he pleases
concerning the grand machine of the universe, and con
cerning the connexion of its several wheels, yet it must be
allowed, He that made it can unmake it; can vary every
wheel, every spring, every movement, at his own good
pleasure. Neither, therefore, does this imply any necessity
laid either upon the thoughts, passions, or actions, of those
that know and trust in Him who is the Creator and
Governor of heaven and earth.
5. Ah, poor Infidel! this is no comfort to you ! You
must plunge on in the fatal whirlpool | You are without
hope; without help! For there is only one possible help;
and that you spurn. What follows then? Why
Si figit adamantinos
Summis verticibus dira necessitas
Clavos; non animum metu,
Non mortis laqueis expedies caput.*
O what advantage has a Christian (a real Christian) over an
Infidel ! He sees God! Consequently
* This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Francis :
“Yet soon as Fate shall round your head,
With adamantine strength, its terrors spread,
Not the Dictator's power shall save
Your soul from fear, your body from the grave.”–EDIT.
Metus omnes, et inerorabile fatum
Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari.
He tramples on inexorable fate,
And fear, and death, and hell !
6. Ah, poor predestinarian | If you are true to your
doctrine, this is no comfort to you! For perhaps you are
not of the elect number: If so, you are in the whirlpool too.
For what is your hope? Where is your help? There is no
help for you in your God. Your God! No; he is not
yours; he never was; he never will be. He that made you,
He that called you into being, has no pity upon you ! He
made you for this very end,—to damn you; to cast you
headlong into a lake of fire burning with brimstone ! This
was prepared for you, or ever the world began | And for
this you are now reserved in chains of darkness, till the
decree brings forth; till, according to his eternal, unchange
able, irresistible will,
You groan, you howl, you writhe in waves of fire,
And pour forth blasphemies at his desire!
O God, how long shall this doctrine stand I
