Serious Thoughts Concerning Godfathers and Godmothers
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. IN the ancient Church, when baptism was administered,
there were usually two or more sponsors (so Tertullian calls
them, an hundred years after the death of St. John) for every
person to be baptized. As these were witnesses, before God
and the Church, of the solemn engagement those persons
then entered into, so they undertook (as the very word
implies) to watch over those souls in a peculiar manner, to
instruct, admonish, exhort, and build them up in the faith
once delivered to the saints. These were considered as a
kind of spiritual parents to the baptized, whether they were
infants or at man’s estate; and were expected to supply
whatever spiritual helps were wanting either through the
death or neglect of the natural parents.
2. These have been retained in the Christian Church from
the earliest times, as the reason for them was the same in all
ages. In our Church they are termed, by a proper and
expressive name, godfathers and godmothers. And it is
appointed, “that there shall be for every male child to be
baptized, two godfathers and one godmother; and for every
female, one godfather and two godmothers.”
3. But it is objected against these, (1.) That there is no
mention of godfathers and godmothers in Scripture. (2.)
That many undertake this without ever considering what they
undertake, or once seriously thinking how to perform it.
And, (3.) That no serious man would undertake it, because it
is impossible to perform it.
4. I answer, First, it is undoubtedly true, godfathers and
godmothers are not mentioned in Scripture; and therefore it
cannot be said they are absolutely necessary, or that baptism
cannot be administered without them. But yet it may be
said they are highly expedient; for when they are prudently
chosen, they may be of unspeakable use to the persons bap
tized, and a great relief and comfort to the parents of them.
5. I answer, Secondly, it is too true that many undertake
this solemn office without ever considering what they under
take; giddy, ignorant persons, if not openly vicious, who
never once seriously think how to perform it. But whose
fault is this? It is not the fault of the Church, which care
fully guards against this very thing, by ordering “that none
but communicants be admitted to be godfathers or god
mothers.” Now, communicants we may presume to be
serious persons who will both consider and perform what they
undertake. It is altogether the fault of those foolish parents
who will, on any account whatever, either desire or suffer
those to be sponsors for their children, that do not take care
of their own souls. It is these inconsiderate and cruel men,
who have no compassion for their own flesh, that deprive their
children of all the benefits of this wise institution, and bring
a scandal on the institution itself, by their wicked abuse of it.
I therefore earnestly exhort all who have any concern, either
for their own or their children’s souls, at all hazards to
procure such persons to be sponsors, as truly fear God.
Regard not whether they are rich or poor; and if they are
poor, see that it be no expense to them. You will then tear
up by the roots one of the most plausible objections which
can be made against this primitive custom.
6. For, Thirdly, there is no reason why any truly serious
man should scruple to undertake the office. If you suppose
godfathers and godmothers undertake what is impossible to
perform, you entirely mistake. And your mistake lies here:
You think they undertake what they do not. Do not you
think the sponsors themselves undertake or promise that the
child shall “renounce the devil and all his works, constantly
believe God's holy word, and obediently keep his command
ments?” Whereas in truth they neither undertake nor
promise any such thing. When they answer, “I renounce them
all,” “This I steadfastly believe,” “I will” (obediently keep
God’s holy will and commandments), they promise nothing at
all; they engage for nothing; it is another person that
promises all this. Whatever is then promised or undertaken,
it is not by them, but by the child. It is his part, not theirs.
So the Church tells you expressly: “This infant must for
his part promise.” It is he promises in these words, not
they. So again: “This child hath promised to renounce the
devil, to believe in God, and to serve him.” If it be said,
“But why are those questions inserted, which seem to mean
what they really do not?” I answer, I did not insert them,
and should not be sorry had they not been inserted at all.
I believe the compilers of our Liturgy inserted them because
they were used in all the ancient Liturgies. And their deep
reverence for the primitive Church made them excuse some
impropriety of expression.
7. What theri is your part, who are sponsors for the child?
This likewise is expressly told you: “It is your part to see
that this infant be taught, so soon as he shall be able to learn,
what a solemn vow, promise, and profession he hath here
made by you. You shall call upon him to hear sermons, and
shall provide that he may learn the Creed, the Lord’s Prayer,
and the Ten Commandments, and all other things which a
Christian ought to know and believe to his soul’s health;
and that this child may be virtuously brought up, to lead a
godly and a Christian life.”
8. Can anything then be plainer than what you do not,
and what you do, undertake? You do not undertake that he
shall renounce the devil and serve God; this the baptized
himself undertakes. You do undertake to see that he be
taught what things a Christian ought to know and believe.
And what is there in this which is impossible? which any
serious person may not perform ?
9. If then you that are parents will be so wise and kind to
your children as to wave every other consideration, and to
choose for their sponsors those persons alone who truly fear
and serve God; if some of you who love God, and love one
another, agree to perform this office of love for each other's
children; and if all you who undertake it perform it faith
fully, with all the wisdom and power God hath given you;
what a foundation of holiness and happiness may be laid,
even to your late posterity ! Then it may justly be hoped,
that not only you and your house, but also the children
which shall be born, shall serve the Lord.
ATHLoNE,
August 6, 1752.
