A Letter to a Person Lately Joined with the Quakers
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
YoU ask me, “Is there any difference between Quakerism
and Christianity?” I think there is. What that difference
is, I will tell you as plainly as I can.
I will, First, set down the account of Quakerism, so called,
which is given by Robert Barclay; and, Then, add wherein
it agrees with, and wherein it differs from, Christianity.
“1. Seeing the height of all happiness is placed in the
true knowledge of God, the right understanding of this is
what is most necessary to be known in the first place.
“2. It is by the Spirit alone that the true knowledge of
God hath been, is, and can be, revealed. And these revela
tions, which are absolutely necessary for the building up of
true faith, neither do, nor can, ever contradict right reason
or the testimony of the Scriptures.”
Thus far there is no difference between Quakerism and
Christianity.
“Yet these revelations are not to be subjected to the
examination of the Scriptures as to a touchstone.”
Here there is a difference. The Scriptures are the touch
stone whereby Christians examine all, real or supposed,
revelations. In all cases they appeal “to the law and to the
testimony,” and try every spirit thereby.
“3. From these revelations of the Spirit of God to the
saints, have proceeded the Scriptures of truth.”
In this there is no difference between Quakerism and
Christianity.
“Yet the Scriptures are not the principal ground of all
truth and knowledge, nor the adequate, primary rule of faith
and manners. Nevertheless, they are a secondary rule,
subordinate to the Spirit. By Him the saints are led into all
truth. Therefore the Spirit is the first and principal leader.”
If by these words, “The Scriptures are not the principal
ground of truth and knowledge, nor the adequate, primary
rule of faith and manners,” be only meant, that “the Spirit
is our first and principal leader;” here is no difference
between Quakerism and Christianity.
But there is great impropriety of expression. For though
the Spirit is our principal leader, yet He is not our rule at
all; the Scriptures are the rule whereby he leads us into all
truth. Therefore, only talk good English; call the Spirit
our guide, which signifies an intelligent being, and the
Scriptures our rule, which signifies something used by an
intelligent being, and all is plain and clear.
“4. All mankind is fallen and dead, deprived of the sen
sation of this inward testimony of God, and subject to the
power and nature of the devil, while they abide in their natural
state. And hence not only their words and deeds, but all
their imaginations, are evil perpetually in the sight of God.
“5. God out of his infinite love hath so loved the world
that he gave his only Son, to the end that whosoever believeth
on him might have everlasting life. And he enlighteneth
every man that cometh into the world, as he tasted death for
every man.
“6. The benefit of the death of Christ is not only extended
to such as have the distinct knowledge of his death and
sufferings, but even unto those who are inevitably excluded
from this knowledge. Even these may be partakers of the
benefit of his death, though ignorant of the history, if they
suffer his grace to take place in their hearts, so as of wicked
men to become holy.”
In these points there is no difference between Quakerism
and Christianity.
“7. As many as receive the light, in them is produced a
holy and spiritual birth, bringing forth holiness, righteous
ness, purity, and all other blessed fruits. By which holy
birth, as we are sanctified, so we are justified.”
Here is a wide difference between Quakerism and Chris
tianity. This is flat justification by works. Whereas, the
Christian doctrine is, that “we are justified by faith;” that
“unto him that worketh not, but believeth on Him that
justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted to him for
righteousness.”
The ground of this mistake is, the not understanding the
meaning of the word justification. For Robert Barclay takes
it in the same sense as the Papists do, confounding it with
sanctification. So in page 208 of his “Apology,” he says, in
express terms, “Justification, taken in its proper signification,
is making one just; and is all one with sanctification.”
“8. In whom this holy birth is fully brought forth, the
body of sin and death is crucified, and their hearts are
subjected to the truth, so as not to obey any suggestion of
the evil one; but to be free from actual sinning and
transgressing of the law of God, and, in that respect, perfect.
“9. They in whom his grace hath wrought in part to
purify and sanctify them, may yet by disobedience fall from
it, and make shipwreck of the faith.”
In these propositions there is no difference between
Quakerism and Christianity.
The uncommon expression, “This holy birth brought
forth,” is taken from Jacob Behmen. And indeed so are
many other expressions used by the Quakers, as are also
many of their sentiments.
“10. By this light of God in the heart, every true Minister
is ordained, prepared, and supplied in the work of the ministry.”
As to part of this proposition, there is no difference between
Quakerism and Christianity. Doubtless, “every true Minis
ter is by the light of God prepared and supplied in the work
of the ministry.” But the Apostles themselves ordained them
by “laying on of hands.” So we read throughout the Acts
of the Apostles.
N 2
“They who have received this gift, ought not to use it as
a trade, to get money thereby. Yet it may be lawful for
such to receive what may be needful to them for food and
clothing.”
In this there is no difference between Quakerism and
Christianity.
“We judge it noways unlawful for a woman to preach in
the assemblies of God’s people.”
In this there is a manifest difference: For the Apostle
Paul saith expressly, ‘Let your women keep silence in the
Churches; for it is not permitted unto them to speak. And
if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at
home; for it is a shame for women to speak in the Church.”
(1 Cor. xiv. 34, 35.)
Robert Barclay, indeed, says, “Paul here only reproves
the inconsiderate and talkative women.”
But the text says no such thing. It evidently speaks of
women in general.
Again: The Apostle Paul saith to Timothy, “Let the
woman learn in silence with all subjection. For I suffer not
a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man,”
(which public teaching necessarily implies,) “but to be in
silence.” (1 Tim. ii. 11, 12.)
To this Robert Barclay makes only that harmless reply:
“We think this is not anyways repugnant to this doctrine.”
Not repugnant to this, “I do suffer a woman to teach !”
Then I know not what is.
“But a woman “laboured with Paul in the work of the
gospel.’” Yea, but not in the way he had himself expressly
forbidden.
“But Joel foretold, ‘Your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy.’ And ‘Philip had four daughters which prophe
sied.’ And the Apostle himself directs women to prophesy;
only with their heads covered.”
Very good. But how do you prove that prophesying in
any of these places means preaching?
“11. All true worship to God is offered in the inward and
immediate moving of his own Spirit. We ought not to pray or
preach where and when we will, but where and when we are
moved thereto by his Spirit. All other worship, both praises,
prayers, and preachings, which man sets about in his own will,
and at his own appointment, which he can begin and end at
pleasure, do or leave undone, as himself sees meet, are but
superstitions, will-worship, and abominable idolatries.”
Here lies one of the main differences between Quakerism
and Christianity.
It is true indeed, that “all true worship to God is offered
in the inward and immediate moving of his own Spirit;” or,
(to speak plain,) that we cannot truly worship God, unless his
Spirit move or incline our hearts. It is equally true, that “we
ought to pray and preach, only where and when we are moved
thereto by his Spirit; ” but I fear you do not in anywise
understand what the being “moved by his Spirit” means.
God moves man, whom he has made a reasonable creature,
according to the reason which he has given him. He moves
him by his understanding, as well as his affections; by light,
as well as by heat. He moves him to do this or that by
conviction, full as often as by desire. Accordingly, you are
as really “moved by the Spirit” when he convinces you you
ought to feed him that is hungry, as when he gives you ever
so strong an impulse, desire, or inclination so to do.
In like manner, you are as really moved by the Spirit to
pray, whether it be in public or private, when you have a
conviction it is the will of God you should, as when you have
the strongest impulse upon your heart. And he does truly
move you to preach, when in His light you “see light”
clearly satisfying you it is his will, as much as when you feel
the most vehement impulse or desire to “hold forth the
words of eternal life.”
Now let us consider the main proposition: “All worship
which man sets about in his own will, and at his own appoint
ment”—Hold ! that is quite another thing. It may be at his
own appointment, and yet not in his own will. For instance:
It is not my own will to preach at all. It is quite contrary to
my will. Many a time have I cried out, “Lord, send by
whom thou wilt send; only send not me!” But I am moved
by the Spirit of God to preach: He clearly shows me it is his
will I should; and that I should do it when and where the
greatest number of poor sinners may be gathered together.
Moved by Him, I give up my will, and appoint a time and
place, when by his power I trust to speak in his name.
How widely different, then, from true Christianity is that
amazing sentence: “All praises, prayers, and preachings
which man can begin and end at his pleasure, do or leave
undone, as himself sees meet, are superstitions, will-worship,
and abominable idolatry in the sight of God!”
There is not one tittle of Scripture for this; nor yet is there
any sound reason. When you take it for granted, “In all
preachings which a man begins or ends at his pleasure, does
or leaves undone as he sees meet, he is not moved by the
Spirit of God,” you are too hasty a great deal. It may be by
the Spirit, that he sees meet to do or leave it undone. How
will you prove that it is not? His pleasure may depend on
the pleasure of God, signified to him by his Spirit. His
appointing this or that time or place does in nowise prove the
contrary. Prove me that proposition, if you can: “Every man
who preaches or prays at an appointed time, preaches or prays
in his own will, and not by the Spirit.”
That “all such preaching is will-worship, in the sense St.
Paul uses the word,” is no more true than that it is murder.
That it is superstition, remains also to be proved. That it is
abominable idolatry, how will you reconcile with what follows
but a few lines after? “However, it might please God, who
winked at the times of ignorance, to raise some breathings
and answer them.” What! answer the breathings of abomi
nable idolatry ! I observe how warily this is worded; but it
allows enough. If God ever raised and answered those
prayers which were made at set times, then those prayers
could not be abominable idolatry.
Again: That prayers and preachings, though made at
appointed times, may yet proceed from the Spirit of God,
may be clearly proved from those other words of Robert
Barclay himself, page 389:—
“That preaching or prayer which is not done by the actings
and movings of God’s Spirit cannot beget faith.” Most true.
But preaching and prayer at appointed times have begotten
faith both at Bristol and Paulton. You know it well. There
fore that preaching and prayer, though at appointed times,
was “done by the actings and movings of God’s Spirit.”
It follows, that this preaching and prayer were far from
“abominable idolatry.” That expression can never be
defended. Say, It was a rash word, and give it up.
In truth, from the beginning to the end, you set this matter
upon a wrong foundation. It is not on this circumstance,—
the being at set times or not, that the acceptableness of our
prayers depends; but on the intention and tempers with which
we pray. He that prays in faith, at whatsoever time, is heard.
In every time and place, God accepts him who “lifts up holy
hands, without wrath or doubting.” The charge of super
stition, therefore, returns upon yourself; for what gross
superstition is this, to lay so much stress on an indifferent
circumstance, and so little on faith and the love of God!
But to proceed: “We confess singing of psalms to be a
part of God's worship, and very sweet and refreshful when it
proceeds from a true sense of God’s love; but as for formal
singing, it has no foundation in Scripture.”
In this there is no difference between Quakerism and
Christianity.
But let it be observed here, that the Quakers in general
cannot be excused, if this is true. For if they “confess
singing of psalms to be a part of God’s worship,” how dare
they either condemn or neglect it?
“Silence is a principal part of God’s worship; that is, men's
sitting silent together, ceasing from all outwards, from their
own words and actings, in the natural will and comprehen
sion, and feeling after the inward seed of life.”
In this there is a manifest difference between Quakerism
and Christianity.
This is will-worship, if there be any such thing under
heaven. For there is neither command nor example for it in
Scripture.
Robert Barclay indeed refers to abundance of scriptures to
prove it is a command. But as he did not see good to set
them down at length, I will take the trouble to transcribe a
few of them:
“Wait on the Lord: Be of good courage, and he shall
strengthen thine heart.” (Psalm xxvii. 14.) “Rest in the
Lord, and wait patiently; fret not thyself at him who prosper
eth in his way.” “Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and
he shall exalt thee to inherit the land.” (Psalm xxxvii. 7, 34.)
“Say not thou, I will recompense evil; but wait on the Lord,
and he shall save thee.” (Prov. xx. 22.)
By these one may judge of the rest. But how amazing is
this ! What are all these to the point in question?
For examples of silent meetings he refers to the five texts
following:—
“They were all with one accord in one place.” (Acts ii. 1.)
“So they sat down with him seven days and seven nights,
and none spake a word unto him: For they saw that his
grief was very great.” (Job ii. 13.) “Then were assembled
unto me every one that trembled at the words of God. And
I sat astonied until the evening sacrifice.” (Ezra ix. 4.)
“Then came certain of the elders of Israel unto me, and sat
before me.” (Ezek. xiv. 1; xx. 1.)
Was it possible for Robert Barclay to believe, that any one
of these texts was anything to the purpose?
The odd expressions here also, “Ceasing from all outwards,
in the natural will and comprehension, and feeling after the
inward seed of life,” are borrowed from Jacob Behmen.
“12. As there is one Lord and one faith, so there is one
baptism.” Yea, one outward baptism; which you deny.
Here, therefore, is another difference between Quakerism and
Christianity.
But “if those whom John baptized with water were not
baptized with the baptism of Christ, then the baptism of
water is not the baptism of Christ.”
This is a mere quibble. The sequel ought to be, “Then
that baptism of water” (that is, John's baptism) “was not
the baptism of Christ.” Who says it was?
Yet Robert Barclay is so fond of this argument, that he
repeats it almost in the same words:
“If John, who administered the baptism of water, yet did
not baptize with the baptism of Christ, then the baptism of
water is not the baptism of Christ.”
This is the same fallacy still. The sequel here also
should be, “Then that baptism of water was not the baptism
of Christ.”
He repeats it, with a little variation, a third time: “Christ
himself saith, ‘John baptized with water, but ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost.’”
He repeats it a fourth time: “Peter saith, “Then remem
bered I the word of the Lord, John baptized with water,
but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. From all
which it follows, that such as John baptized with water, yet
were not baptized with the baptism of Christ.” Very true.
But this proves neither more nor less than that the baptism
of John differed from the baptism of Christ. And so doubt
less it did; not indeed as to the outward sign, but as to the
inward grace.
“13. The breaking of bread by Christ with his disciples
was but a figure, and ceases in such as have obtained the
substance.”
Here is another manifest difference between Quakerism
and Christianity.
From the very time that our Lord gave that command,
“Do this in remembrance of me,” all Christians throughout
the habitable world did eat bread and drink wine in remem
brance of him.
Allowing, therefore, all that Robert Barclay affirms for
eighteen or twenty pages together, viz., (1.) That believers
partake of the body and blood of Christ in a spiritual manner:
(2.) That this may be done, in some sense, when we are not
eating bread and drinking wine : (3.) That the Lutherans,
Calvinists, and Papists, differ from each other with regard to
the Lord’s supper: And, (4.) That many of them have
spoken wildly and absurdly concerning it: Yet all this will
never prove, that we need not do what Christ has expressly
commanded to be done; and what the whole body of Christians
in all ages have done, in obedience to that command.
That there was such a command, you cannot deny. But
you say, “It is ceased in such as have obtained the
substance.”
St. Paul knew nothing of this. He says nothing of its
ceasing in all he writes of it to the Corinthians. Nay, quite
the contrary. He says, “As often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye do show the Lord’s death till he come.”
O, say you, the Apostle means “his inward coming, which
some of the Corinthians had not yet known.” Nay, this
cannot be his meaning. For he saith to all the Corinthian
communicants, “Ye do show the Lord's death till he come.”
Now, if He was not come (spiritually) in some of these,
undoubtedly he was in others. Consequently, he cannot be
speaking here of that coming which, in many of them at least,
was already past. It remains, that he speaks of his coming
in the clouds, to judge both the quick and dead.
In what Robert Barclay teaches concerning the Scriptures,
justification, baptism, and the Lord’s supper, lies the main
difference between Quakerism and Christianity.
“14. Since God hath assumed to himself the dominion of
the conscience, who alone can rightly instruct and govern it;
therefore it is not lawful for any whatsoever to force the
consciences of others.”
In this there is no difference at all between Quakerism and
Christianity.
“15. It is not lawful for Christians to give or receive
titles of honour, as, Your Majesty, Your Lordship, &c.”
In this there is a difference between Quakerism and Chris
tianity. Christians may give titles of honour, such as are
usually annexed to certain offices.
Thus St. Paul gives the usual title of “Most Noble” to the
Roman Governor. Robert Barclay indeed says, “He would
not have called him such, if he had not been truly noble; as
indeed he was, in that he would not give way to the fury of
the Jews against him.”
The Scripture says quite otherwise; that he did give way to
the fury of the Jews against him. I read: “Festus, willing to
do the Jews a pleasure, (who had desired a favour against him,
that he would send for him to Jerusalem, lying in wait in the
way to kill him,) said to Paul, Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem,
and there be judged of these things before me? Then said
Paul, I stand at Caesar’s judgment-seat, where I ought to be
judged: To the Jews have I done no wrong, as thou very
well knowest. If I have done anything worthy of death, I
refuse not to die; but if there be none of these things
whereof these accuse me, no man may deliver me unto them.”
Hence it plainly appears, that Festus was a very wicked
person, one who, “to do the Jews a pleasure,” would have
betrayed the innocent blood. But although St. Paul was not
ignorant of his character, still he calls him, “Most Noble
Festus,” giving him the title of his office; which, indeed, was
neither more nor less than saying, “Governor Festus,” or,
“King Agrippa.”
It is therefore mere superstition to scruple this. And it is,
if possible, greater superstition still to scruple saying, you, vous,
or ihr, whether to one or more persons, as is the common way
of speaking in any country. It is this which fixes the lan
guage of every nation. It is this which makes me say you in
England, vous in France, and ihr in Germany, rather than thou,
tu, or du, rather than av, as, or n N ; which, if we speak strictly,
is the only scriptural language; not thou, or thee, any more
than you. But the placing religion in such things as these is
such egregious trifling, as naturally tends to make all religion
stink in the nostrils of Infidels and Heathens.
And yet this, by a far greater abuse of words than that you
would reform, you call the plain language. O my friend he
uses the plain language who speaks the truth from his heart;
not he who says thee or thou, and in the meantime will
dissemble or flatter, like the rest of the world.
“It is not lawful for Christians to kneel, or bow the body,
or uncover the head, to any man.”
If this is not lawful, then some law of God forbids it. Can
you show me that law? If you cannot, then the scrupling
this is another plain instance of superstition, not Christianity.
“It is not lawful for a Christian to use superfluities in
apparel; as neither to use such games, sports, and plays,
under the notion of recreations, as are not consistent with
gravity and godly fear.”
As to both these propositions, there is no difference
between Quakerism and Christianity. Only observe, touching
the former, that the sin of superfluous apparel lies chiefly in
the superfluous expense. To make it therefore a point of
conscience to differ from others, as to the shape or colour of
your apparel, is mere superstition; let the difference lie in the
price, that you may have the more wherewith to clothe them
that have none.
“It is not lawful for Christians to swear before a Magistrate,
nor to fight in any case.”
Whatever becomes of the latter proposition, the former is
no part of Christianity; for Christ himself answered upon
oath before a Magistrate. Yea, he would not answer till he
was put to his oath; till the High Priest said unto him, “I
adjure thee by the living God.”
Friend, you have an honest heart, but a weak head; you
have a zeal, but not according to knowledge. You was zealous
once for the love of God and man, for holiness of heart and
holiness of life. You are now zealous for particular forms
of speaking, for a set of phrases, and opinions. Once your zeal
was against ungodliness and unrighteousness, against evil
tempers and evil works. Now it is against forms of prayer,
against singing psalms or hymns, against appointing times of
praying or preaching; against saying you to a single person,
uncovering your head, or having too many buttons upon
your coat. O what a fall is here ! What poor trifles are
these, that now well-nigh engross your thoughts | Come back,
come back, to the weightier matters of the law, to spiritual,
rational, scriptural religion. No longer waste your time and
strength in beating the air, in vain controversies and strife of
words; but bend your whole soul to the growing in grace
and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the
continually advancing in that holiness, without which you
cannot see the Lord.
