An Answer to the Rev. Mr. Dodd
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. YoU and I may the more easily bear with each other,
because we are both of us rapid writers, and therefore the
more liable to mistake. I will thank you for showing me any
mistake I am in; being not so tenacious of my opinions now,
as I was twenty or thirty years ago. Indeed, I am not fond
of any opinion as such. I read the Bible with what attention
I can, and regulate all my opinions thereby, to the best of
my understanding. But I am always willing to receive more
light; particularly with regard to any less common opinions,
because the explaining and defending of them takes up much
time, which I can ill spare from other employments. Who
ever, therefore, will give me more light with regard to
Christian perfection, will do me a singular favour. The
opinion I have concerning it at present, I espouse merely
because I think it is scriptural. If therefore I am convinced
it is not scriptural, I shall willingly relinquish it.
2. I have no particular fondness for the term. It seldom
occurs either in my preaching or writings. It is my oppo
nents who thrust it upon me continually, and ask me what I
mean by it. So did Bishop Gibson, till by his advice I
publicly declared what I did not mean by it, and what I did.
This I supposed might be best done in the form of a sermon,
having a text prefixed, wherein that term occurred. But
that text is there used only as an occasion or introduction to
the subject. I do not build any doctrine thereupon, nor
undertake critically to explain it.
3. What is the meaning of the term perfection? is another
question; but that it is a scriptural term is undeniable.
Therefore, none ought to object to the use of the term,
whatever they may do to this or that explication of it. I am
very willing to consider whatever you have to object to what
is advanced under the first head of that sermon. But I still
* At what time this answer was written, it is perhaps impossible exactly to
ascertain. It appears to have been sent as a private letter to Mr. Dodd, before
he had become a Doctor of Divinity; and not to have been published till the
year 1782, when it was inserted in the Arminian Magazine.-EDIT.
think that perfection is only another term for holiness, or
the image of God in man. “God made man perfect,” I
think is just the same as, “He made him holy,” or “in his
own image;” and you are the first person I ever read of or
spoke with, who made any doubt of it. Now this perfection
does certainly admit of degrees. Therefore, I readily allow
the propriety of that distinction,-perfection of kinds, and
perfection of degrees. Nor do I remember one writer,
ancient or modern, who excepts against it.
4. In the sermon of Salvation by Faith, I say, “He that is
born of God sinneth not,” (a proposition explained at large in
another sermon, and everywhere either explicitly or virtually
connected with, “while he keepeth himself,”) “by any sinful
desire; any unholy desire he stifleth in the birth.” (Assuredly
he does, “while he keepeth himself”) “Nor doth he sin by
infirmities; for his infirmities have no concurrence of his
will; and without this they are not properly sins.” Taking
the words as they lie in connexion thus, (and taken otherwise
they are not my words but yours,) I must still aver, they
speak both my own experience, and that of many hundred
children of God whom I personally know. And all this, with
abundantly more than this, is contained in that single expres
sion, “the loving God with all our heart, and serving him with
all our strength.” Nor did I ever say or mean any more by
perfection, than thus loving and serving God. But I dare
not say less than this; for it might be attended with worse
consequences than you seem to be aware of. If there be a
mistake, it is far more dangerous on the one side than on the
other. If I set the mark too high, I drive men into needless
fears; if you set it too low, you drive them into hell-fire.
5. We agree, that true “Christianity implies a destruction
of the kingdom of sin, and a renewal of the soul in righteous
mess; which even babes in Christ do in a measure experience,
though not in so large a measure as young men and fathers.”
But here we divide. I believe even babes in Christ, “while
they keep themselves, do not commit sin.” By sin, I mean,
outward sin; and the word commit, I take in its plain, literal
meaning. And this I think is fully proved by all the texts
cited Sermon III., from the sixth chapter to the Romans.
Nor do I conceive there is any material difference between
committing sin, and continuing therein. I tell my neighbour
here, “William, you are a child of the devil, for you commit
sin; you was drunk yesterday.” “No, Sir,” says the man,
“I do not live or continue in sin” (which Mr. Dodd says is
the true meaning of the text); “I am not drunk continually,
but only now and then, once in a fortnight, or once in a
month.” Now, Sir, how shall I deal with this man? Shall
I tell him he is in the way to heaven or hell? I think he is
in the high road to destruction; and that if I tell him other
wise his blood will be upon my head. And all that you say
of living, continuing in, serving sin, as different from com
mitting it, and of its not reigning, not having dominion, over
him who still frequently commits it, is making so many loop
holes whereby any impenitent sinner may escape from all the
terrors of the Lord. I dare not therefore give up the plain,
literal meaning either of St. Paul’s or St. Peter's words.
6. As to those of St. John, cited Sermon V., I do not
think you have proved they are not to be taken literally. In
every single act of obedience, as well as in a continued course
of it, rous Buxaloavyw: And in either an act or a course of sin
Troisi aplapriav. Therefore, that I may give no countenance
to any kind or degree of sin, I still interpret these words by
those in the fifth chapter, and believe, “he that is born of
God” (while he keepeth himself) “sinneth not;” doth not
commit outward sin.
7. But “it is absolutely necessary,” as you observe, “to
add sometimes explanatory words to those of the sacred
penmen.” It is so; to add words explanatory of their sense,
but not subversive of it. The words added to this text, “Ye
know all things,” are such; and you yourself allow them so
to be. But I do not allow the words wilfully and habitually
to be such. These do not explain, but overthrow, the text.
That the first Fathers thus explained it, I deny; as also that
I ever spoke lightly of them.
8. You proceed: “You allow in another sermon, in evident
contradiction to yourself, that the true children of God could,
and did, commit sin.” This is no contradiction to anything I
ever advanced. I everywhere allow that a child of God can and
will commit sin, if he does not keep himself. “But this,” you
say, “is nothing to the present argument.” Yes, it is the whole
thing. If they keep themselves, they do not; otherwise, they
can and do commit sin. I say nothing contrary to this in either
sermon. But “hence,” you say, “we conclude that he who is
born of God, may possibly commit sin:” An idle conclusion as
ever was formed; for who ever denied it? I flatly affirm it in
both the sermons, and in the very paragraph now before us.
The only conclusion which I deny is, that “all Christians do
and will commit sin, as long as they live.” Now this you
yourself (though you seem to start at it) maintain from the
beginning of your Letter to the end; namely, that all Chris
tians do sin, and cannot but sin, more or less, to their lives’
end. Therefore I do not “artfully put this conclusion;” but
it is your own conclusion, from your own premises. Indeed
were I artfully to put in anything in expounding the word
of God, I must be an arrant knave. But I do not; my
conscience bears me witness, that I speak the very truth, so
far as I know it, in simplicity and godly sincerity.
9. I think that all this time you are directly pleading for
looseness of manners, and that everything you advance natu
rally tends thereto. This is my grand objection to that doc
trine of the necessity of sinning: Not only that it is false, but
that it is directly subversive of all holiness. The doctrine of
the Gnostics was, not that a child of God does not commit
sin, that is, act the things which are forbidden in Scripture,
but that they are not sin in him, that he is a child of God
still; so they contend, not for sinless, but sinful, perfec
tion; just as different from what I contend for, as heaven is
from hell. What the Donatists were, I do not know ; but I
suspect they were the real Christians of that age; and were
therefore served by St. Augustine and his warm adherents,
as the Methodists are now by their zealous adversaries. It
is extremely easy to blacken; and could I give myself leave,
I could paint the consequences of your doctrine, in at least
as dark and odious colours as you could paint mine.
10. The passage of St. Peter, mentioned Sermon XII., I
still think proves all which I brought it to prove.
“But you allow, (Sermon XIV.,) that Paul and Barnabas
did commit sin. And these were, without all controversy,
fathers in Christ.” That is not without controversy,–that
either Barnabas when he left Paul, or Peter when he dissem
bled at Antioch, was at that time a father in Christ in St.
John’s sense; though by office undoubtedly they were. Their
example, therefore, only proves what no one denies, namely,
that if a believer keeps not himself, he may commit sin. Would
the conclusions here drawn “be made only by a very weak
opponent?” Then you are a weak opponent; for you make
them all, either from these or other premises: For you believe
and maintain, (1.) That all the other Apostles committed sin
sometimes. (2.) That all the other Christians of the apostolic
age sometimes committed sin. (3.) That all other Christians,
in all ages, do and will commit sin as long as they live.
And, (4.) That every man must commit sin, cannot help it,
as long as he is in the body. You cannot deny one of these
propositions, if you understand your own premises.
I am, Rev. Sir,
Your affectionate brother,
J. WESLEY.
