An Answer to a Letter Published in the Bath Journal
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
SIR,
You ask, why I “do not warn the members of our society
against fornication and adultery.” I answer, For the same
reason that I do not warm them (in those short hints) against
rebellion or murder; namely, because I do not apprehend
them to be in immediate danger thereof. Whereas many
of them are in continual danger, either of “taking the name
of God in vain, of profaning the day of the Lord, or of
drunkenness, or brawling, or of uncharitable or unprofitable
conversation.”
But you say, “Many persons of great eminence among
you have been publicly charged with the commission of these
crimes.” But will you undertake to make those charges
good? Whenever your “Christian charity, and hearty
desire for our success in so important a work,” shall oblige
you to instance particulars, I do hereby promise to give you
a particular answer.
“But has not a Preacher of your sect preached and
printed to prove the lawfulness of polygamy?” I answer,
No Preacher in connexion with me has ever done any such
thing. What Mr. Hall of Salisbury has dome, is no more to
me than it is to you; only that I am a greater sufferer by it.
For he renounced all the Methodists several years since:
And, when I was at Salisbury last, turned both me and my
sister out of his house. No man therefore of common,
heathen humanity, could ever blame me for the faults of that
unhappy man.
In declaring my “abhorrence of all vices of that kind,” I
cannot be more plain or explicit than I have been. I can
only declare again, that I believe neither fornicators, adul
terers, nor unclean persons shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven; and that I rank together sorcerers, whoremongers,
murderers, idolaters, and whosoever maketh or loveth a lie.
I well know, “a weak brother,” as you define him, that is,
a man of “profane eyes, and an unholy imagination,” if you
talk either of love-feasts, or persons confessing their faults to
one another, will immediately run over all the scenes of the
“New Atalantis.” But I leave that to himself. I must not
neglect a scriptural advice, because such an one is offended
at my following it.
Your “friendly advice to avoid spiritual selfishness,” I will
endeavour to follow as soon as I understand it. At present,
I do not; neither do I well understand how any “sober
Christian should think me guilty of arrogance or self
conceit,” because I relate a fact in which I had no share at
all; namely, that other men “prayed for one another, that
they might be healed of the faults they had confessed; and
it was so.”
You add, “Dr. Middleton absolves you from all boasting,
in relation to the miracle you worked upon Kirkman.” Dr.
Middleton does me too much honour, in taking any notice
of so inconsiderable a person. But, miracle or no miracle,
the fact is plain: William Kirkman is, I apprehend, yet
alive, and able to certify for himself, that he had that cough
threescore years, and that since that time it has not yet
returned. I do not know that any “one patient yet has
died under my hands.” If any person does, let him declare
it, with the time and circumstances.
You conclude: “Let me beg of you, as a fellow-Christian,
to remove that great load of scandal that now lies upon your
sect; and that you will not, by a careless or premeditated
silence, bring yourself and your followers under a just suspi
cion of not being enemies to certain vices which you seem
afraid even to name.”
Alas, Sir, is your “hearty wish for my success” dwindled
down to this? and your “sorrow for any oversight that
should afford ground of cavil to those who are disposed to
think unfavourably of me?” Sir, I take knowledge of you.
I no longer wonder at your so readily answering for Dr.
Middleton. I am persuaded none has a better right so to
do: No, not the gentleman who lately printed in the public
papers a letter to the Lord Bishop of Exeter. Well,"Sir, you
may now lay aside the mask. I do not require you to
style yourself my “fellow-Christian.” But we are fellow
creatures, at least fellow-servants of the great Lord of heaven
and earth ! May we both serve him faithfully ! For his
sake, I remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
JOHN WESLEY.
P. S.—I did not receive yours till last night.
END OF THE EIGHTH VOLUME,
