A Sufficient Answer to Letters to the Author of Theron and Aspasio
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
SIR,
IT is not very material who you are. If Mr. Glass is
still alive, I suppose you are he. If not, you are at least one
of his humble admirers, and probably not very old: So your
youth may in some measure plead your excuse for such a
peculiar pertness, insolence, and self-sufficiency, with such
an utter contempt of all mankind, as no other writer of the
present age has shown.
As you use no ceremony toward any man, so neither shall
I use any toward you, but bluntly propose a few objections
to your late performance, which stare a man in the face as
soon as he looks in it.
I object, First, that you are a gross, wilful slanderer. For,
1. You say of Mr. Hervey, “He shuts up our access to the
divine righteousness, by holding forth a preliminary human
one as necessary to our enjoying the benefit of it.” (Page 4.)
Again: “You set men to work to do something, in order
to make their peace with God.” (Page 9.) This is an
absolute slander, founded on that poor pretence, that he
supposes those who repent and believe, and none but those,
to “enjoy the benefit of Christ's righteousness.” And has
he not the warrant of Christ himself for so doing,—“Repent
ye, and believe the gospel?” If this is “teaching man to
acquire a righteousness of his own,” the charge falls on our
Lord himself.
You say, 2. “As to that strange something which you call
faith, after all you have told us about it, we are at as great a
loss to tell distinctly what it is, as when you began.” (Ibid.)
This is another slander. You are at no loss (as will
presently appear) to tell what Mr. Hervey means by faith.
Whether it be right or wrong, his account of it is as clear
and distinct as any that ever was given.
You say, 3. “The popular Preachers” (so you term Arch
bishop Tillotson, Dr. Lucas, Crisp, Doddridge, Watts, Gill;
Mr. Guthrie, Boston, Erskine, Willison; Mr. Flavel, Marshal;
Mr. Griffith Jones, Hervey, Romaine, Whitefield, Wesley)
“never tell us what they mean by faith, but by some laboured
circumlocutions.” (Page 282.)
This is a third palpable slander, as your own words prove:
“They say, Faith is a real persuasion that Christ hath died
for me.” (Page 5.) Are you not here told what they mean
by faith; and that without any circumlocution at all?
You confute your own slander still farther, by adding
three more: 4. “They make a pious resolve the ground of
our acceptance with God.” (Page 360.) No, never. Not
one of the writers you have named ever did, or does so
now. 5. “The faith they talk of, is only a timid resolve,
joined with a fond conjecture.” Or, 6. “It is a fond
presumptuous wish, greatly embarrassed with doubts and
difficulties.” (Page 404.)
Slander all over. We make the righteousness and blood
"300 ANSWER TO LETTERS To
of Christ the only ground of our acceptance with God. And
the faith we talk of is neither more nor less than a divine
conviction, that Christ loved me, and gave himself for me.
You say, 7. “All who preach this doctrine are of the
world, and speak of the world; therefore the world heareth
them.” (Page 14.) “Therefore they will always be attended
by the body of the people.” (Page 37.)
A sad mistake this, in point of fact. For whether they
are of the world or no, it is certain the world, the generality
of men, (good or bad,) doth not and never did hear them.
At this day those who hear them are an exceeding small
number, in comparison of those who do not. And if the
body of the people in any place do attend some of them, how
do they attend? Just as they would a mad dog; with sticks
and stones, and whatever comes to hand.
And this you yourself account for extremely well. Sed
oportet Palaemonem esse memorem.* “What a figure would
a small number of Ministers make in the Church either of
England or Scotland, who should agree to maintain the plain,
obvious sense of their own public standards of doctrine; and
insist upon an adherence to that sense, as a term of holding
communion with them in the sacred institutions ! Their
situation in the national Church would be very uncomfortable,
as well as extremely ridiculous. For many enemies would
soon be awakened against them, to distress and misrepresent
them in various respects.” (Page 465.)
Thus much as a specimen of your veracity. I object,
Secondly, that you know not what faith is. You talk about
it, and about it, and labour and sweat, and at last come to a
most lame and impotent conclusion.
You say, “That Christ died for me, is a point not easily
settled, a point which the Scripture nowhere ascertains:”
(The very thought, and nearly the words, of Cardinal Bellar
mine, in his dispute with our forefathers:) “So far from it,
that it affirms the final perdition of many who have great
confidence of their interest in Christ;” (this only proves, that
many fancy they have what they have not; which I suppose
nobody will deny;) “yea, and declares, that “wide is the gate,
and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction.” (Page 14.)
It is so; but this is nothing to the point,-the nature of true
faith.
*But Palaemon ought to possess a good memory.–EDIT.
“Nature, these men say, begins the work;” (I know none
of them who say so;) “and then grace helps out the efforts
of nature, and persuades a man, though he be not mentioned
in Scripture, either by name or surname, that Christ died for
him.” (Page 33.) “So the Spirit whispers something to the
heart of a sinner, beside what he publicly speaks in the
Scriptures. But will any lover of the Scriptures allow the
possibility of this,—that the Spirit should ever speak a syllable
to any man, beside what he publicly speaks there?” (Page
35.) You will presently allow something wonderfully like it.
And you suppose yourself to be a “lover of the Scriptures.”
“Some of the Martyrs were assured of being the friends
of Christ.” (Page 398.) How? Which way? Neither their
name nor surname was mentioned in Scripture ! Why, “the
Holy Ghost assured their hearts and the hearts of the first
Christians, that their joy was not the joy of the hypocrite, but
the beginning of eternal life. Thus their joy was made full,
and their love perfected by the highest enjoyments it was
here capable of Every believer finds a refreshment to his
mind, far superior to all the comforts of this life. They
stand in God’s presence, and have their joy made full in
beholding the light of his countenance.” (Page 402.)
Allow this, and we will never dispute, whether the Spirit
does or does not “whisper anything to their hearts.” It is
enough, that they have “the Spirit of adoption, crying in
their hearts, Abba, Father;” and that this “Spirit witnesseth
with their spirits that they are the children of God.”
“The chief time of this agency of the Spirit is, while the
Preachers are declaiming. And the people are in continual
expectation of the season of power in hearing them.”
(Page 38.)
Yea, and reason good, if, as you affirm, “hearing is the
only mean whereby God gives faith.” (Page 391.) But we
do not affirm so much. We only maintain, that “faith”
generally “cometh by hearing.”
But you go on : “They who partake of Christ's Joy, receive
the highest evidence that he is the Christ. Thus then faith
is greatly confirmed by a kind of presence of its object.
Their love is joyfully inflamed, and they obtain the assurance
of hope, by having in themselves an experimental foretaste
of their eternal enjoyment.” (Page 415.)
Why, then, what are we disputing about, seeing you are
now so kind as to allow, not only the possibility, but the real
existence, of all that we contend for?
“O, but this is not faith. Faith is quite another thing.”
What is it? Let us hear your account of it.
“The essence of true faith is the eternal God.” (Page 288.)
“What is faith? It is the blood of Christ.” (Page 330.)
Stark, staring nonsense ! Sir, you can talk sense, if you
please. Why should you palm upon your readers such stuff
as this?
Very little better than this is your third definition: “The
truth which a man believes is his faith.” (Page 301.) No,
it is not; no more than the light which a man sees is his sight.
You must therefore guess again. “To believe this fact, Christ
rose from the dead, is faith.” (Page 169.) “Ask a man, Is
the gospel true or not? If he holds it to be true, this is faith.”
(Page 296.) But is this saving faith? “Yes. Every one
that believes the gospel history shall be saved.” (Page 333.)
This is flat and plain. And, if it is but true, every devil in
hell will be saved. For it is absolutely certain, every one of
these believes this fact, —Christ rose from the dead. It is
certain, every one of these believes the Gospel history.
Therefore this is not saving faith: Neither will every one be
saved who believes this fact, —Christ rose from the dead. It
follows, that, whatever others do, you know not what faith is.
I object, Thirdly, 1. That you yourself “shut up our
access to the divine righteousness.” 2. That you vehemently
contradict yourself, and do the very thing which you charge
upon others.
1. You yourself shut up our access to the divine righteous
ness by destroying that repentance which Christ has made
the way to it. “Ask men,” you say, “have they sinned or
not ? If they know they have, this is conviction. And this
is preparation enough for mercy.” Soft casuistry indeed !
He that receives this saying, is never likely either to
“repent” or “believe the gospel.” And if he do not, he
can have no access to the righteousness of Christ.
Yet you strangely affirm, “A careless sinner is in full as
hopeful a way as one that is the most deeply convicted.”
(Page 292.) How can this be, if that conviction be from
God? Where He has begun the work, will He not finish
it? Have we not reason to hope this? But in a careless
sinner that work is not begun; perhaps, never will be.
Again: Whereas our Lord gives a general command, “Seek,
and ye shall find;” you say, “Saving faith was never yet
sought, or in the remotest manner wished for, by an unbe
liever:” (Page 372 :) A proposition as contrary to the whole
tenor of Scripture, as to the experience of every true believer.
Every one who now believes, knows how he sought and wished
for that faith, before he experienced it. It is not true even
with regard to your faith, a belief of the Bible. For I know
Deists at this day, who have often wished they could believe
the Bible, and owned, “it was happy for them that could.”
2. You vehemently contradict yourself, and do the very
thing which you charge upon others.
“If we imagine we possess or desire to attain any requisite to
our acceptance with God, beside or in connexion with the bare
work of Christ, Christ shall profit us nothing.” (Page 96.)
Again: “What is required of us in order to our acceptance
with God? Nothing. The least attempt to do anything is
damnably criminal.”
Very good. Now for self-consistency: “What Christ has
done is that which quiets the conscience of man as soon as
he knows it. So that he need ask no more than, ‘Is it true
or not?” If he finds it true, he is happy. If he does not,
he can reap no comfort from it. Our comfort arises from the
persuasion of this.” (Page 12.)
Again: “Men are justified by a knowledge of the righte
ousness of Christ.” (Page 406.) And yet again:
“The sole requisite to acceptance is, divine righteousness
brought to view.” (Page 291.)
So you have brought matters to a fine conclusion; confut
ing an hundred of your own assertions, and doing the very
thing for which you have been all along so unmercifully con
demning others. You yourself here teach another “requisite
to our acceptance, beside the bare work of Christ,” viz., the
knowing that work, the finding it true. Therefore, by your
own word, “Christ shall profit you nothing.” In one page
you say, “Nothing is required in order to our acceptance
with God;” in another, “Divine righteousness brought to
view is requisite to our acceptance.” Brought to view /
What self-righteousness is this? Which of “the popular
Preachers” could have done worse? “Men are justified by
a knowledge of the righteousness of Christ.” Knowledge /
What ! our own knowledge ! Knowledge in us! Why, this
is the very thing which we call faith. So you have fairly
given up the whole question, justified your opponents, and
condemned yourself as “damnably criminal !”
I object, Fourthly, that you have no charity, and that you
know not what charity is. That you know not what it is,
manifestly appears from the wonderful definition you give of
it. “Charity,” you say, “is fellowship with God in his
blessedness.” (Page 453.) Muddy, confused, ut nihil supra /*
We know, he that loveth hath fellowship with God. But
yet the ideas of one and of the other are widely different.
We know, “God is love; and he that dwelleth in love,
dwelleth in God, and God in him.” But yet loving him is
not the same thing with dwelling in him. If it were, the
whole sentence would be flat tautology.
You say, 2. Charity is “the love of the truth.” (Page 456.)
Not at all: No more than it is the love of the sun. It is
the love of God, and of man for God’s sake: No more and
no less.
You say, 3. “Christ is known to us only by report.”
That is not granted. “And charity is the love of that
report.” (Page 455.) Every intelligent reader will want no
farther proof, that you know not what charity is.
No wonder then that you have it not; nay, that you are at
the utmost distance, both from the love of God and of your
neighbour. You cannot love God, because you do not love
your neighbour. For he that loves God, loves his brother
also. But such hatred, malevolence, rancour, bitterness, as
you show to all who do not exactly fall in with your opinion,
was scarce ever seen in a Jew, an Heathen, or a Popish
inquisitor.-
“Nay, but you abhor persecution. You would persecute
no man.” I should be very loath to trust you. I doubt,
were it in your power, you would make more bonfires in
Smithfield than Bonner and Gardiner put together. But if
not, if you would not persecute with fire and faggot,
Mirum "
Ut neque calce lupus quenquam, neque dente petit bos : +
What does this prove? Only that you murder in another way.
* So as nothing can exceed it.–EDIT.
+ The following is Francis's translation of this quotation from Horace :
“Wondrous indeed! that bulls ne'er strive to bite,
Nor wolves with desperate horns engage in fight.”—EDIT.
You smite with the tongue; with the poison of asps, which is
under your lips.
A few specimens follow:—
“The popular Preachers worship another God.” (Page 338.)
“It can never be allowed that Dr. Doddridge worshipped the
same God with Paul.” (Page 470.) “Notice the difference
betwixt the God of these Preachers, and the true God;
betwixt their Christ, and the Christ preached by the Apostles;
betwixt their spirit, and the Spirit that influenced the
Apostles.” (Page 40.)
“I know no sinners more hardened, none greater destroyers
of mankind, than they.” (Page 98.) “By no small energy of
deceit, they darken the revelation of God, and change the doc
trine of the blessed God into a doctrine of self-dependence.”
Strange, that you yourself should do the very same thing!
averring, that “men are justified by a knowledge of the
righteousness of Christ,” not by the bare work which Christ
has wrought! You put me in mind of an old usurer, who
vehemently thanked a Minister that had preached a severe
sermon against usury; and being asked, “Why do you talk
thus?” replied, “I wish there were no usurer in London
beside myself!” Sir, do not you wish there was no Minister
in Great Britain who taught this doctrine, beside yourself?
“That any who has learnt his religion from the New
Testament, should mistake their doctrine for the Christian,
is astonishing.” (Page 40.) Theirs, or yours? for it happens
to be one and the same with regard to the present point.
“By many deceits they change the truth of God into a
lie.” (Ibid.) If they do, so do you. Indeed you heavily
complain of the imputation. You say, “It is both astonish
ing and provoking, that, after all, men will say, there is no
difference between their scheme and yours.” And yet, after
all, so it is: Truth is great, and will prevail. In the leading
point, that of justification, both you and they teach, “Men
are justified by a knowledge of the righteousness of Christ.”
Only they think, it is a divine, supernatural, experimental
knowledge, wrought in the inmost soul; and you think, it is
a bare historical knowledge, of the same kind with that which
the devils have.
One specimen more of your unparalleled charity, which in
any but yourself would be astonishing: “If any one chooses
to go to hell by a devout path, let him study any one of those
WOL. X. X
four famous treatises: Mr. Guthrie’s ‘Trial of a Saving Interest
in Christ; Mr. Marshal’s ‘Gospel Mystery of Sanctification;’
Mr. Boston’s ‘Human Nature in its Fourfold State;’ or Dr.
Doddridge’s ‘Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul.”
If any profane person, who desires to be converted, enter into
the spirit of those books, he thereby becomes twofold more a
child of hell than he was before.” (Page 436.)
Such is the doctrine, such is the spirit, of Palaemon |
condemning the whole generation of God’s children; sending
all his opponents to hell at once; casting arrows, firebrands,
death on every side ! But I stop. God be merciful to thee
a sinner; and show thee compassion, though thou hast none
for thy fellow-servants | Otherwise it will be more tolerable,
I will not say for Seneca or Epictetus, but for Nero or
Domitian, in the day of judgment, than for thee! W
