A Dialogue between a Predestinarian and His Friend
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
TO ALL PREDESTINARIANS.
1. I AM informed, some of you have said, that the following
quotations are false; that these words were not spoken by
these authors; others, that they were not spoken in this
sense; and others, that neither you yourself, nor any true
Predestinarian, ever did, or ever would, speak so.
2. My friends, the authors here quoted are well known, in
whom you may read the words with your own eyes. And
you who have read them know in your own conscience, they
were spoken in this sense, and no other; nay, that this sense
of them is professedly defended throughout the whole
treatises whence they are taken.
S 2
3. But, be this as it may, do you indeed say, “No true
Predestinarian ever did or would speak so?” Why, every
true Predestinarian must speak so, and so must you yourself
too, if you dare speak out, unless they and you renounce
your fundamental principle.
4. Your fundamental principle is this: “God from eternity
ordained whatsoever should come to pass.” But from this
single position undeniably follows every assertion hereafter
mentioned. It remains therefore only that you choose which
you please (for one you must choose) of these three things:
Either, (1.) To equivocate, evade the question, and prevaricate
without end; or, (2.) To swallow all these assertions together,
and honestly to avow them; or, (3.) To renounce them all
together, and believe in Christ, the Saviour of all.
FRIEND.—SIR, I have heard that you make God the
author of all sin, and the destroyer of the greater part of
mankind without mercy.
PREDESTINARIAN.—I deny it; I only say, “God did from
all eternity unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass.”
(Assembly’s Catechism, chap. 3.)
Friend.—Do you make no exception ?
Pred.—No, surely; for “nothing is more absurd than to
think anything at all is done but by the ordination of God.”
(Calvin’s Institutes, book I., chap. 16, sect. 3.)
Friend.—Do you extend this to the actions of men?
Pred.—Without doubt: “Every action and motion of
every creature is so governed by the hidden counsel of God,
that nothing can come to pass, but what was ordained by
him.” (Ibid., sect. 3.)
Friend.—But what then becomes of the wills of men?
Pred.—“The wills of men are so governed by the will of
God, that they are carried on straight to the mark which he
has fore-ordained.” (Ibid., sect. 8.)
Friend.—I suppose you mean the permissive will of God?
Pred.—No : I mean, “all things come to pass by the
efficacious and irresistible will of God.” (Twissi Vindicia
Gratiae Potestatis & Providentia Dei. Editio Jensoniana,
par. 3, p. 19.)
Friend.—Why, then, all men must do just what they do?
Pred.-True: “It is impossible that anything should ever
:
:
c
:
.
be done, but that to which God impels the will of man.”
(Ibid., p. 19.)
Friend.—But does not this imply the necessity of all
events?
Pred.—“I will not scruple to own that the will of God lays
a necessity on all things, and that every thing he wills neces
sarily comes to pass.” (Calvin’s Inst., b. 3, c. 24, sec. 8.)
Friend.—Does sin then necessarily come to pass?
Pred.—Undoubtedly : For “the almighty power of God
extends itself to the first fall, and all other sins of angels and
men.” (Assembly’s Catechism, c. 5.)
Friend.—I grant, God foresaw the first man would fall.
Pred.—Nay, “God not only foresaw that Adam would fall,
but also ordained that he should.” (Calvin’s Inst., b. 3, c. 23,
sec. 7.)
Friend.—I know God permitted Adam’s fall.
Pred.—I tell you, “he fell not only by the permission, but
also by the appointment, of God.” (Calvini Responsio ad
Calumnias Nebulonis cujusdam ad Articulum primum.) “He
sinned because God so ordained, because the Lord saw good.”
(Calvin's Inst., b. 3, c. 24, sec. 8.)
Friend.—But do not those who differ from you raise many
objections against you as to this point?
Pred.—Yes: “Those poisonous dogs vomit out many things
against God.” (Ibid., b. 3, c. 23, sec. 2.) “They deny that
the Scripture says God decreed Adam’s fall. They say he
might have chose either to fall or not; and that God fore
ordained only to treat him according to his desert: As if God
had created the noblest of all his creatures, without fore
ordaining what should become of him !” (Ibid., sec. 7.)
Friend.—Did God then make Adam on purpose that he
might fall?
Pred.—Undoubtedly. “God made Adam and Eve to this
very purpose, that they might be tempted and led into sin.
And by force of his decree, it could not otherwise be but they
must sin.” (Piscatoris Disput. Praedest, Praef, p. 6)
Friend.—But do not you ground God's decree on God’s
foreknowledge rather than his will?
Pred.—No : “God foresees nothing but what he has
decreed, and his decree precedes his knowledge.” (Piscat.
Disput. Praedest.)
Friend.—Well, this may truly be termed a horrible decree.
Pred.—“I confess it is a horrible decree; yet no one can
deny but God foreknew Adam's fall, and therefore foreknew
it, because he had ordained it so by his own decree.” (Calv.
Inst., b. 3, c. 23, sec. 7.)
Friend.—Do you believe, then, that God has by his own
positive decree, not only elected some men to life, but also
reprobated all the rest?
Pred.—Most surely, if I believe one, I believe the other.
“Many indeed (thinking to excuse God) own election, and
yet deny reprobation; but this is quite silly and childish.
For without reprobation, election itself cannot stand; whom
God passes by, those he reprobates.” (Calv. Inst., b. 3, c. 23,
sec. 1.)
Friend.—Pray explain what you mean by election and
reprobation.
Pred.—With all my heart. “All men are not created for
the same end; but some are fore-ordained to eternal life;
others to eternal damnation. So according as every man was
created for the one end or the other, we say he was elected or
predestinated to life, or reprobated, that is, predestinated to
destruction.” (Ibid., c. 21, sec. 1.)
Friend.—Pray repeat your meaning.
Pred.—“God hath once for all appointed, by an eternal
and unchangeable decree, to whom he would give salvation,
and whom he would devote to destruction.” (Ibid., sec. 7.)
Friend.—Did God make any man on purpose that he
might be damned?
Pred.—Did not I tell you before? “God’s first constitu
tion was, that some should be destined to eternal ruin; and
to this end their sins were ordained, and denial of grace in
order to their sins.” (Zanchius de Natura Dei, p. 553, 554.)
Friend.—But is not God’s predestinating men to life or
death grounded on his foreknowledge?
Pred.—“So the vulgar think; that God, as he foresees
every man will deserve, elects them to life, or devotes them to
death and damnation.” (Calv. Inst., b. 3, c. 22, sec. 1.)
Friend.—And do not you think that reprobation, at least,
is grounded on God’s foreknowing men’s sins?
Pred.—No indeed: “God of his own good pleasure ordains
that many should be born, who are from the womb devoted
to inevitable damnation. If any man pretend that God’s
foreknowledge lays them under no necessity of being damned,
but rather that he decreed their dammation because he fore
knew their wickedness, I grant that God’s foreknowledge
, alone lays no necessity on the creature; but eternal life and
death depend on the will rather than the foreknowledge of
God. If God only foreknew all things that relate to all men,
and did not decree and ordain them also, then it might be
inquired whether or no his foreknowledge necessitates the
thing foreknown. But seeing he therefore foreknows all
things that will come to pass, because he has decreed they
shall come to pass, it is vain to contend about foreknowledge,
since it is plain all things come to pass by God’s positive
decree.” (Ibid., c. 23, s. 6.)
Friend.—But if God has positively decreed to damn the
greater part of mankind, why does he call upon them to
repent and be saved?
Pred.—“As God has his effectual call, whereby he gives the
elect the salvation to which he ordained them, so he has his
judgments towards the reprobates, whereby he executes his
decree concerning them. As many, therefore, as he created to
live miserably, and then perish everlastingly; these, that they
may be brought to the end for which they were created, he
sometimes deprives of the possibility of hearing the word, and
at other times, by the preaching thereof, blinds and stupifies
them the more.” (Ibid., c. 24, s. 12.)
Friend.—How is this? I say, if God has created them for
never-ending death, why does he call to them to turn and live?
Pred.—“He calls to them, that they may be more deaf; he
kindles a light, that they may be the more blind; he brings
his doctrine to them, that they may be more ignorant; and
applies the remedy to them, that they may not be healed.”
(Ibid., b. 3, c. 24, s. 13.)
Friend.—Enough, enough. Yet you do not make God the
author of sin!
Pred.—No certainly: “God cannot be termed the author
of sin, though he is the cause of those actions which are sins.”
(Petri Martyris Vermillii Com. in Roman., p. 413)
Friend.—How is he the cause of them then ?
Pred.—Two ways: First, by his eternal, unchangeable
decree; Secondly, by his present irresistible power.
Friend.—Did God then fore-ordain the sins of any man?
Pred.—“Both the reprobates and the elect were fore
ordained to sin, as sin, that the glory of God might be
leclared thereby.” (Zanchius de Nat. Dei, p. 555.) “The
reprobates,” more especially, “who were predestinated to
damnation, and the causes of damnation, and created to that
end, that they may live wickedly, and be vessels full of the
dregs of sin.” (Piscator contra Tauffium, p. 47.)
Friend.—But surely the sins of the elect were not fore
ordained?
Pred.—Yes, but they were: “For we neither can do more
good than we do, nor less evil than we do; because God from
eternity has precisely decreed that both the good and the evil
should be so done.” (Piscatoris Responsio ad Amicam Dupli
cationem Conradi Vorstii, p. 176.)
Friend.—I understand you, as to God’s decreeing sin.
But how is his irresistible power now concerned in the sins
of men?
Pred.—“God is the author of that action which is sinful
by his irresistible will.” (Dr. Twisse, par. 3, p. 21.)
Friend.—How do you mean?
Pred.-- “God procures adultery, cursings, lyings.” (Piscat.
Responsio ad Apologiam Bertii.) “He supplies wicked men
with opportunities of sinning, and inclines their hearts thereto.
He blinds, deceives, and seduces them. He, by his working
on their hearts, bends and stirs them up to do evil.” (Pet.
Martyr. Ver. Comment. in Rom., pp. 36, 413.) And thus
“thieves, murderers, and other malefactors are God’s instru
ments, which he uses to execute what he hath decreed in
himself.” (Calv. Inst., b. 1, c. 17, s. 5.)
Friend.—Do you not then charge God himself with sin?
Pred.—No : “God necessitates them only to the act of sin,
not to the deformity of sin.” (Twissi Vindicia, par. 3, p. 22.)
Besides, “when God makes angels or men sin, he does not sin
himself, because he does not break any law. For God is under
no law, and therefore cannot sin.” (Zuinglius in Serm. de
Provid., c. 5, 6.)
Friend.—But how does God make angels or men to sin?
Pred.—“The devil and wicked men are so held in on
every side with the hand of God, that they cannot conceive,
or contrive, or execute any mischief, any farther than God
himself doth not permit only, but command. Nor are they
only held in fetters, but compelled also, as with a bridle, to
perform obedience to those commands.” (Calv. Inst., b. 1,
c. 17, s. 11.)
Friend.—This is true Turkish doctrine, and ought so to be
exploded as that used to be in these words:
“I do anathematize the blasphemy of Mahomet, which
saith that God deceiveth whom he will, and whom he will he
leadeth to that which is good. Himself doeth what he
willeth, and is himself the cause of all good and all evil.
Fate and destiny govern all things.” (Nicetus Saracenita.)
Pred.—Nay, our doctrine is more ancient than Mahomet:
It was maintained by St. Augustine.
Friend.—Augustine speaks sometimes for it, and sometimes
against it. But all antiquity for the four first centuries is
against you, as is the whole Eastern Church to this day; and
the Church of England, both in her Catechism, Articles, and
Homilies. And so are divers of our most holy Martyrs,
Bishop Hooper and Bishop Latimer in particular.
Pred.—But does not antiquity say, Judas was predestinated
to damnation?
Friend.—Quite the contrary. St. Chrysostom’s express
words are, “Judas, my beloved, was at first a child of the
kingdom, and heard it said to him with the disciples, “Ye
shall sit on twelve thrones; but afterwards he became a
child of hell.”
Pred.—However, you will own that Esau was predestinated
to destruction.
Friend.—Indeed I will not. Some of your own writers
believe he was finally saved, which was the general opinion of
the ancient Fathers. And that scripture, “Jacob have I
loved, and Esau have I hated,” plainly relates not to their
persons but their posterities.*
But, supposing Esau or Judas to be damned, what is he
damned for ?-
Pred.—Without question, for unbelief. For as we are
saved by faith alone, so unbelief is the only damning sin.
Friend.—By what faith are you saved?
Pred.—By faith in Christ, who gave himself for me.
Friend.—But did he give himself for Esau and Judas? If
not, you say they are damned for not believing a lie.
This consideration it was which forced Archbishop Usher
to cry out, “What would not a man fly unto, rather than
yield, that Christ did not die for the reprobates; and that
none but the elect had any kind cf title to him; and yet
many thousands should be bound in conscience to believe that
he died for them, and tied to accept him for their Redeemer
and Saviour? Whereby they should have believed that which
in itself is most untrue, and laid hold of that in which they
had no kind of interest.”
Pred.—But what then do you mean by the words, election
and reprobation?
Friend.—I mean this: First, God did decree from the
beginning to elect or choose, in Christ, all that should believe
to salvation. And this decree proceeds from his own goodness,
and is not built upon any goodness in the creature. Secondly:
God did from the beginning decree to reprobate all who
should obstinately and finally continue in unbelief.
Pred.—What then do you think of absolute, unconditional
election and reprobation?
Friend.—I think it cannot be found in holy writ, and that
it is a plant which bears dismal fruit. An instance of which
we have in Calvin himself; who confesses that he procured
the burning to death of Michael Servetus, purely for differing
from him in opinion in matters of religion.
