Minutes of Several Conversations, 1744 to 1789
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Year: 1789
Author: John Wesley
---
IT is desired, that all things be considered as in the imme
diate presence of God; that every person speak freely
whatever is in his heart.
Q. 1. How may we best improve the time of this Conference?
A. (1.) While we are conversing, let us have an especial
care to set God always before us.
(2.) In the intermediate hours, let us redeem all the time
we can for private exercises.
(3) Therein let us give ourselves to prayer for one another,
and for a blessing on this our labour.
Q. 2. Have our Conferences been as useful as they might
have been.”
A. No : We have been continually straitened for time.
Hence, scarce anything has been searched to the bottom.
To remedy this, let every Conference last nine days, con
cluding on Wednesday in the second week.
Q. 3. What may we reasonably believe to be God’s design
in raising up the Preachers called Methodists?
A. Not to form any new sect; but to reform the nation,
particularly the Church; and to spread scriptural holiness
over the land.
* This tract, which is usually denominated, “The Large Minutes,” contains the
plan of discipline as practised in the Methodist Connexion during the life of Mr.
Wesley. As its title intimates, it underwent several alterations and enlargements
from the year 1744 to 1789, when the last revision took place. It is here
reprintel from a copy which bears the date of 1791,-the year in which Mr.
Wesley died,—colla'ed with the edition of 1789-EDIT.
Q. 4. What was the rise of Methodism, so called?
A. In 1729, two young men, reading the Bible, saw they
could not be saved without holiness, followed after it, and
incited others so to do. In 1737 they saw holiness comes by
faith. They saw likewise, that men are justified before they
are sanctified; but still holiness was their point. God then
thrust them out, utterly against their will, to raise a holy
people. When Satan could no otherwise hinder this, he
threw Calvinism in the way; and then Antinomianism, which
strikes directly at the root of all holiness.
Q. 5. Is it advisable for us to preach in as many places as
we can, without forming any societies?
A. By no means. We have made the trial in various places;
and that for a considerable time. But all the seed has fallen
as by the highway side. There is scarce any fruit remaining.
Q. 6. Where should we endeavour to preach most?
A. (1.) Where there is the greatest number of quiet and
willing hearers. (2.) Where there is most fruit.
Q. 7. Is field-preaching unlawful?
A. We conceive not. We do not know that it is contrary
to any law either of God or man.
Q. 8. Have we not used it too sparingly?
A. It seems we have; (1.) Because our call is, to save that
which is lost. Now, we cannot expect them to seek us.
Therefore we should go and seek them. (2.) Because we are
particularly called, by “going into the highways and hedges,”
which none else will do, “to compel them to come in.” (3.)
Because that reason against it is not good, “The house will
hold all that come.” The house may hold all that come to
the house; but not all that would come to the field.
The greatest hinderance to this you are to expect from
rich, or cowardly, or lazy Methodists. But regard them not,
neither Stewards, Leaders, nor people. Whenever the
weather will permit, go out in God’s name into the most
public places, and call all to repent and believe the gospel;
every Sunday, in particular; especially were there are old
societies, lest they settle upon their lees. The Stewards will
frequently oppose this, lest they lose their usual collection.
But this is not a sufficient reason against it. Shall we
barter souls for money?
Q. 9. Ought we not diligently to observe in what places God
is pleased at any time to pour out his Spirit more abundantly?
A. We ought; and at that time to send more labourers
than usual into that part of the harvest.
But whence shall we have them? (1.) So far as we can
afford it, we will keep a reserve of Preachers at Kingswood.
(2.) Let an exact list be kept of those who are proposed for
trial, but not accepted.
Q. 10. How often shall we permit strangers to be present
at the meeting of the society?
Sr.~<
A. At every other meeting of the society in every place
let no stranger be admitted. At other times, they may; but
c ~ *
-- ".the same person not above twice or thrice. In order to this,
see that all in every place show their tickets before they
come in. If the Stewards and Leaders are not exact herein,
employ others that have more resolution.
Q. 11. How may the Leaders of classes be made more
useful P
A. (1.) Let each of them be diligently examined concern
ing his method of meeting a class. Let this be done with
all possible exactness at the next quarterly visitation. And
in order to this, allow sufficient time for the visiting of each
society.
(2.) Let each Leader carefully inquire how every soul in his
class prospers; not only how each person observes the outward
Rules, but how he grows in the knowledge and love of God.
(3.) Let the Leaders converse with the Assistant frequently
and freely.
Q. 12. Can anything farther be done, in order to make
the meetings of the classes lively and profitable?
A. (1.) Change improper Leaders.
(2.) Let the Leaders frequently meet each other's classes.
(3.) Let us observe which Leaders are the most useful;
and let these meet the other classes as often as possible.
(4.) See that all the Leaders be not only men of sound
judgment, but men truly devoted to God.
Q. 13. How can we farther assist those under our care ?
A. (1.) By meeting the married men and women together,
the first Sunday after the visitation,—the single men and
women apart, on the two following,-in all the large
societies: This has been much neglected.
(2.) By instructing them at their own houses. What
unspeakable need is there of this ! The world say, “The
Mcthodists are no better than other people.” This is not true.
But it is nearer the truth than we are willing to believe.
N. B. For (1.) Personal religion either toward God or
man is amazingly superficial among us.
I can but just touch on a few generals. How little faith
is there among us! How little communion with God! How
little living in heaven, walking in eternity, deadness to every
creature ! How much love of the world; desire of pleasure,
of ease, of getting money! How little brotherly love 1
What continual judging one another ! What gossiping,
evil-speaking, tale-bearing ! What want of moral honesty!
To instance only in one or two particulars: Who does as he
would be done by, in buying and selling, particularly in
selling horses! Write him a knave that does not. And the
Methodist knave is the worst of all knaves.
(2.) Family religion is shamefully wanting, and almost in
every branch.
And the Methodists in general will be little the better, till
we take quite another course with them. For what avails
public preaching alone, though we could preach like angels?
We must, yea, every travelling Preacher must, instruct them
from house to house. Till this is done, and that in good
earnest, the Methodists will be little better than other people.
Our religion is not deep, universal, uniform; but superficial,
partial, uneven. It will be so, till we spend half as much
time in this visiting, as we now do in talking uselessly.
Can we find a better method of doing this than Mr.
Baxter's? If not, let us adopt it without delay. His whole
tract, entitled Gildas Salvianus, is well worth a careful
perusal. A short extract from it I will subjoin. Speaking
of this visiting from house to house, he says:
“We shall find many hinderances, both in ourselves, and
in the people.
“l. In ourselves there is much dulness and laziness; so
that there will be much ado to get us to be faithful in the
work.
“2. We have a base, man-pleasing temper; so that we let
men perish, rather than lose their love. We let them go
quietly to hell, lest we should anger them.
“3. Some of us have also a foolish bashfulness. We know
not how to begin, and blush to contradict the devil.
“4. But the greatest hinderance is, wea mess of faith.
‘Our whole motion is weak, because the spring of it is weak.
“5. Lastly, we are unskilful in the work. How few know
how to deal with men, so as to get within them, and suit all
our discourse to their several conditions and tempers; to choose
the fittest subjects, and follow them with a holy mixture of
seriousness, and terror, and love, and meekness l’’ (P. 351.)
And we have many difficulties to grapple with in our people.
1. Too many of them will be unwilling to be taught, till we
conquer their perverseness by the force of reason and the power
of love.
2. And many are so dull that they will shun being taught
for fear of showing their dulness. And indeed you will find it
extremely hard to make them understand the very plainest
points. 3. And it is still harder to fix things on their hearts, without
which all our labour is lost. If you have not, therefore, great
seriousness and fervency, what good can you expect? And,
after all, it is grace alone that must do the work.
4. And when we have made some impressions on their
hearts, if we look not after them, they will soon die away.
But as great as this labour of private instruction is, it is
absolutely necessary. For, after all our preaching, many of
our people are almost as ignorant as if they had never heard
the gospel. I speak as plain as I can, yet I frequently meet
with those who have been my hearers many years, who know
not whether Christ be God or man. And how few are there
that know the nature of repentance, faith, and holiness! Most
of them have a sort of confidence that God will save them, while
the world has their hearts. I have found by experience, that
one of these has learned more from one hour's close discourse,
than from ten years’ public preaching.
And undoubtedly this private application is implied in those
solemn words of the Apostle: “I charge thee, before God and
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and dead at
his appearing, preach the word, be instant in season, out of
season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all longsuffering.”
Obrethren, if we could but set this work on foot in all our
societies, and prosecute it zealously, what glory would redound
to God! If the common ignorance were banished, and every
shop and every house busied in speaking of the word and works
of God; surely God would dwell in our habitations, and make
us his delight.
And this is absolutely necessary to the welfare of our people,
many of whom neither believe nor repent to this day. Look
round and see how many of them are still in apparent danger of
damnation. And how can you walk and talk and be merry with
such people, when you know their case? Methinks, when your
look them in the face, you should break forth into tears, as the
Prophet did when he looked upon Hazael; and then set on
them with the most vehement and importunate exhortations.
O, for God’s sake, and for the sake of poor souls, bestir your
selves, and spare no pains that may conduce to their salvation!
What cause have we to bleed before the Lord this day, that
we have so long neglected this good work | If we had but set
upon it sooner, how many more might have been brought to
Christ! And how much holier and happier might we have
made our societies before now ! And why might we not have
done it sooner? There were many hinderances; and so there
always will be. But the greatest hinderance was in ourselves,
in our littleness of faith and love.
But it is objected, (1) “This will take up so much time,
that we shall not have time to follow our studies.”
I answer, (1.) Gaining knowledge is a good thing; but saving
souls is a better. (2.) By this very thing you will gain the most
excellent knowledge, that of God and eternity. (3.) You will
have time for gaining other knowledge too, if you spend all your
mornings therein. Only sleep not more than you need; and
never be idle, or triflingly employed. But, (4.) If you can do.
but one, let your studies alone. I would throw by all the libra
ries in the world, rather than be guilty of the loss of one soul.
I allow, in some of the country circuits, where you have
only a day to spend in each place, you have not time for this
excellent work. But you have, wherever you spend several
days together in one town.
It is objected, (2.) “The people will not submit to it.” If
some will not, others will. And the success with them will
repay all your labour. O let us herein follow the example of
St. Paul |
(1.) For our general business, “Serving the Lord with all
humility of mind.” (2.) Our special work, “Take heed to your
selves, and to all the flock.” (3.) Our doctrine, “Repentance
toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.” (4.) The
place, “I have taught you publicly, and from house to house.”
The object and manner of teaching: “I ceased not to warn
every one, night and day, with tears.” (5.) His innocence and
self-denial herein: “I have coveted no man’s silver or gold.”
(6.) His patience: “Neither count Imy life dear unto myself.”
And among all our motives, let these be ever before our eyes:
(1) “The Church of God, which he hath purchased with his
own blood.” (2.) “Grievous wolves shall enter in ; yea, of
yourselves shall men arise, speaking perverse things.” Write
this upon your hearts, and it will do you more good than
twenty years’ study.
Let every Preacher, having a catalogue of those in each
society, go to each house. Deal gently with them, that the
report of it may move others to desire your coming. Give the
children the “Instructions for Children,” and encourage them
to get them by heart. Indeed, you will find it no easy matter
to teach the ignorant the principles of religion. So true is the
remark of Archbishop Usher: “Great scholars may think this
work beneath them. But they should consider, the laying the
foundation skilfully, as it is of the greatest importance, so it is
the masterpiece of the wisest builder. And let the wisest of us
all try, whenever we please, we shall find, that to lay this
ground-work rightly, to make the ignorant understand the
grounds of religion, will put us to the trial of all our skill.”
Perhaps in doing this it may be well, (1.) After a few loving
words spoken to all in the house, to take each person singly
into another room, where you may deal closely with him, about
his sin, and misery, and duty. Set these home, or you lose all
your labour. (At least, let none be present but those who are
familiar with each other.)
(2.) Hear what the children have learned by heart.
(3) Choose some of the weightiest points, and try if they
understand them. As, “Do you believe you have sin in you?
What does sin deserve? What remedy has God provided for
guilty, helpless sinners?”
(4.) Often with the question suggest the answer. As, “What
is repentance? Sorrow for sin, or a conviction that we are
guilty, helpless sinners.” “What is faith? A divine convic
tion of things not seen.”
(5.) Where you perceive they do not understand the stress
of your question, lead them into it by other questions. For
instance, you ask, “How do you think your sins will be par
doned?” They answer, “By repenting and amending my life.”
You ask farther, “But will your amendment make satisfac
tion for your past sins?” They will answer, “I hope so, or I
know not what will.” One would think, these had no know
ledge of Christ at all. And some have not. But others have ;
and give such answers, only because they do not understand
the scope of the question. Ask them farther, “Can you be
saved without the death of Christ?” They immediately say,
“No.” And if you ask, “What has he suffered for you?”
they will say, “He shed his blood for us.” But many cannot
express even what they have some conception of; no, not even
when expressions are put into their mouths. With these you
are to deal exceeding tenderly, lest they be discouraged.
(6.) If you perceive them troubled, that they cannot answer,
step in yourself, and take the burden off them; answering the
question yourself. And do it thoroughly and plainly, making a
full explication of the whole business to them.
(7.) When you have tried their knowledge, proceed to in
struct them, according to their several capacities. If a man
understand the fundamentals, speak what you perceive he most
needs, either explaining farther some doctrines, or some duty,
or showing him the necessity of something which he neglects.
If he still understands not, go over it again till he does.
(8.) Next inquire into his state, whether convinced or uncon
vinced, converted or unconverted. Tell him, if need be, what
conversion is; and then renew and enforce the inquiry.
(9.) If unconverted, labour with all your power to bring his
heart to a sense of his condition. Set this home with a more
earnest voice than you spoke before. Get to the heart, or you
do nothing.
(10.) Conclude all with a strong exhortation, which should
enforce, (1.) The duty of the heart, in order to receive Christ.
(2.) The avoiding former sins, and constantly using the out
ward means. And be sure, if you can, to get their promise,
to forsake sin, change their company, and use the means. And
do this solemnly, reminding them of the presence of God, who
hears their promises, and expects the performance.
(11.) Before you leave them, engage the head of each family
to call all his family together every Sunday before they go to
bed, and hear what they can repeat, and so continue, till they
have learned the “Instructions” perfectly; and afterwards let
him take care that they do not forget what they have learned.
Do this in earnest, and you will soon find what a work you
take in hand, in undertaking to be a Travelling Preacher!
Q. 14. How shall we prevent improper persons from
insinuating into the society?
A. (1.) Give tickets to none till they are recommended by a
Leader, with whom they have met at least two months on trial.
(2.) Give notes to none but those who are recommended
by one you know, or till they have met three or four times
in a class.
(3.) Give them the Rules the first time they meet. See
that this be never neglected.
Q. 15. When shall we admit new members?
A. In large towns, admit them into the Bands at the
quarterly love-feast following the visitation: Into the society,
on the Sunday following the visitation. Then also read the
names of them that are excluded.
Q. 16. Should we insist on the Band rules, particularly
with regard to dress?
A. By all means. This is no time to give any encourage
ment to superfluity of apparel. Therefore give no Band-tickets
to any till they have left off superfluous ornaments. In order
to this, (1.) Let every Assistant read the “Thoughts upon
Dress” at least once a year, in every large society. (2.) In
visiting the classes, be very mild, but very strict. (3.) Allow
no exempt case, not even of a married woman. Better one
suffer than many. (4) Give no ticket to any that wear
calashes, high-heads, or enormous bonnets.
To encourage meeting in Band, (1.) In every large society,
have a love-feast quarterly for the Bands only. (2.) Never
fail to meet them once a week. (3.) Exhort every believer
to embrace the advantage. (4.) Give a Band-ticket to none
till they have met a quarter on trial.
Observe 1 You give none a Band-ticket before he meets,
but after he has met.
Q. 17. Have those in Band left off snuff and drams?
A. No. Many are still enslaved to one or the other. In
order to redress this, (1.) Let no Preacher touch either on
any account. (2.) Strongly dissuade our people from them.
(3.) Answer their pretences, particularly curing the colic.
Q. 18. Do we observe any evil which has lately prevailed
among our societies?
A. Many of our members have married with unbelievers,
yea, with unawakened persons. This has had fatal effects.
They had either a cross for life, or turned back to perdition.
Q. 19. What can be done to put a stop to this?
A. (1.) Let every Preacher publicly enforce the Apostle's
caution, “Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers.” (2.)
Let him openly declare, whoever does this will be expelled
the society. (3.) When any such is expelled, let a suitable
exhortation be subjoined. And, (4.) Let all be exhorted to
take no step in so weighty a matter without advising with
the most serious of their brethren.
Q. 20. Ought any woman to marry without the consent
of her parents?
A. In general she ought not. Yet there may be an excep
tion. For if, (1.) A woman be under a necessity of marrying;
if, (2.) Her parents absolutely refuse to let her marry any Chris
tian; then she may, nay, ought to, marry without their consent.
Yet, even then, a Methodist Preacher ought not to marry her.
Q. 21. Do not Sabbath-breaking, dram-drinking, evil
speaking, unprofitable conversation, lightness, expensiveness
or gaiety of apparel, and contracting debts without due care
to discharge them, still prevail in several places? How may
these evils be remedied?
A. (1) Let us preach expressly on each of these heads. (2.)
Read in every society the “Sermon on Evil-Speaking. (3.)
Let the Leaders closely examine and exhort every person to put
away the accursed thing. (4.) Let the Preacher warn every
society, that none who is guilty herein can remain with us. (5.)
Extirpate smuggling, buying or selling uncustomed goods, out
of every society. Let none remain with us, who will not totally
abstain from every kind and degree of it. Speak tenderly, but
earnestly, and frequently of it, in every society near the coasts;
and read to them, and diligently disperse among them, the
“Word to a Smuggler.” (6.) Extirpate bribery, receiving any
thing, directly or indirectly, for voting in any election. Show
no respect of persons herein, but expel all that touch the ac
cursed thing. Largely show, both in public and private, the
wickedness of thus selling our country. And every where read
the “Word to a Freeholder,” and disperse it with both hands.
Q. 22. What shall we do to prevent scandal, when any of
our members become bankrupt?
A. Let the Assistant talk with him at large; and if he has
not kept fair accounts, or has been concerned in that base
practice of raising money by coining notes, (commonly called
the bill-trade,) let him be expelled immediately.
Q. 23. What is the office of a Christian Minister?
A. To watch over souls, as he that must give account.
Q. 24. In what view may we and our Helpers be considered?
A. Perhaps as extraordinary messengers, (that is, out of the
ordinary way,) designed, (1.) To provoke the regular Ministers
to jealousy. (2.) To supply their lack of service toward those
who are perishing for want of knowledge. But how hard is
it to abide here ! Who does not wish to be a little higher?
suppose, to be ordained !
Q. 25. What is the office of a Helper?
A. In the absence of a Minister, to feed and guide the
flock; in particular,
(1.) To preach morning and evening. (But he is never to
begin later in the evening than seven o’clock, unless in par
ticular cases.)
(2.) To meet the society and the Bands weekly.
(3.) To meet the Leaders weekly.
Let every preacher be particularly exact in this, and in the
morning preaching. If he has twenty hearers, let him preach.
If not, let him sing and pray.
N. B. We are fully determined never to drop the morning
preaching, and to continue preaching at five, wherever it is
practicable, particularly in London and Bristol.
Q. 26. What are the rules of a Helper?
A. (1.) Be diligent. Never be unemployed a moment. Never
be triflingly employed. Never while away time; neither spend
any more time at any place than is strictly necessary.
(2.) Be serious. Let your motto be, “Holiness to the Lord.”
Avoid all lightness, jesting, and foolish talking.
(3.) Converse sparingly and cautiously with women; par
ticularly, with young women.
(4.) Take no step toward marriage, without first consulting
with your brethren.
(5.) Believe evil of no one; unless you see it done, take
heed how you credit it. Put the best construction on every
-
thing. You know the Judge is always supposed to be on the
prisoner's side.
(6.) Speak evil of no one; else your word cspecially would
eat as doth a canker. Keep your thoughts within your own
breast, till you come to the person concerned.
(7.) Tell every one what you think wrong in him, and that
plainly, as soon as may be; else it will fester in your heart.
Make all haste to cast the fire out of your bosom.
(8.) Do not affect the gentleman. You have no more to do
with this character than with that of a dancing-master. A
Preacher of the gospel is the servant of all.
(9.) Be ashamed of nothing but sin: Not of fetching wood
(if time permit) or drawing water; not of cleaning your own
"shoes, or your neighbour's.
(10.) Be punctual. Do everything exactly at the time.
And in general, do not mend our Rules, but keep them; not
for wrath, but for conscience' sake.
(11.) You have nothing to do but to save souls. Therefore
spend and be spent in this work. And go always, not only to
those that want you, but to those that want you most.
Observe: It is not your business to preach so many times,
and to take care of this or that society; but to save as many
souls as you can ; to bring as many sinners as you possibly can
to repentance, and with all your power to build them up in that
holiness without which they cannot see the Lord. And remem
ber 1 A Methodist Preacher is to mind every point, great and
small, in the Methodist discipline ! Therefore you will need all
the sense you have, and to have all your wits about you!
(12.) Act in all things, not according to your own will, but
as a son in the Gospel. As such, it is your part to employ
your time in the manner which we direct; partly, in preach
ing and visiting from house to house; partly, in reading,
meditation, and prayer. Above all, if you labour with us in
our Lord's vineyard, it is needful that you should do that
part of the work which we advise, at those times and places
which we judge most for his glory.
Q. 27. What power is this which you exercise over both the
Preach.crs and the societies?
A. Count Zinzendorf loved to keep all things close: I love
to do all things openly. I will therefore tell you all I know of
the matter, taking it from the very beginning.
(1.) In November, 1738, two or three persons who desired
“to flee from the wrath to come,” and then a few more, came
to me in London, and desired me to advise and pray with them.
I said, “If you will meet me on Thursday night, I will help
you as well as I can.” More and more then desired to meet
with them, till they were increased to many hundreds. The
case was afterwards the same at Bristol, Kingswood, Newcastle,
and many other parts of England, Scotland, and Ireland. It
may be observed, the desire was on their part, not mine. My
desire was, to live and die in retirement. But I did not see that
I could refuse them my help, and be guiltless before God.
Here commenced my power; namely, a power to appoint when,
and where, and how they should meet; and to remove those
whose lives showed that they had not a desire “to flee from
the wrath to come.” And this power remained the same,
whether the people meeting together were twelve, or twelve
hundred, or twelve thousand.
(2.) In a few days some of them said, “Sir, we will not sit
under you for nothing; we will subscribe quarterly.” I said,
“I will have nothing; for I want nothing. My Fellowship sup
plies me with all I want.” One replied, “Nay, but you want
a hundred and fifteen pounds to pay for the lease of the Foun
dery; and likewise a large sum of money to put it into repair.”
On this consideration, I suffered them to subscribe. And when
the society met, I asked, “Who will take the trouble of receiv
ing this money, and paying it where it is needful?” One said,
“I will do it, and keep the account for you.” So here was the
first Steward. Afterwards, I desired one or two more to help
me, as Stewards, and, in process of time, a greater number.
Let it be remarked, it was I myself, not the people, who
chose these Stewards, and appointed to each the distinct work
wherein he was to help me, as long as I desired. And herein
I began to exercise another sort of power; namely, that of
appointing and removing Stewards.
(3.) After a time a young man, named Thomas Maxfield,
came and desired to help me as a son in the gospel. Soon after
came a second, Thomas Richards; and then a third, Thomas
Westell. These severally desired to serve me as sons, and to
labour when and where I should direct. Observe: These like
wise desired me, not I them. But I durst not refuse their assist
ance. And here commenced my power, to appoint each of these
when, and where, and how to labour; that is, while he chose to
continue with me. For each had a power to go away when
he pleased; as I had also, to go away from them, or any of
them, if I saw sufficient cause. The case continued the same
when the number of Preachers increased. I had just the same
power still, to appoint when, and where, and how each should
help me; and to tell any, (if I saw cause,) “I do not desire your
help any longer.” On these terms, and no other, we joined at
first: On these we continue joined. But they do me no favour
in being directed by me. It is true, my “reward is with the
Lord: ” But at present I have nothing from it but trouble
and care; and often a burden I scarce know how to bear.
(4.) In 1744 I wrote to several Clergymen, and to all who
then served me as sons in the gospel, desiring them to meet me
in London, and to give me their advice concerning the best
method of carrying on the work of God. And when their num
ber increased, so that it was not convenient to invite them all,
for several years I wrote to those with whom I desired to confer,
and they only met me at London, or elsewhere; till at length I
gave a general permission, which I afterwards saw cause to
retract.
Observe: I myself sent for these of my own free choice.
And I sent for them to advise, not govern, me. Neither did
I at any time divest myself of any part of the power above
described, which the providence of God had cast upon me,
without any design or choice of mine.
(5.) What is that power? It is a power of admitting into,
and excluding from, the societies under my care; of choosing
and removing Stewards; of receiving or not receiving Helpers;
of appointing them when, where, and how to help me, and of
desiring any of them to confer with me when I see good. And
as it was merely in obedience to the providence of God, and
for the good of the people, that I at first accepted this power,
which I never sought; so it is on the same consideration, not
for profit, honour, or pleasure, that I use it at this day.
(6.) But “several gentlemen are offended at your having so
much power.” I did not seek any part of it. But when it was
come unawares, not daring to “bury that talent,” I used it to
the best of my judgment. Yet I never was fond of it. I always
did, and do now, bear it as my burden;—the burden which God
lays upon me, and therefore I dare not lay it down.
But if you can tell me any one, or any five men, to whom I
may transfer this burden, who can and will do just what I do
now, I will heartily thank both them and you.
(7.) But some of our Helpers say, “This is shackling free
born Englishmen;” and demand a free Conference, that is, a
meeting of all the Preachers, wherein all things shall be deter
mined by most votes. I answer, It is possible, after my death,
something of this kind may take place; but not while I live.
To me the Preachers have engaged themselves to submit, to
serve me as sons in the gospel; but they are not thus engaged
to any man or number of men besides. To me the people in
general will submit; but they will not thus submit to any other.
It is nonsense, then, to call my using this power, “shack
ling free-born Englishmen.” None needs to submit to it un
less he will; so that there is no shackling in the case. Every
Preacher and every member may leave me when he pleases.
But while he chooses to stay, it is on the same terms that he
joined me at first.
“But this is making yourself a Pope.” This carries no face
of truth. The Pope affirms that every Christian must do all he
bids, and believe all he says, under pain of damnation. I never
affirmed anything that bears any the most distant resemblance
to this. All I affirm is, the Preachers who choose to labour
with me, choose to serve me as sons in the gospel. And the
people who choose to be under my care, choose to be so on
the same terms they were at first.
Therefore all talk of this kind is highly injurious to me, who
bear the burden merely for your sake. And it is exceeding mis
chievous to the people, tending to confound their understand
ing, and to fill their hearts with evil surmisings and unkind
tempers toward me; to whom they really owe more, for taking
all this load upon me, for exercising this very power, for shack
ling myself in this manner, than for all my preaching put
together: Because preaching twice or thrice a day is no burden
to me at all; but the care of all the Preachers and all the
people is a burden indeed!
Q. 28. What reason can be assigned why so many of our
Preachers contract nervous disorders?
A. The chief reason, on Dr. Cadogan's principles, is either
indolence or intemperance. (1.) Indolence. Several of them
use too little exercise, far less than when they wrought at their
trade. And this will naturally pave the way for many, especially
nervous, disorders. (2.) Intemperance,—though not in the
vulgar sense. They take more food than they did when they
laboured more: And let any man of reflection judge how long
this will consist with health. Or they use more sleep than
when they laboured more: And this alone will destroy the
firmness of the nerves. If, then, our Preachers would avoid
nervous disorders, let them, (1.) Take as little meat, drink, and
sleep as nature will bear; and, (2.) Use full as much exercise
daily as they did before they were Preachers.
Q. 29. What general method of employing our time would
you advise us to?
A. We advise you, (1.) As often as possible to rise at four.
(2.) From four to five in the morning, and from five to six in
the evening, to meditate, pray, and read, partly the Scripture
with the Notes, partly the closely practical parts of what we have
published. (3.) From six in the morning till twelve, (allowing
an hour for breakfast,) to read in order with much prayer, first,
“The Christian Library,” and the other books which we have
published in prose and verse, and then those which we recom
mended in our Rules of Kingswood School.
Q. 30. Should our Helpers follow trades?
A. The question is not, whether they may occasionally work
with their hands, as St. Paul did, but whether it be proper for
them to keep shop or follow merchandise. After long consi
deration, it was agreed by all our brethren, that no Preacher
who will not relinquish his trade of buying and selling, (though
it were only pills, drops, or balsams) shall be considered as a
Travelling Preacher any longer.
Q. 31. Why is it that the people under our care are no
better?
A. Other reasons may concur; but the chief is, because we
are not more knowing and more holy.
Q. 32. But why are we not more knowing?
A. Because we are idle. We forget our very first rule, “Be
diligent. Never be unemployed a moment. Never be tri
flingly employed. Never while away time; neither spend any
more time at any place than is strictly necessary.”
I fear there is altogether a fault in this matter, and that few
of us are clear. Which of you spends as many hours a day in
God’s work as you did formerly in man’s work? We talk,
—or read history, or what comes next to hand. We must,
absolutely must, cure this evil, or betray the cause of God.
But how? (1.) Read the most useful books, and that
regularly and constantly. Steadily spend all the morning in
this employ, or, at least, five hours in four-and-twenty.
“But I read only the Bible.” Then you ought to teach
others to read only the Bible, and, by parity of reason, to
hear only the Bible: But if so, you need preach no more.
Just so said George Bell. And what is the fruit? Why, now
he neither reads the Bible, nor anything else. This is rank
enthusiasm. If you need no book but the Bible, you are got
above St. Paul. He wanted others too. “Bring the books,”
says he, “but especially the parchments,” those wrote on
parchment. “But I have no taste for reading.” Contract
a taste for it by use, or return to your trade.
“But I have no books.” I will give each of you, as fast
as you will read them, books to the value of five pounds.
And I desire the Assistants would take care that all the
large societies provide our Works, or at least the Notes, for
the use of the Preachers.
(2.) In the afternoon follow Mr. Baxter's plan. Then you
will have no time to spare: You will have work enough for
all your time. Then, likewise, no Preacher will stay with us
who is as salt that has lost its savour. For to such this em
ployment would be mere drudgery. And in order to it, you
will have need of all the knowledge you have, or can procure.
The sum is, Go into every house in course, and teach every
one therein, young and old, if they belong to us, to be
Christians inwardly and outwardly.
Make every particular plain to their understanding; fix it in
their memory; write it in their heart. In order to this, there
must be “line upon line, precept upon precept.” What
patience, what love, what knowledge is requisite for this!
Q. 33. In what particular method should we instruct them?
A. You may, as you have time, read, explain, enforce, (1.)
“The Rules of the Society.” (2.) “Instructions for Children.”
(3.) The fourth volume of “Sermons.” And, (4) Philip
Henry’s “Method of Family Prayer.”
We must needs do this, were it only to avoid idleness. Do
we not loiter away many hours in every week? Each try
himself: No idleness can consist with growth in grace. Nay,
without exactness in redeeming time, you cannot retain the
grace you received in justification.
But what shall we do for the rising generation? Unless we
take care of this, the present revival will be res unius aetatis ;
it will last only the age of a man. Who will labour herein?
Let him that is zealous for God and the souls of men begin now.
(1.) Where there are ten children in a society, meet them
at least an hour every week.
(2.) Talk with them every time you see any at home.
(3.) Pray in earnest for them.
(4.) Diligently instruct and vehemently exhort all parents
at their own houses.
(5.) Preach expressly on education, particularly at Mid
summer, when you speak of Kingswood. “But I have no
gift for this.” Gift or no gift, you are to do it; else you are
not called to be a Methodist Preacher. Do it as you can, till
you can do it as you would. Pray earnestly for the gift, and
use the means for it. Particularly, study the “Instructions”
and “Lessons for Children.”
Q. 34. Why are not we more holy? Why do not we live in
eternity; walk with God all the day long? Why are we not
all devoted to God; breathing the whole spirit of Missionaries?
A. Chiefly because we are enthusiasts; looking for the end,
without using the means. To touch only upon two or three
instances: Who of you rises at four in summer; or even at
five, when he does not preach? Do you recommend to all our
societies the five o’clock hour for private prayer? Do you
observe it, or any other fixed time? Do not you find by
experience, that any time is no time? Do you know the
obligation and the benefit of fasting P How often do you
practise it? The neglect of this alone is sufficient to account
for our feebleness and faintness of spirit. We are continu
ally grieving the Holy Spirit of God by the habitual neglect
of a plain duty Let us amend from this hour.
Q. 35. But how can I fast, since it hurts my health?
A. There are several degrees of fasting which cannot hurt
your health. I will instance in one: Let you and I every
Friday (beginning on the next) avow this duty throughout the
nation, by touching no tea, coffee, or chocolate in the morning
but (if we want it) half a pint of milk or water-gruel. Letus dine
on potatoes, and (if we need it) eat three or four ounces of flesh
in the evening. At other times let us eat no flesh-suppers:
These exceedingly tend to breed nervous disorders.
Q. 36. What is the best general method of preaching?
A. (1.) To invite. (2.) To convince. (3.) To offer Christ.
(4.) To build up; and to do this in some measure in every
Sermon.
..Q. 37. Are there any smaller advices relative to preaching,
which might be of use to us?
A. Perhaps these: (1.) Be sure never to disappoint a con
gregation, unless in case of life or death.
(2.) Begin and end precisely at the time appointed.
(3.) Let your whole deportment before the congregation.
be serious, weighty, and solemn.
(4.) Always suit your subject to your audience.
(5.) Choose the plainest texts you can.
(6.) Take care not to ramble; but keep to your text, and
make out what you take in hand.
(7.) Be sparing in allegorizing or spiritualizing.
(8.) Take care of anything awkward or affected, either in
your gesture, phrase, or pronunciation.
(9.) Sing no hymns of your own composing.
(10.) Print nothing without my approbation.
(11.) Do not usually pray above eight or ten minutes (at
most) without intermission.
(12.) Frequently read and enlarge upon a portion of the
Notes. And let young Preachers often exhort, without
taking a text.-
(13.) In repeating the Lord's Prayer, remember to say “hal
lowed,” not hollowed ; “trespass against us ; ” “amen.”
(14) Repeat this prayer aloud after the Minister, as often
as he repeats it.
(15.) Repeat after him aloud every confession, and both
the doxologies in the Communion-Service.
(16.) Always kneel during public prayer.
(17.) Everywhere avail yourself of the great festivals, by
preaching on the occasion, and singing the hymns, which
you should take care to have in readiness.
(18.) Avoid quaint words, however in fashion, as object,
originate, very, high, &c.
(19.) Avoid the fashionable impropriety of leaving out the
w in many words, as honor, vigor, &c. This is mere childish
affectation.
3.18 MINUTES OF
(20.) Beware of clownishness, either in speech or dress.
Wear no slouched hat.
(21.) Be merciful to your beast. Not only ride moderately,
but see with your own eyes that your horse be rubbed, fed,
and bedded.
Q. 38. Have not some of us been led off from practical
preaching by what was called preaching Christ?
A. Indeed we have. The most effectual way of preaching
Christ, is to preach him in all his offices, and to declare his
law as well as his gospel, both to believers and unbelievers.
Let us strongly and closely insist upon inward and outward
holiness, in all its branches.
Q. 39. How shall we guard against formality in public wor
ship; particularly in singing?
A. (1.) By preaching frequently on the head. (2.) By taking
care to speak only what we feel. (3.) By choosing such
hymns as are proper for the congregation. (4.) By not sing
ing too much at once; seldom more than five or six verses.
(5.) By suiting the tune to the words. (6.) By often stopping
short, and asking the people, “Now, do you know what, you
said last? Did you speak no more than you felt 7”
Is not this formality creeping in already, by those complex
tunes, which it is scarcely possible to sing with devotion?
Such is, “Praise the Lord, ye blessed ones:” Such the long
quavering hallelujah annexed to the morning-song tune, which
I defy any man living to sing devoutly. The repeating the
same words so often, (but especially while another repeats
different words, the horrid abuse which runs through the
modern church-music) as it shocks all common sense, so it
necessarily brings in dead formality, and has no more of reli
gion in it than a Lancashire hornpipe. Besides, it is a flat
contradiction to our Lord’s command, “Use not vain repeti
tions.” For what is a vain repetition, if this is not? What
end of devotion does it serve? Sing no anthems.
(7.) Do not suffer the people to sing too slow. This natu
rally tends to formality, and is brought in by them who have
either very strong or very weak voices. (8.) In every large
society let them learn to sing; and let them always learn our
own tunes first. (9.) Let the women constantly sing their
parts alone. Let no man sing with them, unless he under
stands the notes, and sings the bass, as it is pricked down in
the book. (10.) Introduce no new tunes till they are perfect
in the old. (11.) Let no organ be placed anywhere, till pro
posed in the Conference. (12.) Recommend our tune-book
everywhere; and if you cannot sing yourself, choose a person
or two in each place to pitch the tune for you. (13.) Exhort
every one in the congregation to sing, not one in ten only.
(14.) If a Preacher be present, let no singer give out the
words. (15.) When they would teach a tune to the congrega
tion, they must sing only the tenor.
After preaching, take a little lemonade, mild ale, or candied
orange-peel. All spirituous liquors, at that time especially,
are deadly poison.
Q. 40. Who is the Assistant?
A. That Preacher in each Circuit who is appointed, from
time to time, to take charge of the societies and the other
Preachers therein.
Q. 41. How should an Assistant be qualified for his charge?
A. By walking closely with God, and having his work
greatly at heart; by understanding and loving discipline, ours
in particular; and by loving the Church of England, and
resolving not to separate from it. Let this be well observed.
I fear, when the Methodists leave the Church, God will leave
them. But if they are thrust out of it, they will be guiltless.
Q. 42. What is the business of an Assistant?
A. (1.) To see that the other Preachers in his Circuit behave
well, and want nothing. (2) To visit the classes quarterly,
regulate the Bands, and deliver tickets. (3.) To take in or
put out of the society or the Bands. (4.) To keep watch
nights and love-feasts. (5.) To hold quarterly-meetings, and
thereindiligently to inquire both into the temporal and spi
ritual state of each society. (6.) To take care that every
society be duly supplied with books; particularly with
“Kempis,” “Instructions for Children,” and the “Primitive
Physic,” which ought to be in every house. O why is not this
regarded ! (7.) To send from every quarterly-meeting a cir
cumstantial account to London of every remarkable conversion
and remarkable death. (8.) To take exact lists of his socie
ties every quarter, and send them up to London. (9.) To
meet the married men and women, and the single men and
women, in the large societies, once a quarter. (10.) To over
look the accounts of all the Stewards.
Q.”43. Has the office of an Assistant been well executed?
A. No, not by half the Assistants. (1.) Who has sent me
word, whether the other Preachers behave well or ill? (2) Who
has visited all the classes and regulated the Bands quarterly?
(3.) Love-feasts for the Bands have been neglected: Neither
have persons been duly taken in and put out of the Bands.
(4.) The societies are not half supplied with books; not even
with those above-mentioned. O exert yourselves in this! Be
not weary! Leave no stone unturned ! (5.) How few accounts
have I had, either of remarkable deaths, or remarkable conver
sions ! (6.) How few exact lists of the societies ! (7.) How
few have met the married and single persons once a quarter I
Q. 44. Are there any other advices which you would give
the Assistants?
A. Several. (1.) Take a regular catalogue of your societies,
as they live in house-row. (2.) Leave your successor a particu
lar account of the state of the Circuit. (3) See that every
Band-Leader has the Rules of the Bands. (4.) Vigorously, but
calmly, enforce the Rules concerning needless ornaments,
drams, snuff, and tobacco. Give no Band-ticket to any man
or woman who does not promise to leave them off (5.) As
soon as there are four men or women believers in any place,
put them into a Band. (6.) Suffer no love-feast to last above
an hour and an half; and instantly stop all breaking the cake
with one another. (7.) Warn all, from time to time, that none
are to remove from one society to another without a certificate
from the Assistant in these words: (Else he will not be received
in other societies:) “A. B., the bearer, is amember of our society
in C.: I believe he has sufficient cause for removing.” I beg
every Assistant to remember this. (8.) Everywhere recommend
decency and cleanliness: Cleanliness is next to godliness. (9.)
Exhort all that were brought up in the Church, to continue
therein. Set the example yourself; and immediately change
every plan that would hinder their being at church at least two
Sundays in four. Carefully avoid whatever has a tendency to
separate men from the Church; and let all the servants in our
preaching-houses go to church once on Sunday at least.
Is there not a cause? Are we not unawares, by little and
little, sliding into a separation from the Church? O use every
means to prevent this! (1) Exhort all our people to keep
close to the Church and sacrament. (2.) Warn them all against
niceness in hearing,-a prevailing evil. (3.) Warn them also
against despising the Prayers of the Church. (4.) Against calling
our society, “the Church.” (5.) Against calling our Preachers,
“Ministers;” our Houses, “Meeting-houses:” Call them plain
preaching-houses, or chapels. (6.) Do not license them as Dis
senters. The proper paper to be sent in at the Assizes, Sessions,
or Bishop’s Court is this: “A. B. has set apart his house in C.
for public worship, of which he desires a certificate.” N.B. The
Justice does not license the house, but the Act of Parliament.
(7.) Do not license yourself till you are constrained; and
then, not as a Dissenter, but a Methodist. It is time enough
when you are prosecuted to take the oaths. And by so doing
you are licensed.
Q. 45. But are we not Dissenters?
A. No: Although we call sinners to repentance in all places
of God’s dominion; and although we frequently use extempo
rary prayer, and unite together in a religious society; yet we
are not Dissenters in the only sense which our law acknow
ledges, namely, those who renounce the service of the Church.
We do not, we dare not, separate from it. We are not Seceders,
nor do we bear any resemblance to them. We set out upon
quite opposite principles. The Seceders laid the very founda
tion of their work in judging and condemning others: We laid
thefoundation of our workin judging and condemning ourselves.
They begin everywhere with showing their hearers how fallen
the Church and Ministers are: We begin everywhere with
showing our hearers how fallen they are themselves. What
they do in America, or what their Minutes say on this sub
ject, is nothing to us. We will keep in the good old way.
And let us never make light of going to church, either by
word or deed. Remember Mr. Hook, a very eminent and
a zealous Papist. When I asked him, “Sir, what do you do
for public worship here, where you have no Romish service?”
he answered, “Sir, I am so fully convinced it is the duty of
every man to worship God in public, that I go to church
every Sunday. If I cannot have such worship as I would, I
will have such worship as I can.”
But some may say, “Our own service is public worship.”
Yes; but not such as supersedes the Church Service; it pre
supposes public prayer, like the sermons at the University.
If it were designed to be instead of the Church Service, it
would be essentially defective; for it seldom has the four
grand parts of public prayer, deprecation, petition, interces
sion, and thanksgiving.
If the people put ours in the room of the Church Service,
we hurt them that stay with us, and ruin them that leave
us; for then they will go nowhere, but lounge the Sabbath
away without any public worship at all.
Q. 46. Nay, but is it not our duty to separate from the
Church, considering the wickedness both of the Clergy and
the people?
A. We conceive not ; (1.) Because both the Priests and the
people were full as wicked in the Jewish Church; and yet it
was not the duty of the holy Israelites to separate from them.
(2.) Neither did our Lord command his disciples to separate
from them; he rather commanded the contrary. (3.) Hence it
is clear that could not be the meaning of St. Paul’s words:
“Come out from among them, and be ye separate.”
Q. 47. But what reasons are there why we should not
separate from the Church?
A. Among others, those which were printed above twenty
years ago, entitled, “Reasons against a Separation from the
Church of England.”
We allow two exceptions: (1) If the parish Minister be
a notoriously wicked man. (2.) If he preach Socinianism,
Arianism, or any other essentially false doctrine.
Q. 48. Do we sufficiently watch over our Helpers?-
A. We might consider those that are with us as our pupils;
into whose behaviour and studies we should inquire every day.
Should we not frequently ask each, Do you walk closely with
God? Have you now fellowship with the Father and the
Son? At what hour do you rise? Do you punctually
observe the morning and evening hour of retirement? Do
you spend the day in the manner which we advise? Do you
converse seriously, usefully, and closely? To be more par
ticular: Do you use all the means of grace yourself, and
enforce the use of them on all other persons?
They are either Instituted or Prudential:—
I. The INSTITUTED are,
(1.) Prayer; private, family, public; consisting of depreca
tion, petition, intercession, and thanksgiving. Do you use each
of these? Do you use private prayer every morning and even
ing? if you can, at five in the evening; and the hour before or
after morning preaching? Do you forecast daily, wherever
you are, how to secure these hours? Do you avow it every
where? Do you ask everywhere, “Have you family prayer?”
Do you retire at five o’clock?
(2.) Searching the Scriptures by,
(i.) Reading: Constantly, some part of every day; regu
larly, all the Bible in order; carefully, with the Notes;
seriously, with prayer before and after; fruitfully, imme
diately practising what you learn there?
(ii) Meditating: At set times? by any rule?
(iii.) Hearing: Every morning? carefully; with prayer
before, at, after; immediately putting in practice? Have
you a New Testament always about you?
(3.) The Lord’s supper: Do you use this at every oppor
tunity? with solemn prayer before; with earnest and delibe
rate self-devotion ?
(4.) Fasting: How do you fast every Friday?
(5.) Christian conference: Are you convinced how import
ant and how difficult it is to “order your conversation right?”
Is it “always in grace?seasoned with salt 7 meet to minister
grace to the hearers?” Do not you converse too long at a
time? Is not an hour commonly enough? Would it not be
well always to have a determinate end in view; and to pray
before and after it?
II. PRUDENTIAL MEANs we may use either as common
Christians, as Methodists, as Preachers, or as Assistants.
(1.) As common Christians. What particular rules have
you in order to grow in grace? What arts of holy living?
(2.) As Methodists. Do you never miss your class, or
Band P
(3.) As Preachers. Do you meet every society; also the
Leaders and Bands, if any?
(4.) As Assistants. Have you throughly considered your
office; and do you make a conscience of executing every part
Of it?
These means may be used without fruit: But there are
some means which cannot; namely, watching, denying our
selves, taking up our cross, exercise of the presence of God.
(1.) Do you steadily watch against the world, the devil,
yourselves, your besetting sin?
(2.) Do you deny yourself every useless pleasure of sense,
~.
>
".
imagination, honour? Are you temperate in all things”
instance in food: Do you use only that kind and that degree
which is best both for your body and soul? Do you see the
uecessity of this?
(3.) Do you eat no flesh suppers? no late suppers?
(4.) Do you eat no more at each meal than is necessary?
Are you not heavy or drowsy after dinner?
(5.) Do you use only that kind and that degree of drink
which is best both for your body and soul?
(6.) Do you drink water? Why not? Did you ever?
Why did you leave it off? If not for health, when will you
begin again? to-day?
(7.) How often do you drink wine or ale? every day? Do
you want it?
(8.) Wherein do you “take up your cross daily P” Do
you cheerfully bear your cross (whatever is grievous to
nature) as a gift of God, and labour to profit thereby ?
(9.) Do you endeavour to set God always before you; to
see his eye continually fixed upon you? Never can you use
these means but a blessing will ensue. And the more you
use them, the more will you grow in grace.
Q. 49. What can be done, in order to a closer union of
our Helpers with each other.
A. (1.) Let them be deeply convinced of the want there
is of it at present, and the absolute necessity of it.
(2.) Let them pray for a desire of union.
(3.) Let them speak freely to each other.
(4.) When they meet, let them never part without prayer.
(5.) Let them beware how they despise each other's gifts.
(6.) Let them never speak slightingly of each other in any
sind.
(7.) Let them defend one another's characters in every
thing, so far as consists with truth: And,
(8.) Let them labour in honour each to prefer the other
before himself.
Q. 50. How shall we try those who think they are moved
by the Holy Ghost to preach P
A. Inquire, (1.) Do they know God as a pardoning God?
Have they the love of God abiding in them? Do they desire
and seek nothing but God? And are they holy in all manner
of conversation? (2.) Have they gifts (as well as grace) for
the work? Have they (in some tolerable degree) a clear, sound
understanding? Have they a right judgment in the things of
God? Have they a just conception of salvation by faith? And
has God given them any degree of utterance? Do they speak
justly, readily, clearly? (3.) Have they fruit? Are any truly
convinced of sin, and converted to God, by their preaching?
As long as these three marks concur in any one, we believe
he is called of God to preach. These we receive as sufficient
proof that he is “moved thereto by the Holy Ghost.”
Q. 51. What method may we use in receiving a new Helper?
A. A proper time for doing this is at a Conference after
solemn fasting and prayer.
Every person proposed is then to be present; and each of
them may be asked,—Have you faith in Christ? Are you
“going on to perfection?” Do you expect to be “perfected
in love” in this life? Are you groaning after it? Are you
resolved to devote yourself wholly to God and to his work?
Do you know the Methodist plan? Have you read the
“Plain Account?” the “Appeals?” Do you know the
Rules of the Society? of the Bands? Do you keep them?
Do you take no snuff, tobacco, drams? Do you constantly
attend the church and sacrament? Have you read the “Min
utes of the Conference?” Are you willing to conform to them?
Have you considered the Rules of a Helper; especially the First,
Tenth, and Twelfth? Will you keep them for conscience sake?
Are you determined to employall your time in the work of God?
Will you preach every morning and evening; endeavouring
not to speak too long, or too loud 7 Will you diligently in
struct the children in every place? Will you visit from house
to house? Will you recommend fasting, both by precept and
example? Are you in debt? Are you engaged to marry?
(N.B. A Preacher who marries while on trial, is thereby
set aside.)
We may then receive him as a probationer, by giving him
the “Minutes of the Conference,” inscribed thus:
* TO A. B.
“You think it your duty to call sinners to repentance.
Make full proof hereof, and we shall rejoice to receive you as
a fellow-labourer.”
Let him then read and carefully weigh what is contained
therein, that if he has any doubt it may be removed.
Observe: Taking on trial is entirely different from admitting
a Preacher. One on trial may be either admitted or rejected,
without doing him any wrong; otherwise it would be no trial at
all. Let every Assistant explain this to them that are on trial
When he has been on trial four years, if recommended by the
Assistant, he may be received into full connexion, by giving him.
the “Minutes,” inscribed thus: “As long as you freely consent
to, and earnestly endeavour to walk by, these Rules, we shall
rejoice to acknowledge you as a fellow-labourer.” Meantime,
let none exhort in any of our societies, without a note of per
mission from the Assistant. Let every Exhorter take care to
have this renewed yearly; and let every Assistant insist upon it.
Q. 52. What is the method wherein we usually procced in
our Conferences P
A. We inquire,
(1.) What Preachers are admitted? Who remain on trial?
Who are admitted on trial P Who desist from travelling P
(2.) Are there any objections to any of the Preachers?
who are named one by one.
(3.) How are the Preachers stationed this year?
(4.) What numbers are in the society?
(5.) What is the Kingswood collection?
(6.) What boys are received this year?
(7.) What girls are assisted?
(8.) What is contributed for the contingent expenses?
(9.) How was this expended ?
(10.) What is contributed toward the fund for super
annuated and supernumerary Preachers?
(11.) What demands are there upon it?
(12.) How many Preachers' wives are to be provided for?
By what societies?
(13.) Where and when may our next Conference begin?
Q. 53. How can we provide for superannuated and super
numerary Preachers?
A. Those who can preach four or five times a week are
supernumerary Preachers. As for those who cannot,
(1.) Let every Travelling Preacher contribute half-a-guinea
yearly at the Conference.
(2.) Let every one when first admitted as a Travelling
Preacher pay a guinea.
(3) Let this be lodged in the hands of the Stewards.
(4.) The present Stewards are John Murlin and John
Pawson.
(5.) Out of this let provision be made, first for the worn
out Preachers, and then for the widows and children of those
that are dead.
(6.) Every worn-out Preacher shall receive, if he wants it,
at least ten pounds a-year.
(7.) Every widow of a Preacher shall receive yearly, if she
wants it, during her widowhood, a sum not usually exceeding
ten pounds.
(8.) Every child left by a Preacher shall receive, once for
all, a sum not usually exceeding ten pounds.
(9.) But none is entitled to anything from this fund, till
he has subscribed two guineas.
(10.) Nor any who neglects paying his subscription for
four years together.
(11.) Let every Preacher who does not bring or send his sub
scription to the Conference, be fined two shillings and sixpence.
(12.) Let the fund never be reduced to less than a hun
dred pounds.
(13.) Let a Committee be named to see these Rules duly
executed. The present Committee are,—Christopher Hopper,
Thomas Coke, Thomas Hanby, John Allen, Robert Roberts,
Henry Moore, Thomas Taylor, William Thompson, Andrew
Blair.
(14.) Let an exact account of all receipts and disbursements
be produced at the Conference.
(15.) Let every Assistant bring to the Conference the
contribution of every Preacher in his Circuit.
Q. 54. Are not many of the Preachers' wives still straitened
for the necessaries of life?
A. Some certainly have been. To prevent this for the time
to come, (1.) Let every Circuit either provide each with a lodg
ing, coals, and candles, or allow her fifteen pounds a year. (2.)
Let the Assistant take this money at the Quarterly Meeting,
before anything else be paid out of it. Fail not to do this.
Q. 55. How can we account for the decrease of the work
of God in some Circuits, both this year and the last?
A. It may be owing either, (1.) To the want of zeal and
exactness in the Assistant, occasioning want of discipline
throughout: Or (2.) To want of life and diligence in the
Preachers: Or (3.) To our people’s losing the life of God,
and sinking into the spirit of the world.
It may be owing, farther, to the want of more field-preaching,
and of trying more new places.
Q. 56. What can be done in order to revive the work of God
where it is decayed?
A. (1.) Let every Preacher read carefully over the “Life of
David Brainerd.” Let us be followers of him, as he was of
Christ, in absolute self-devotion, in total deadness to the world,
and in fervent love to God and man. Let us but secure this
point, and the world and the devil must fall under our feet.
(2.) Let both Assistants and Preachers be conscientiously
exact in the whole Methodist discipline.-
(3.) See that no Circuit be at any time without Preachers.
Therefore let no Preacher, who does not attend the Confer
ence, leave the Circuit, at that time, on any pretence what
ever. This is the most improper time in the whole year.
Let every Assistant see to this, and require each of these to
remain in the Circuit till the new Preachers come.
Let not all the Preachers in any Circuit come to the
Conference.
Let those who do come, set out as late and return as soon as
possible.
(4.) Wherever you can, appoint prayer-meetings, and par
ticularly on Friday.
(5.) Let a fast be observed in all our societies, the last
Friday in August, November, February, and May.
(6.) Be more active in dispersing the books, particularly the
sermon on “The Good Steward,” on “Indwelling Sin,” “The
Repentance of Believers,” and “The Scripture Way of Salva
tion.” Every Assistant may give away small tracts: And he
may beg money of the rich to buy books for the poor.
(7.) Strongly and explicitly exhort all believers to “go on to
perfection.” That we may “all speak the same thing,” I ask,
once for all, Shall we defend this Perfection, or give it up?
Youall agree to defend it, meaning thereby, (as we did from the
beginning,) salvation from all sin, by the love of God and man
filling our heart. The Papists say, “This cannot be attained,
till we have been refined by the fire of purgatory.” The Calvin
ists say, “Nay, it will be attained as soon as the soul and body
part.” The old Methodists say, “It may be attained before we
die: A moment after is too late.” Is it so or not? You are
all agreed, we may be saved from all sin before death. The
substance then is settled; but, as to the circumstance, is the
change gradual or instantaneous? It is both the one and the
other. From the moment we are justified, there may be a
gradual sanctification, a growing in grace, a daily advance in
the knowledge and love of God. And if sin cease before
death, there must, in the nature of the thing, be an instan
taneous change; there must be a last moment wherein it does
exist, and a first moment wherein it does not. “But should
we in preaching insist both on one and the other?” Certainly
we must insist on the gradual change; and that earnestly and
continually. And are there not reasons why we should insist
on the instantaneous also? If there be such a blessed change
before death, should we not encourage all believers to expect
it? and the rather, because constant experience shows, the
more earnestly they expect this, the more swiftly and steadily
does the gradual work of God go on in their soul; the more
watchful they are against all sin, the more careful to grow in
grace, the more zealous of good works, and the more punctual.
in their attendance on all the ordinances of God. Whereas,
just the contrary effects are observed whenever this expectation
ceases. They are “saved by hope,” by this hope of a total
change, with a gradually increasing salvation. Destroy this
hope, and that salvation stands still, or, rather, decreases daily.
Therefore whoever would advance the gradual change in
believers should strongly insist on the instantaneous.
Q. 57. What can be done to increase the work of God in
Scotland?
A. (1.) Preach abroad as much as possible. (2.) Try every
town and village, (3) Visit every member of the society at
home.
Q. 58. How many Circuits are there now?
A. Of America we have no late account. There are seventy
four Circuits in England, Wales, and the Isle of Man; seven
in Scotland, and twenty-eight in Ireland.
Q. 59. Are our preaching-houses safe?
A. Not all; for some of them are not settled on Trustees.
Several of the Trustees for others are dead.
Q. 60. What then is to be done?
A. (1.) Let those who have debts on any of the Houses give
a bond, to settle them as soon as they are indemnified. (2.)
Let the surviving Trustees choose others without delay, by
endorsing their deed thus:
“We, the remaining Trustees of the Methodist preaching
house in , do, according to the power vested in us by this
deed, choose place of•
to be Trustees of the said House, in the
Witness our hands .”
N. B. The deed must have three new stamps, and must be
enrolled in Chancery within six months.
Q. 61. In what form may a House be settled?
A. In the following, which was drawn by three of the most
eminent Lawyers in London. Whoever therefore objects to
it, only betrays his own ignorance.
“The Indenture made , between Benjamin Heap, of
—,in the county of , on theone part, and Thomas Philips,
hatter, &c., on the other part, witnesseTH, That inconsideration
of five shillings, lawful money of Great Britain, by the said T.P.,
&c., tothesaid B.H., truly paid, before the sealing and delivering
hereof, (the receipt whereof the said B. H. doth hereby acknow
ledge,) andfordivers other considerationshim thereuntomoving,
the said B. H. hath granted, bargained, and sold, and by these
presents doth bargain and sell unto the said T. P., &c., their
heirs and assigns for ever, all that lately erected House or
tenement, with the yard thereunto adjoining, situate , in
, aforesaid, now in the tenure or occupation of*
together with all the ways, drains, and privileges to the said
premises appertaining, and all the profits thereof, with all the
right, title, and interest in law and equity: To HAVE AND To
Hold the said house, yard, and other premises, to the said
T. P., &c., their heirs and assigns for ever. NEvERTHELEss,
upon special trust and confidence, and to the intent, that they
and the survivors of them, and the Trustees for the time being,
do and shall permit John Wesley, of the City-Road, London,
Clerk, and such other persons as he shall from time to time
appoint, at all times, during his natural life, and no other
persons, to have and enjoy the free use and benefit of the said
premises; that the said John Wesley, and such other persons
as he appoints, may therein preach and expound God’s holy
word. And after his decease, upon further trust and confidence,
and to the intent, that the said T. P., &c., or the major part of
them, or the survivors of them, and the major part of the
Trustees of the said premises for the time being, shall, from
time to time, and at all times for ever, permit such persons as
shall be appointed at the yearly Conference of the people called
Methodists, in London, Bristol, Leeds, Manchester, or else
where, specified by name in a Deed enrolled in Chancery, under
the hand and seal of the said John Wesley, and bearing date
the 28th day of February, 1784, and no others, to have and to
enjoy the said premises, for the purposes aforesaid: Provided
always, that the persons preach no other doctrine than is con
tained in Mr. Wesley's ‘Notes upon the New Testament, and
four volumes of ‘Sermons. And upon farther trust and confi
dence, that, as often as any of these Trustees, or the Trustees
for the time being, shall die, or cease to be a member of the
society commonly called Methodists, the rest of the said Trus
tees, or of the Trustees for the time being, as soon as conveni
ently may be, shall and may choose another Trustee or Trus
tees, in order to keep up the number of Trustees for ever.
In witness whereof, the said B. H. hath hereunto set his hand
and seal, the day and year above-written.”
In this form the proprietors of the House are to make it
over to five, seven, or nine Trustees.
Q. 62. But is this form a safe one? Should we not have
the opinion of a Counsel upon it?
A. I think this would be throwing money away; (1.) Because
this form was drawn up by three eminent Counsellors: But,
(2.) It is the way of almost every Lawyer to blame what another
has done. Therefore, you cannot at all infer, that they think a
thing wrong, because they say so. (3.) If they did in reality
think it wrong, this would not prove it was so. (4.) If there
was (which I do not believe) some defect therein, who would go
to law with the body of Methodists? But, (5.) If they did,
would any Court in England put them out of possession; espe
cially when the intent of the deed was plain and undeniable?
Q. 63. Is anything farther advisable with regard to building?
A. (1.) Build all preaching-houses, where the ground will
permit, in the octagon form. It is best for the voice, and, on
many accounts, more commodious than any other. (2.) Why
should not any octagon House be built after the model of Yarm?
any square House, after the model of Bath or Scarborough?
Can we find any better model? (3.) Let the roof rise only
one-third of its breadth: This is the true proportion. (4.)
Have doors and windows enough; and let all the windows be
sashes, opening downward. (5.) Let there be no Chinese
paling, and no tub-pulpit, but a square projection, with a long
seat behind. (6.) Let there be no pews, and no backs to the
seats, which should have aisles on each side, and be parted in
the middle by a rail running all along, to divide the men from
the women; just as at Bath. (7.) Let all preaching-houses
be built plain and decent; but not more expensive than is
absolutely unavoidable: Otherwise the necessity of raising
money will make rich men necessary to us. But if so, we
must be dependent upon them, yea, and governed by them.
And then farewell to the Methodist discipline, if not doctrine
too. (8.) Wherever a preaching-house is built, see that
lodgings for the Preachers be built also.
Q. 64. Is there any exception to the rule, “Let the men
and women sit apart?”
A. In those galleries where they have always sat together,
they may do so still. Butlet them sit apart everywhere below,
and in all new-erected galleries.
Q. 65. But how can we secure their sitting apart there?
A. I must do it myself. If I come into any new House,
and see the men and women together, I will immediately go out.
I hereby give public notice of this: Pray let it be observed.
Q. 66. But there is a worse indecency than this creeping in
among us,—talking in the preaching-houses, before and after
service. How shall this be cured ?
A. Let all the Preachers join as one man, and the very next
Sunday they preach in any place, enlarge on the impropriety
of talking before or after service, and strongly exhort them to
do it no more. In three months, if we are in earnest, this
vile practice will be banished out of every Methodist congre
gation. Let none stop till he has carried his point.
Q. 67. Is there not another shocking indecency frequently
practised by filthy men against the wall of a preaching-house;
enough to make any modest woman blush?
A. There is: But I beg any one who sees another do this
will give him a hearty clap on the back.
Q. 68. Complaint has been made that sluts spoil our
houses. How may we prevent this?
A. Let none that has spoiled one, ever live in another. But
what a shame is this! A Preacher's wife should be a pattern of
cleanliness in her person, clothes, and habitation. Let nothing
slatternly be seen about her; no rags, no dirt, no litter. And
she should be a pattern of industry; always at work, either
for herself, her husband, or the poor. I am not willing any
should live in the Orphan-House at Newcastle, or any
preaching-house, who does not conform to this rule.
Q. 69. It has been complained also, that people crowd into
the Preachers' houses, as into coffee-houses, without any invita
tion. Is this right?
A. It is utterly wrong. Stop it at once. Let no person
come into the Preacher's house, unless he wants to ask a
question.
Q. 70. May any new preaching-houses be built?
A. Not unless, (1.) They are proposed at the Conference:
No, nor (2.) Unless two-thirds of the expense be subscribed.
And if any collection be made for them, it must be made between
the Conference and the beginning of February.
Q. 71. What can be done to make the Methodists sensible
of the excellency of Kingswood School?
A. Let every Assistant read the following account of it
yearly in every congregation:—
(1.) The wisdom and love of God have now thrust out a
large number of labourers into His harvest; men who desire
nothing on earth but to promote the glory of God, by saving
their own souls and those that hear them. And those to whom
they minister spiritual things are willing to minister to them of
their carnal things; so that they “ have food to eat, and rai
ment to put on,” and are content therewith.
(2.) A competent provision is likewise made for the wives
of married Preachers. These also lack nothing, having a
weekly allowance over and above for their little children; so
that neither they nor their husbands need to be “careful about
many things,” but may “wait upon the Lord without dis
traction.”
(3.) Yet one considerable difficulty lies on those that have
boys, when they grow too big to be under their mother's direc
tion. Having no father to govern and instruct them, they are
exposed to a thousand temptations. To remedy this, we have
a school on purpose for them, wherein they have all the instruc
tion they are capable of, together with all things necessary for
the body, clothes only excepted. And it may be, if God pros
per this labour of love, they will have these too, shortly.
(4) In whatever view we look upon this, it is one of the
noblest charities that can be conceived. How reasonable is the
Institution | Is it fit that the children of those who leave wife,
and all that is dear, to save souls from death, should want what
is needful either for soul or body? Ought not we to supply
what the parent cannot, because of his labours in the gospel?
How excellent are the effects of this Institution | The Preacher
eased of this weight, can the more cheerfully go on in his
labour. And perhaps many of these children may hereafter fill
up the place of those that shall “rest from their labours.”
(5.) It is not strange therefore, considering the excellence of
this design, that Satan should have taken much pains to defeat
it, particularly by lies of every kind, which were plentifully
invented and handed about for several years. But truth now
generally prevails, and its adversaries are put to silence. It is
well known that the children want nothing; that they scarce
know what sickness means; that they are well instructed in
whatever they are capable of learning; that they are care
fully and tenderly governed; and that the behaviour of all
in the house, elder and younger, is “as becometh the gospel
of Christ.”
(6.) But the expense of such an undertaking is very large,
so that we are ill able to defray it. The best means we could
think of at our Conference to supply the deficiency, is, once
a year to desire the assistance of all those in every place,
who wish well to the work of God; who long to sec sinners
converted to God, and the kingdom of Christ set up in all
the earth.
(7.) All of you who are thus minded have an opportunity
now of showing your love to the gospel. Now promote, as far
as in you lies, one of the noblest charities in the world. Now
forward, as you are able, one of the most excellent designs
that ever was set on foot in this kingdom. Do what you can
to comfort the parents who give up their all for you, and to
give their children cause to bless you. You will be no poorer
for what you do on such an occasion. God is a good pay
master. And you know, in doing this, you lend unto the
Lord : In due time he shall pay you again.
Q. 72. But how can we keep out of debt?
A. Let a collection be made for this school the Sunday
before or after Midsummer, in every preaching-house, great
and small, throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland.
Q. 73. How may we raise a general fund for carrying on
the whole work of God?
A. By a yearly subscription to be proposed by every
Assistant when he visits the classes at Christmas, and
received at the visitation following.
To this end he may then read and enlarge upon the
following hints in every society:—
(1.) How shall we send labourers into those parts where
they are most of all wanted? suppose the North-West of
Ireland, and the North of Scotland. Many are willing to
hear, but not to bear the expense. Nor can it as yet be
expected of them: Stay till the word of God has touched their
hearts, and then they will gladly provide for them that preach
it. Does it not lie upon us, in the mean time, to supply their
lack of service? to raise a general fund, out of which, from time
to time, that expense may be defrayed? By this means those
who willingly offer themselves may travel through every part,
and stay wherever there is a call, without being burdensome
to any. Thus may the gospel, in the life and power thereof,
be spread from sea to sea. Which of you will not rejoice to
throw in your mite, to promote this glorious work?
(2.) Besides this, in carrying on so large a work through
the three kingdoms, there are calls for money in various ways,
and we must frequently be at considerable expense, or the
work must be at a full stop. Many too are the occasional
distresses of our Preachers or their families, which require an
immediate supply. Otherwise their hands would hang down,
if they were not constrained to depart from the work.
(3.) Let then every member of our society once a year set
his shoulder to the work; contributing more or less as God
hath prospered him, at the Lady-Day visitation of the classes.
Let none be excluded from giving something,-be it a penny,
a halfpenny, a farthing. Remember the widow’s two mites !
And let those who are able to give shillings, crowns, and
pounds, do it willingly. The money contributed will be
brought to the ensuing Conference.
(4) Men and brethren, help ! Was there ever a call like
this, since you first heard the gospel sound? Help to relieve
your companions in the kingdom of Jesus, who are pressed
above measure.
“Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of
Christ.” Help to send forth able, willing labourers into your
Lord’s harvest: So shall ye be assistant in saving souls from
death, and hiding a multitude of sins. Help to spread the
gospel of your salvation into the remotest corners of the king
dom, till “the knowledge of our Lord shall cover the land, as
the waters cover the sea.” So shall it appear to ourselves, and
all men, that we are indeed one body, united by one spirit; so
shall the baptized Heathens be yet again constrained to say,
“See how these Christians love one another l” In this may
not even the Romanists provoke us to jealousy ? They have
a general fund at Rome, and another at Paris, which bears all
the expenses of their Missionaries throughout all the world.
Q. 74. What is the direct antidote to Methodism, the
doctrine of heart-holiness?
A. Calvinism: All the devices of Satan, for these fifty years,
have done far less toward stopping this work of God, than that
single doctrine. It strikes at the root of salvation from sin,
previous to glory, putting the matter on quite another issue.
Q. 75. But wherein lie the charms of this doctrine?
What makes men swallow it so greedily?
A. (1.) It seems to magnify Christ; although in reality it
supposes him to have died in vain. For the absolutely elect
must have been saved without him; and the non-elect cannot
be saved by him.
(2.) It is highly pleasing to flesh and blood, final perse
verance in particular.
Q. 76. What can be done to guard against it?
A. (1.) Let all our Preachers carefully read over ours and
Mr. Fletcher’s Tracts.-
(2.) Let them frequently and explicitly preach the truth,
though not in a controversial way. But let them take care
to do it in love and gentleness; not in bitterness, not
returning railing for railing: Let those who preach it have
all this to themselves.
(3) Do not imitate them in screaming, allegorizing, boast
ing: Rather mildly expose these things when time serves.
(4) Imitate them in this: They readily seize upon any
one that is newly convinced or converted. Be diligent to
prevent them, and to guard those tender minds against the
predestinarian poison.
(5.) Answer all their objections, as occasion offers, both in
public and private. But take care to do this with all possible
sweetness both of look and of accent.
(6.) Very frequently, both in public and private, advise our
people not to hear them.
(7) Make it matter of constant and earnest prayer, that
God would stop the plague.
Q. 77. We said in 1744, “We have leaned too much
toward Calvinism.” Wherein?
A. (1.) With regard to man’s faithfulness. Our Lord him
self taught us to use the expression: Therefore we ought never
to be ashamed of it. We ought steadily to assert upon his
authority, that if a man is not “faithful in the unrighteous
mammon, God will not give him the true riches.”
(2.) With regard to “working for life,” which our Lord
expressly commands us to do. “Labour,” epyašeaffe, literally,
“work, for the meat that endureth to everlasting life.” And
in fact, every believer, till he comes to glory, works for as
well as from life.
(3.) We have received it as a maxim, that “a man is to do
nothing in order to justification.” Nothing can be more
false. Whoever desires to find favour with God, should
“cease from evil, and learn to do well.” So God himself
teaches by the Prophet Isaiah. Whoever repents, should
“do works meet for repentance.” And if this is not in order
to find favour, what does he do them for ?
Once more review the whole affair:
(1.) Who of us is now accepted of God?
He that now believes in Christ with a loving, obedient heart.
(2.) But who among those that never heard of Christ?
He that, according to the light he has, “feareth God and
worketh righteousness.”
(3.) Is this the same with “he that is sincere?”
Nearly, if not quite.
(4.) Is not this salvation by works?
Not by the merit of works, but by works as a condition.
(5.) What have we then been disputing about for these
thirty years?
I am afraid about words, namely, in some of the foregoing
instances.
(6.) As to merit itself, of which we have been so dreadfully
afraid: We are rewarded according to our works, yea, because
of our works. How does this differ from, “for the sake of
our works?” And how differs this from secundum merita
operum ? which is no more than, “as our works deserve.”
Can you split this hair? I doubt I cannot.
(7.) The grand objection to one of the preceding propositions
is drawn from matter of fact. God does in fact justify those who,
by their own confession, neither “feared God” nor “wrought
righteousness.” Is this an exception to the general rule P
It is a doubt whether God makes any exception at all. But
how are we sure that the person in question never did fear
God and work righteousness? His own thinking so is no
proof. For we know how all that are convinced of sin under
value themselves in every respect.
(8.) Does not talking, without proper caution, of a justified
or sanctified state, tend to mislead men; almost naturally
leading them to trust in what was done in one moment?
Whereas we are every moment pleasing or displeasing to God,
according to our works; according to the whole of our present
