The Advantage of the Members of the Church of England over Those of the Church of Rome
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
I LAY this down as an undoubted truth:—The more the
doctrine of any Church agrees with the Scripture, the more
readily ought it to be received. And, on the other hand, the
more the doctrine of any Church differs from the Scripture,
the greater cause we have to doubt of it.
2. Now, it is a known principle of the Church of England,
that nothing is to be received as an article of faith, which is
not read in the Holy Scripture, or to be inferred therefrom
by just and plain consequence. Hence it follows, that every
Christian has a right to know and read the Scripture, that he
may be sure what he hears from his teachers agrees with the
revealed word of God.
3. On the contrary, at the very beginning of the Reform
ation, the Church of Rome began to oppose this principle,
that all articles of faith must be provable from Scripture, (till
then received throughout the whole Christian world,) and to
add, if not prefer, to Holy Scripture, tradition, or the
doctrine of Fathers and Councils, with the decrees of Popes.
And soon after she determined in the Council of Trent,
“that the Old and New Testament, and the traditions of the
Church, ought to be received pari pietatis affectu ac
reverentia, “with equal piety and reverence;’” and that “it
suffices for laymen if they believe and practise what the
Church believes and requires, whether they understand the
ground of that doctrine and practice or not.” (Sess. 4.)
4. How plain is it that this remedy was found out because
they themselves observed that many doctrines, practices, and
ceremonies of their Church, not only could not be proved by
Scripture, but were flatly contradictory thereto?
As to the Fathers and Councils, we cannot but observe,
that in an hundred instances they contradict one another:
Consequently, they can no more be a rule of faith to us, than
the Papal decrees, which are not grounded on Scripture.
5. But the Church of Rome does not stop here. She not
only makes tradition of equal authority with the Scripture,
but also takes away the Scripture from the people, and
denies them the use of it.
For, soon after, her writers began to teach, yea, and assert
in entire volumes, “that the Scripture is obscure, and hard to
be understood; that it gives an handle to error and heresies;
that it is not a perfect or sufficient rule of life; that it ought
to be understood no otherwise than the Church, that is, the
Pope, explains it; that, consequently, the reading the
Scripture is of more hurt than use to the generality of
Christians.”
And, in fact, they not only publicly spoke against the
reading the Holy Scriptures, but in most countries absolutely
forbad the laity to read them, yea, and the Clergy too, till
they were ordered to preach.
And if any did read it without a particular license, they
condemned and punished it as a great crime.
6. Thus the case stands to this day; yea, the late contro
versies in France make it undeniably plain, that the Church
of Rome does now labour, more earnestly than ever, to take
away the use of the Scriptures, even from those who have
hitherto enjoyed them.
Seeing, therefore, the Church of England contends for the
word of God, and the Church of Rome against it, it is easy
to discern on which side the advantage lies, with regard to
the grand principle of Christianity.
7. But that it may more clearly appear how widely the
Church of Rome differs from the Holy Scriptures, we have
set down a few instances wherein they flatly contradict the
written word of God.
Thus the Church of Rome, after acknowledging that the
Apostle terms concupiscence sin, yet scruples not to add
immediately, “The Catholic Church never understood that
this is truly and properly sin; and if any think the contrary,
let him be accursed.” (Conc. Trid, Sess. 5.)
Thus, although Christ himself says to all his disciples,
“Without me ye can do nothing,” yet the Church of Rome
condemns this very proposition as false and heretical:—“The
grace of Jesus Christ, the effectual principle of all good, is
necessary to every good work. Not only nothing good is done
without it, but nothing can be done.” (In the Bull Unigenitus.)
8. In like manner, the Church of Rome does not scruple
to impose upon the consciences of men, in the doctrine of the
mass, various traditions, that have no authority from holy
writ; and also takes away the cup in the Lord’s supper from
the laity, contrary to the plain institution of Christ, as well as
to the acknowledged custom of the primitive Church. Whence
it manifestly appears, that it is not the design of the Roman
Church to conform itself to the rule of the written word.
9. Again: The Church of Rome pronounces all those
accursed who say, “that baptism, confirmation, the Lord’s
supper, penance, extreme unction, orders, and matrimony,
are not sacraments instituted by Christ himself; or, that
there are more or fewer sacraments than seven; or, that any
of these is not truly and properly a sacrament; or, that they
do not confer grace barely by the work done.” (Conc. Trid,
Sess. 7.)
136 cHURCH or ENGLAND’s ADvANTAGE
Now, whereas these positions cannot be proved by
Scripture, and yet are enjoined to be believed under pain of
an anathema, it is hence also plain, that the Church of Rome
does purposely teach, and also maintain by open force, things
which partly are not founded on holy writ, partly are
contrary thereto.
10. As to their sacraments in particular, it is easy to show
that they require in each of them such doctrines and customs
to be received, as are wholly unsupported by, if not also
contrary to, the word of God.
For example: They teach, that in baptism “the right
intention of the Minister is so indispensably necessary, that
if it be wanting the baptized receives no benefit; that
confirmation was a true and proper sacrament from the
beginning; (ibid.;) that in the Lord’s supper the bread and
wine are converted into the natural body and blood of
Christ; that every particle of what is consecrated is no
longer bread, but the entire body of Christ; that it ought to
be worshipped and adored; and that the laity ought not to
receive the cup.” (Sess. 13, 22.)
In penance: “That a full confession of all our sins to the
Priest is absolutely necessary, or they cannot be pardoned;
that the penances imposed, (such as pilgrimages, whipping
themselves, and the like,) do meritoriously co-operate toward
the forgiveness of sins; that this forgiveness is obtained, not
through the merits of Christ alone, but also through the
merits and intercession of the Virgin Mary and other saints;
that extreme unction is a true and proper sacrament
instituted by Christ; that the oil blessed by the Bishop eases
the soul of the sick, and preserves him from the temptations
of the devil;” (Sess. 14;) “that ordination is a true and
proper sacrament, instituted by Christ; that an indelible
character is given thereby; that there were from the begin
ning those seven orders in the Church,-Priest, Deacon,
Sub-Deacon, acolythe, exorcist, reader, and door-keeper;
that the proper business of a Priest is, to consecrate and offer
the body and blood of Christ, and to remit or retain sins in
the chair of confession; that marriage is a true and proper
sacrament, instituted by Christ; that, nevertheless, marriage
may be dissolved by either party’s entering into a convent,
even against the consent of the other; that it is unlawful for
any of the Clergy to marry.” (Sess. 23.)
11. Now, seeing all these doctrines are unsupported by, if
not also contrary to, the word of God, which yet the Church
of Rome requires to be received as true, and pronounces all
accursed who do not receive them, we cannot but conclude
that the Church of England enjoys an unspeakable advantage
over the Church of Rome, with respect to her doctrines,
which are wholly agreeable to, and founded on, the written
word of God.
12. The advantage of the Church of England over the
Church of Rome is equally great with regard to public worship.
For it is manifest that the public worship of the Roman
Church is wholly degenerated from the nature of Christ's
kingdom and the simplicity of the first Christians: That at
present it consists in magnificent buildings, altars, images,
ornaments, and habits; in splendid ceremonies; in processions
and pilgrimages, and prayers in an unknown tongue; and in
reciting the Creed, the Lord’s Prayer, and the Ave-Maria,
over and over, according to the number of their beads: That
they are not instructed to “worship God in spirit and in
truth,” as their loving and most beloved Father; and to praise
him, and comfort one another, with psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs: That their souls are not edified by sermons
and catechising out of the word of God, the Scriptures being
cited very sparingly in their sermons, and generally in a
strained and allegorical sense: That they are not permitted
to search the Scriptures at home, and seek food for their
souls therein: That the common people are by this means
purposely kept in the grossest ignorance and superstition.
13. It is manifest also that they are held in doubt as to the
salvation both of the living and the dead, by the doctrine of
purgatory; that hereby the minds of those who want to be
assured of the state of their souls, are disquieted and disturbed;
that pardon of sins, release from punishment due thereto,
and redemption from purgatory by masses and indulgences,
either for the living or dead, are daily sold for money.
14. It is no less manifest that their trust in Christ alone, the
one Mediator between God and man, is hindered so much the
more, the more the people are referred to the merits and inter
cession of the blessed Virgin, and other saints; the more they
are taught to adore their images and relics; to make vows to
them, and to implore their help in any trouble; yea, and to
place therein a very considerable part of their worship and
devotion; as well as in a bare outward observance of saints’
days, and other festivals of the Church, and in the abstaining
from some particular kinds of meat on what they call fast-days.
15. All these practices, wholly unsupported by Scripture,
the Church of Rome retains to this day; at the same time
that she rejects and pronounces accursed all (whether practices
or doctrines) that make against her, be they ever so plainly
contained in, and grounded on, the word of God.
Our Reformers seeing this, judged it needful to inquire
whether it could be proved by holy writ that the Bishop of
Rome is the successor of St. Peter; that he is Christ's Vicar
upon earth, and the visible head of the Church; that he has
a right of interpreting the word of God according to his own
pleasure; to introduce and prohibit doctrines, besides and
against the written word; to license things which the Scrip
ture forbids; to exercise a spiritual, and in many cases a
secular, power over all Christians,—Kings and Emperors not
excepted; to anathematize all that oppose his will, depose
Princes, and absolve subjects from their allegiance; to
pronounce heretics, to curse, kill, torture, and burn alive, all
who do not submit to him in every point.
16. Some of the reasons they had to doubt of these things
were those which follow:—
That neither St. Peter, nor any of the ancient Bishops, had
the same doctrine or manner of governing the Church which
the Bishop of Rome now has, as is clear both from the
Epistles of St. Peter, from the Acts of the Apostles, and the
ancient ecclesiastical history; that Christ alone “is made of
God Head over all things to the Church,” (Eph. i. 22; iv.
15; Col. i. 18,) who is “with them always, even to the end
of the world;” that the kingdom of Christ, being not of this
world, bears no resemblance to the hierarchy and monarchy
of the Papal kingdom; that the possessing the See of Rome
no more proves the Pope to be the successor of St. Peter,
than the possessing the city of Constantinople proves the
Great Turk to be the successor of Constantine the Great;
that if the Pope were the Vicar of Christ, (which is not yet
proved,) still he would have no authority to change or
abrogate the laws of his Lord and King; much less to make
laws just contrary to them, or to exempt any from obeying
the laws of Christ; that attempts of this kind denote an
adversary, rather than a faithful and upright Vicar, of Christ.
17. They doubt of these things the more, because the
primitive Church knew of no such thing as an universal
head; because no Bishop was acknowledged as such at the
time of the Council of Nice; because Gregory the Great
declared, he should account any man to be antichrist who
called himself by such a title; because it is apparent, that
Boniface III., the next Pope but one to him, about the year
606, was the first to whom the title of universal Bishop was
given, as a reward for his absolving the tyrant Phocas, after
he had murdered his master, the Emperor Mauritius, with
his Empress, and eight children; because the succeeding
Popes acquired one part of their power after another, by
various methods, either of fraud or force; because many of
them have been notoriously wicked men, and encouragers of
all manner of wickedness; notwithstanding all which, men
are required to believe that they are all enlightened by the
Holy Ghost, in so extraordinary a manner as to be rendered
infallible; although one Pope is continually contradicting
another, and reversing the decrees which his predecessors had
most solemnly established.
18. When the Romanists are desired to prove by
Scripture, that the Pope is the head of the Church, they urge,
that Christ said to St. Peter, (1) “I will give unto thee the
keys of the kingdom of heaven.” (2.) “Feed my lambs;
feed my sheep.” Therefore we answer, These texts by no
means prove that Christ made St. Peter himself his Vicar;
much less that he gave that dominion to the Pope, which he
now usurps over the consciences of men. And hence we are
the more clearly convinced, that the papal power is not of
divine original; and that we have great cause to bless God,
whom the Pope has excluded from his communion, and
thereby restored to that unshaken liberty of conscience
wherein, by the grace of God, we shall always stand.
19. In this liberty every member of our Church, if he gives
himself up to the guidance of God's Holy Spirit, may learn
the foundation of his faith from the written word of God;
may read and meditate therein day and night; may devoutly
pray in the Spirit of adoption, like the holy men of ancient
times; may comfort and quicken himself and others, with
psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs; may enjoy all the
ordinances of Christ, according to his own institution; may
be assured of the remission of his sins, and of his justification
through faith in Christ, the Spirit of God witnessing with his
spirit that he is a child of God; may study to have a con
science void of offence, both toward God and toward man:
He may freely enjoy every blessing which God hath bestowed
upon our own Church; and may make advantage of whatever
good the providence of God has still preserved in the Church
of Rome: He may cheerfully look for a happy death, and a
blessed eternity; and at length, by resting on Christ alone,
and patiently partaking of his sufferings, he may, with certain
hope of a resurrection to eternal life, without any fear either
of purgatory or hell, resign his spirit into the hand of God,
and so be ever with the Lord.
