A Letter to the Rev. Mr. Potter
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 9 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. TILL to-day I had not a sight of your sermon, “On
the Pretended Inspiration of the Methodists.” Otherwise I
should have taken the liberty, some days sooner, of sending you
a few lines. That sermon, indeed, only repeats what has been
often said before, and as often answered. But as it is said again,
I believe it is my duty to answer it again. Not that I have any
acquaintance with Mr. Cayley or Osborn: I never exchanged a
word with either. However, as you lump me and them toge
ther, I am constrained to speak for myself, and once more to
give a reason of my hope, that I am clear from the charge you
bring against me.
2. There are several assertions in your sermon which need
not be allowed; but they are not worth disputing. At present,
therefore, I shall only speak of two things: (1.) Your account
of the new birth; and, (2) “The pretended inspiration” (as
you are pleased to term it) “of the Methodists.”
3. Of the new birth, you say, “The terms of being regene.
rated, of being born again, of being born of God, are often used
to express the works of gospel righteousness.” (Pages 10, 11.)
I cannot allow this. I know not that they are ever used in
Scripture to express any outward work at all. They always
express an inward work of the Spirit, whereof baptism is the
outward sign. You add, “Their primary, peculiar, and precise
meaning signifies” (a little impropriety of expression) “our
redemption from death, and restoration to eternal life, through
the grace of God.” (Page 13.) It does not, unless by death
you mean sin; and by eternal life, holiness. The precise mean
ing of the term is, “a new birth unto righteousness,” an in
ward change from unholy to holy tempers. You go on : “This
grace our Lord here calls, ‘entering into the kingdom of God.’”
If so, his assertion is, “Except a man be born again,—he
cannot” be born again. Not so. What he says is, Except a
man experience this change, he cannot enter into my kingdom.
4. You proceed: “Our holy Church doth teach us, that—
by the laver of regeneration in baptism, we are received into
the number of the children of God-This is the first part of
the new birth.” What is the first part of the new birth P
baptism? It is the outward sign of that inward and spiritual
grace; but no part of it at all. It is impossible it should be.
The outward sign is no more a part of the inward grace than
the body is a part of the soul. Or do you mean, that
regeneration is a part of the new birth ? Nay, this is the whole
of it. Or is it the “laver of regeneration ” which is the first
part of it? That cannot be; for you suppose this to be the
same with baptism.
5. “The second part, the inward and spiritual grace, is a
death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness.” What 1
Is the new birth the second part of the new birth? I appre
hend it is the first and second part too: And surely nothing
could have prevented your seeing this, but the ardour of your
spirit, and the impetuosity with which you rush along and
trample down all before you. Your manner of writing reminds
me of an honest Quaker in Cornwall, whose words I would
recommend to your consideration. Being consulted by one
of the Friends, whether he should publish a tract which he
had read to many in private, he replied, “What! Art thou
not content with laying John Wesley on his back, but thou
must tread his guts out too?”
6. So much for your account of the new birth. I am, in
the Second place, to consider the account you give of “the
pretended inspiration” (so you are pleased to term it) “of the
Methodists.”
“The Holy Ghost sat on the Apostles with cloven tongues
as of fire;—and signs and wonders were done by their hands.”
ThE REV. M.R. POTTER, 9I
(Pages 16, 17, 18.) Wonders indeed! sick by a word, a touch, a shadow !—
For they healed the
They spake the dead alive, and living dead.
“But though these extraordinary operations of the Spirit
have been long since withdrawn, yet the pretension to them still
subsists in the confident claim of the Methodists.” This you
boldly affirm, and I flatly deny. I deny that either I, or any in
connexion with me, (for others, whether called Methodists, or
anything else, I am no more concerned to answer than you are,)
do now, or ever did, lay any claim to “these extraordinary
operations of the Spirit.”
7. But you will prove it. They “confidently and presump
tuously claim a particular and immediate inspiration.” (Ibid.)
I answer, First, so do you, and in this very sermon, though
you call it by another name. By inspiration, we mean that
inward assistance of the Holy Ghost, which “helps our infirmi
ties, enlightens our understanding, rectifies our will, comforts,
purifies, and sanctifies us.” (Page 14.) Now, all this you claim as
well as I; for these are your own words. “Nay, but you claim
a particular inspiration.” So do you; do not you expect Him
to sanctify you in particular? “Yes; but I look for no imme
diate inspiration.” You do; you expect He will immediately
and directly help your infirmities. Sometimes, it is true, He
does this, by the mediation or intervention of other men; but at
other times, particularly in private prayer, he gives that he',
directly from himself. “But is this all you mean by particulai,
immediate inspiration?” It is; and so I have declared a thou
sand times in private, in public, by every method I could devise.
It is pity, therefore, that any should still undertake to give an
account of my sentiments, without either hearing or reading
what I say. Is this doing as we would be done to?
8. I answer, Secondly, there is no analogy between claiming.
this inspiration of the Spirit, who, you allow, “assists, and will
assist, all true believers to the end of the world;” (page 18;) and
claiming those extraordinary operations of the Spirit which were
vouchsafed to the Apostles. The former both you and I pretend
to; yea, and enjoy, or we are no believers. The latter you do
not pretend to; nor do I, nor any that are in connexion with me.
9. “But you do pretend to them. For you pray that ‘signs
and wonders may still be wrought in the name of Jesus.’”
True; but what signs and wonders? The conversion of sin
ners; the “healing the broken in heart; the turning men from
darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God.” These
and these only are the signs and wonders which were mentioned
in that prayer. And did I not see these signs and wonders still
wrought, I would sooner hew wood, or draw water, than preach
the gospel. For those are to me very awful words which our
Lord speaks of Prophets or Teachers: “Ye shall know them.”
(whether they are true or false Prophets) “by their fruits.
Every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; every tree that
bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the
fire.” What fruit you have brought forth at Reymerston, I
know not; God knoweth.
10. “Your followers, however, do pretend to the grace of a
miraculous conversion.” Is there any conversion that is not
miraculous? Is conversion a natural or supernatural work? I
suppose all who allow there is any such thing believe it to be
supernatural. And what is the difference between a super
natural and a miraculous work, I am yet to learn.
“But they say, that at such a time, and in such a manner,
the divine illumination shone upon them; Jesus knocked at the
door of their hearts, and the Holy Ghost descended upon their
souls;” that is, in plain terms, raillery apart, at a particular
time, which they cannot easily forget, God did, in so eminent a
manner as they never experienced before, “enlighten their
understanding,” (they are your own words,) “comfort and
purify their hearts, and give his heavenly Spirit to dwell in
them.” But what has all this to do with those extraordinary
operations of the Holy Spirit?
11. “Under these pretended impressions, their next advance
is to a call to preach the word themselves; and forth they issue,
as under the immediate inspiration of God's Spirit, with the
language of Apostles, and zeal of Martyrs, to publish the gos
pel, as if they were among our remotest ancestors, strangers to
the name of Christ.” (Pages 20, 21.)
The plain truth is this: One in five hundred of those whom
God so enlightens and comforts, sooner or later, believes it to
be his duty to call other sinners to repentance. Such an one
commonly stifles this conviction till he is so uneasy he can stifle
it no longer. He then consults one or more of those whom he
believes to be competent judges; and, under the direction of
these, goes on, step by step, from a narrower to a larger sphere
of action. Meantime he endeavours to use only “the language
of the Apostles,” to speak the things of the Spirit in the words
of the Spirit. And he longs and prays for the “zeal of Mar
tyrs,” continually finding the need thereof; seeing our present
countrymen are as great strangers to the mind that was in
Christ, as our ancestors were to his name.
12. “But the Holy Spirit no longer comes from heaven like
a rushing mighty wind. It no longer appears in cloven tongues,
as of fire.” I wonder who imagines it does. “We now dis
cern not between his suggestions and the motions of our own
rational nature.” Many times we do not; but at other times,
God may give such peace or joy, and such love to himself and
all mankind, as we are sure are not “the motions of our own
nature.” “To say, then, that the Holy Spirit began his work
at such a time, and continued it so long in such a manner, is
as vain as to account for the blowing of the wind.” Hold !
accounting for is not the thing. To make a parallel, it must
be, “is as vain as to say, that the wind began to blow at such
a time, and continued so long in such a manner.” And
where is the vanity of this? Why may I not say, either
that the wind began to blow at such a time, and blew so long
in such a manner; or that God began at such a time to com
fort my soul; that He continued that consolation so long, and
$n such a manner, by giving me either peace and joy in
believing, or a lively hope of the glory of God?
13. “Not that we are without a memorable instance of this
instantaneous impulse in the sudden conversion of St. Paul.”
(Page 23.) A poor instance this; for it does not appear that
his was a sudden conversion. It is true, “a great light
suddenly shone round about him; ” but this light did not
convert him. After he had seen this, “he was three days
without sight, and neither did eat nor drink.” And, probably,
during the whole time, God was gradually working in his
heart, till he “arose, and, being baptized, washed away his
sins, and was filled with the Holy Ghost.”
14. But to return: “Their Teachers claim a particular and
immediate inspiration in their nauseous effusions.” (Page 22.)
Certainly they claim either a particular and immediate inspira
tion, (as above explained,) or none at all. But this is no other
inspiration (call it influence, if you please, though it is a far
stronger term) than every one must have, before he can either
understand, or preach, or live the gospel. “But there is not
in Scripture the least promise or encouragement to expect any
particular inspiration.” Yes, surely, such an inspiration as
this; you have allowed it over and over. And what external
evidence of this would you have? I will believe you are thus
inspired, if you convert sinners to God, and if you yourself
are “holy in all manner of conversation.”
15. Is there “no need of this inspiration now, because the
prejudices of mankind are in favour of the gospel, and the pro
fession of it is under the protection and encouragement of the
civil power?” The prejudices of mankind are in favour of the
gospel ! What! the prejudices of the bulk of mankind? To
go no farther than England: Are the bulk of our nation preju
diced in favour of the genuine gospel; of the holiness which it
enjoins; of chastity and temperance; of denying ourselves, and
taking up our cross daily; of dying to the world, and devoting
all our heart and all our life to God? Are they prejudiced in
favour of presenting our souls and bodies a constant, holy sacri
fice to God? What less than this is gospel holiness? And
are the prejudices of mankind in favour of this?
16. Likewise, how far this real Christianity is “under the
protection and encouragement of the civil power,” I know not.
But I know, “all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall
suffer persecution,” domestic persecution, if no other; for “the
foes of” such “a man shall be they of his own household.
There shall be,” and there are now, “five in one house, three
against two, and two against three; ” and that not for being
Methodists, for having a nick-name; (although that may be
the pretence, for want of a better; for who scruples to throw
a man into the ditch, and then beat him, because his clothes
are dirty?) but for living godly; for loving and serving God,
according to the best light they have. And certainly these
meed the assistance of God’s Spirit to strengthen and comfort
them, that they may suffer all things, rather than turn aside,
in any point, from the gospel way.
17. “But the Scriptures are a complete and a sufficient
rule. Therefore, to what purpose could any further inspira
tion serve? All farther inspiration is unnecessary; the sup
posed need of it is highly injurious to the written word. And
the pretension thereto (which must be either to explain or to
supply it) is a wicked presumption, with which Satan hath
filled their hearts, to lie of the Holy Ghost.” (Pages 27, 28.)
High sounding words! But, blessed be God, they are only
brutum fulmen : They make much noise, but do not wound.
“To what purpose could any further inspiration serve?”
Answer yourself: “To enlighten the understanding, and to
rectify the will.” Else, be the Scriptures ever so complete,
they will not save your soul. How, then, can you imagine it
is unnecessary; and that “the supposed need of it is injurious
to the written word?” And when you say yourself, “The Spirit
is to teach us all things, and to guide us into all truth;” judge
you, whether this is “to explain, or to supply, the written
word.” “O, He does this by the written word.” True; but
also “by his holy inspiration.” So the compilers of our
Liturgy speak; who, therefore, according to you, are guilty of
“wicked presumption, with which Satan filled their hearts,
to lie of the Holy Ghost.”
18. These, also, are the men upon whom you fall in the fol
lowing warm words:—“The power of enthusiasm over an
heated imagination may be very great. But it must be under
the ferment of that old, sour leaven, hypocrisy, to rise to that
daring height.” I think not: I think they were neither hypo
crites nor enthusiasts, though they teach me to pray for, and
consequently to expect, (unless I am an hypocrite indeed,)
“God’s holy inspiration,” both in order to “think the things
that be good,” and also “perfectly to love him, and worthily
to magnify his holy name.”
19. You go on: “They boast that their heart is clean, and
their spirit right within them.” Sir, did you ever read Morn
ing Prayer on the tenth day of the month? You then said,
“Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit
within me.” Did you mean what you said? If you did not, you
was guilty of the grossest hypocrisy. If you did, when did you
expect God would answer that prayer? when your body was in
the grave? Too late 1 Unless we have clean hearts before we
die, it had been good we had never been born.
20. “But they boast they are pure from sin, harmless, and
undefiled.” So, in a sound sense, is every true believer. “Nay,
they boast that their bodies are a living sacrifice, holy, accept
able to God.” Sir, is not yours? Are not your soul and body
such a sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God? As the Lord God
liveth, before whom we stand, if they are not, you are not a
Christian. If you are not a holy, living sacrifice, you are still
“dead in trespasses and sins.” You are an “alien from the
commonwealth of Israel, without” Christian “hope, without
God in the world !”
21. You add, “Thus have I exposed their boasted claim to
a particular and immediate inspiration.” (Page 30.) No, Sir,
you have only exposed yourself; for all that we claim, you
allow. “I have shown what a miserable farce is carrying on,
beneath the mask of a more refined holiness.” No tittle of this
have you shown yet; and before you attempt again to show
any thing concerning us, let me entreat you, Sir, to acquaint
yourself better with our real sentiments. Perhaps you may
then find, that there is not so wide a difference as you imagined
between you and,
Reverend Sir,
Your servant for Christ’s sake,
LAKENHEATH, JOHN WESLEY.
