A Disavowal of Persecuting Papists
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
I HAvE read a Tract lately sent me, and will now give my
free thoughts upon the subject.
I set out early in life with an utter abhorrence of persecu
tion in every form, and a full conviction that every man has
a right to worship God according to his own conscience.
Accordingly, more than fifty years ago, I preached on those
words, “Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of: For
the Son of man is not come to destroy men’s lives, but to
save them.” And I preached on the same text, in London,
the 5th of last November. And this I extend to members of
the Church of Rome, as well as to all other men.
I agree not only that many of these in former ages were
good men, (as Thomas à Kempis, Francis Sales, and the Mar
quis de Renty,) but that many of them are so at this day. I
believe, I know some Roman Catholics who sincerely love
both God and their neighbour, and who steadily endeavour
to do unto every one as they wish him to do unto them.
But I cannot say this is a general case; nay, I am fully
convinced it is not. The generality of Roman Catholics,
wherever I have been, are of the same principles, and the
same spirit, with their forefathers. And, indeed, if they had
the same principles, it could not be doubted but they would
be of the same practice too, if opportunity should serve.
These principles openly avowed by their forefathers of
priestly absolution, Papal indulgences, and no faith to be
kept with heretics, have never been openly and authoritatively
disavowed even unto this day. And until they are, a Roman
Catholic, consistent with his principles, cannot be trusted by
a Protestant.
For the same principles naturally tend to produce the same
spirit and the same practice. Very lately, a person seeing
many flocking to a place, which she did not know was a
Romish chapel, innocently said, “What do all these people
want?” and was answered by one of them, with great vehe
mence, “We want your blood. And we will have it soon.”
On Friday last, I dined with a gentlewoman, whose father,
living in Dublin, was very intimate with a Roman Catholic
gentleman. Having invited him to dinner one day, in the
course of conversation, Mrs. Grattan asked him, “Sir, would
you really cut my husband's throat, if your Priest commanded
you?” He answered honestly, “Madam, Mr. Grattan is my
friend; and I love him well; but I must obey the Church.”
“Sir,” said she, “I beg I may never more see you within my
doors.”
But still, be their principles what they will, I would not
persecute them. So persecution is utterly out of the ques
tion. I know no one that pleads for it. Therefore the writing
or talking against it is time lost; it is proving what no one
denies.
And the Romanists never have been persecuted in England
since I remember. They have enjoyed a full toleration. I
wish them to enjoy the same toleration still; neither more
nor less.
I would not hurt a hair of their head. Meantime, I would
not put it into their power to hurt me, or anv other persons
whom they believe to be heretics. I steer the middle way. I
would neither kill nor be killed. I would not use the sword
against them, nor put it into their hands, lest they should use
it against me; I wish them well, but I dare not trust them.
But still I say, persecution is out of the question. And I
look on all vague declamations upon it, which have been lately
poured out, as either mere flourishes of persons who think
they talk prettily, or artful endeavours to puzzle the cause,
and to throw dust into the eyes of honest Englishmen.
JOHN WESLEY.
BRIsToL, March 18, 1782.
