Thoughts upon Necessity
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
TO THE READER.
I HAD finished what I designed to say on this subject, when the “Essay on
Liberty and Necessity” fell into my hands: A most elaborate piece, touched
and retouched with all possible care. This has occasioned a considerable
enlargement of the following tract. I would fain place mankind in a fairer
point of view than that writer has done; as I cannot believe the noblest
creature in the visible world to be only a fine piece of clock-work.
Is man a free agent, or is he not? Are his actions free
or necessary? Is he self-determined in acting; or is he
determined by some other being ? Is the principle which
determines him to act, in himself or in another? This is
the question which I want to colsider. And is it not an
important one? Surely there is not one of greater import
ance in the whole nature of things. For what is there that
more nearly concerns all that are born of women? What
can be conceived which more deeply affects, not some only,
but every child of man?
I. l. That man is not self-determined; that the principle of
action is lodged, not in himself, but in some other being; has
been an exceeding ancient opinion, yea, near as old as the
foundation of the world. It seems, none that admit of Reve
lation can have any doubt of this. For it was unquestion
ably the sentiment of Adam soon after he had eaten of the
forbidden fruit. He imputes what he had done, not to
himself, but another, “The woman whom thou gavest me.”
It was also the sentiment of Eve, “The Serpent, he beguiled
me, and I did eat.” “It is true, I did eat; but the cause of
my eating, the spring of my action, was in another.”
2. The same opinion, that man is not self-determined, took
root very early, and spread wide, particularly in the eastern
world, many ages before Manes was born. Afterwards indeed,
he, and his followers, commonly called Manichees, formed it
into a regular system. They not only maintained, that all the
actions of man were necessarily determined by a power exterior
to himself, but likewise accounted for it, by ascribing the
good to Oromasdes, the parent of all good; the evil to the
other independent being, Arimanius, the parent of all evil.
3. From the eastern world, “when arts and empire learned
to travel west,” this opinion travelled with them into Europe,
and soon found its way into Greece. Here it was earnestly
espoused and vehemently maintained by the Stoic philoso
phers; men of great renown among persons of literature, and
some of the ablest disputants in the world. These affirmed
with one mouth, that from the beginning of the world, if not
rather from all eternity, there was an indissoluble chain of
causes and effects, which included all human actions; and
that these were by fate so connected together, that not one
link of the chain could be broken.
4. A fine writer of our own country, who was a few years
since gathered to his fathers, has with admirable skill drawn
the same conclusion from different premises. He lays it
down as a principle, (and a principle it is, which cannot
reasonably be denied,) that as long as the soul is vitally
united to the body, all its operations depend on the body;
that in particular all our thoughts depend upon the vibrations
of the fibres of the brain; and of consequence vary, more
or less, as those vibrations vary. In that expression, “our
thoughts,” he comprises all our sensations, all our reflections
and passions; yea, and all our volitions, and consequently our
actions, which, he supposes, unavoidably follow those vibrations.
He premises, “But you will say, This scheme infers the
universal necessity of human actions;” and frankly adds,
“Certainly it does. I am sorry for it; but I cannot help it.”
5. And this is the scheme which is now adopted by not a
few of the most sensible men in our nation. One of these
fairly confessing, that “he did not think himself a sinner,”
was asked, “Do you never feel any wrong tempers? And
do you never speak or act in such a manner as your own
reason condemns?” He candidly answered, “Indeed I do.
I frequently feel tempers, and speak many words, and do
many actions, which I do not approve of. But I cannot
avoid it. They result, whether I will or no, from the
vibrations of my brain, together with the motion of my blood,
and the flow of my animal spirits. But these are not in my
own power. I cannot help them. They are independent on
my choice. And therefore I cannot apprehend myself to be
a sinner on this account.”
6. Very lately another gentleman, in free conversation, was
carrying this matter a little farther. Being asked, “Do you
believe God is almighty?” he answered, “I do; or he could
not have made the world.” “Do you believe he is wise?” “I
cannot tell." Much may be said on both sides.” “Do you
believe he is good?” “No; I cannot believe it. I believe
just the contrary. For all the evil in the world is owing to
Him. I can ascribe it to no other cause. I cannot blame that
cur for barking orbiting; it is his nature; and he did not make
himself. I feel wrong tempers in myself; but that is not my
fault; for I cannot help it. It is my nature; and I could
not prevent my having this nature, neither can I change it.”
7. The Assembly of Divines, who met at Westminster in
the last century, express very nearly the same sentiment,
though placed in a different light. They speak to this effect:
“Whatever happens in time, was unchangeably determined
from all eternity. God ordained or ever the world was made,
all the things that should come to pass therein. The greatest
and the smallest events were equally predetermined; in
particular, all the thoughts, all the words, all the actions of
every child of man; all that every man thinks, or speaks, or
does, from his birth, till his spirit returns to God that gave it.
It follows, that no man can do either more or less good, or
more or less evil, than he does. None can think, speak, or
act any otherwise than he does, not in any the smallest
circumstance. In all he is bound by an invisible, but more
than adamantine, chain. No man can move his head or foot,
open or shut his eyes, lift his hand, or stir a finger, any other
wise than as God determined he should, from all eternity.”
8. That this chain is invisible, they allow ; man himself
perceives nothing of it. He suspects nothing less; he
imagines himself to be free in all his actions; he seems to
move hither and thither, to go this way or that, to choose
doing evil or doing good, just at his own discretion. But all
this is an entire mistake; it is no more than a pleasing
dream: For all his ways are fixed as the pillars of heaven;
all unalterably determined. So that, notwithstanding these
gay, flattering appearances,
In spite of all the labour we create,
We only row; but we are steer'd by fate 1
9. A late writer, in his celebrated book upon free-will.
explains the matter thus: “The soul is now connected with
a material vehicle, and placed in the material world. Various
objects here continually strike upon one or other of the bodily
organs. These communicate the impression to the brain;
consequent on which such and such sensations follow. These
are the materials on which the understanding works, in
forming all its simple and complex ideas; according to which
our judgments are formed. And according to our judgments
are our passions; our love and hate, joy and sorrow, desire
and fear, with their innumerable combinations. Now, all
these passions together are the will, variously modified; and
all actions flowing from the will are voluntary actions;
consequently, they are good or evil, which otherwise they
could not be. And yet it is not in man to direct his own
way, while he is in the body, and in the world.”
10. The author of an “Essay on Liberty and Necessity,”
published some years since at Edinburgh, speaks still more
explicitly, and endeavours to trace the matter to the found
ation: “The impressions,” says he, “which man receives in
the natural world, do not correspond to the truth of things.
Thus the qualities called secondary, which we by natural
instinct attribute to Lmatter, belong not to matter, nor exist
without us; but all the beauty of colours with which heaven
and earth appear clothed, is a sort of romance or illusion.
For in external objects there is really no other distinction,
but that of the size and arrangement of their constituent
parts, whereby the rays of light are variously reflected and
refracted.” (Page 152, &c.)
“In the moral world, whatever is a cause with regard to its
proper effect, is an effect with regard to some prior cause, and
so backward without end. Events, therefore, being a train of
causes and effects, are necessary and fixed. Every one must
be, and cannot be otherwise than it is.” (Page 157, &c.)
“And yet a feeling of an opposite kind is deeply rooted in our
nature. Many things appear to us, as not predetermined by
any invariable law. We naturally make a distinction, between
things that must be, and things that may be, or may not.
“So with regard to the actions of men. We see that
connexion between an action and its motive to be so strong,
that we reason with full confidence concerning the future
+ctions of others. But if actions necessarily arise from their
proper motives, then all human actions are necessary and
fixed. Yet they do not appear so to us. Indeed, before any
particular action, we always judge, that the action will be the
necessary result of some motive. But afterwards the feeling
instantly varies. We accuse and condemn a man for doing
what is wrong. We conceive, he had a power of acting
otherwise; and the whole train of our feelings suppose him to
have been entirely a free agent.
“But what does this liberty amount to ? In all cases, our
choice is determined by some motive. It must be determined
by that motive which appears the best upon the whole. But
motives are not under our power or direction. When two
motives offer, we have not the power of choosing as we please.
We are necessarily determined.
“Man is passive in receiving impressions of things;
according to which the judgment is necessarily formed. This
the will necessarily obeys, and the outward action necessarily
follows the will.
“Hence it appears, that God decrees all future events.
He who gave such a nature to his creatures, and placed
them in such circumstances, that a certain train of actions
must necessarily follow ; he who did so, and who must have
foreseen the consequences, did certainly decree, that those
events should fall out, and that men should act just as they do.
“The Deity is the First Cause of all things. He formed
the plan on which all things were to be governed, and put it
in execution by establishing, both in the natural and moral
world, certain laws that are fixed and immutable. By virtue
of these, all things proceed in a regular train of causes and
effects, bringing about the events contained in the original
plan, and admitting the possibility of no other. This universe
is a vast machine, winded up and set a-going. The several
springs and wheels act unerringly one upon another. The
hand advances and the clock strikes, precisely as the Artist
has determined. In this plan, man, a rational creature, was
to fulfil certain ends. He was to appear as an actor, and to
act with consciousness and spontaneity. Consequently, it
was necessary he should have some idea of liberty, some
feeling of things possible and contingent, things depending on
himself, that he might be led to exercise that activity for
which he was designed. To have seen himself a part of that
great machine would have been altogether incongruous to
the ends he was to fulfil. Had he seen that nothing was
contingent, there would have been no room for forethought,
nor for any sort of industry or care. Reason could not have
been exercised in the way it is now; that is, man could not
have been man. But now, the moment he comes into the
world, he acts as a free agent. And contingency, though it
has no real existence in things, is made to appear as really
existing. Thus is our natural feeling directly opposite to
truth and matter of fact; seeing it is certainly impossible,
that any man should act any otherwise than he does.”
See necessity drawn at full length, and painted in the most
lively colours!
II. 1. It is easy to observe, that every one of these schemes
implies the universal necessity of human actions. In this
they all agree, that man is not a free but a necessary agent,
being absolutely determined in all his actions by a principle
exterior to himself. But they do not agree what that principle
is. The most ancient of them, the Manichaean, maintained,
that men are determined to evil by the evil god, Arimanius;
that Oromasdes, the good God, would have prevented or
removed that evil, but could not; the power of the evil god.’
being so great, that he is not able to control it.
2. The Stoics, on the other hand, did not impute the evil
that is in the world to any intelligent principle, but either to
the original stubbornness of matter, which even divine power
was not capable of removing; to the concatenation of causes
and effects, which no power whatever could alter; or to
unconquerable fate, to which they supposed all the gods, the
Supreme not excepted, to be subject.
3. The author of two volumes, entitled “Man,” rationally
rejects all the preceding schemes, while he deduces all human
actions from those passions and judgments which, during the
present union of the soul and body, necessarily result from
such and such vibrations of the fibres of the brain. Herein
he indirectly ascribes the necessity of all human actions
to God; who, having fixed the laws of this vital union
according to his own good pleasure, having so constituted
man that the motions of the soul thus depend on the fibres
of the body, has thereby laid him under an invincible neces
sity of acting thus, and in no other manner. So do those
likewise, who suppose all the judgments and passions neces
sarily to flow from the motion of the blood and spirits. For
this is indirectly to impute all our passions and actions to
Him who alone determined the manner wherein our blood
and spirits should move.
4. The gentleman next mentioned does this directly, without
any softening or circumlocution at all. He flatly and roundly
affirms, The Creator is the proper Author of everything
which man does; that by creating him thus, he has absolutely
determined the manner wherein he shall act; and that there
fore man can no more help sinning, than a stone can help
falling. The Assembly of Divines do as directly ascribe the
necessity of human actions to God, in affirming that God has
eternally determined whatsoever shall be done in time. So
likewise does Mr. Edwards of New-England; in proving by
abundance of deep, metaphysical reasoning, that “we must
see, hear, taste, feel the objects that surround us, and must
have such judgments, passions, actions, and no other.” He
flatly ascribes the necessity of all our actions to Him who
united our souls to these bodies, placed us in the midst of
these objects, and ordered that these sensations, judgments,
passions, and actions should spring therefrom.
5. The author last cited connects together and confirms all
the preceding schemes; particularly those of the ancient
Stoics and the modern Calvinists.
III. 1. It is not easy for a man of common understanding,
especially if unassisted by education, to unravel these finely
woven schemes, or show distinctly where the fallacy lies.
But he knows, he feels, he is certain, they cannot be true;
that the holy God cannot be the author of sin. The horrid
consequences of supposing this may appear to the meanest
understanding, from a few plain, obvious considerations, of
which every man that has common sense may judge.
If all the passions, the tempers, the actions of men, are
wholly independent on their own choice, are governed by a
principle exterior to themselves, then there can be no moral
good or evil; there can be neither virtue nor vice, neither
good nor bad actions, neither good nor bad passions or tempers.
The sun does much good; but it is no virtue; but he is not
capable of moral goodness. Why is he not? For this plain
reason, because he does not act from choice. The sea does
much harm: It swallows up thousands of men; but it is not
capable of moral badness, because it does not act by choice,
but from a necessity of mature. If indeed one or the other
can be said to act at all. Properly speaking, it does not : It
is purely passive: It is only acted upon by the Creator; and
must move in this manner and no other, seeing it cannot
resist His will. In like manner, St. Paul did much good:
But it was no virtue, if he did not act from choice. And if he
was in all things necessitated to think and act, he was not
capable of moral goodness. Nero does much evil; murders
thousands of men, and sets fire to the city: But it is no fault;
he is not capable of moral badness, if he does not act from
choice, but necessity. Nay, properly, the man does not act at
all : He is only acted upon by the Creator, and must move thus,
being irresistibly impelled. For who can resist his will?
2. Again: If all the actions, and passions, and tempers of
men are quite independent on their own choice, are governed
by a principle exterior to themselves; then none of them is
either rewardable or punishable, is either praise or blame
worthy. The consequence is undeniable: I cannot praise the
sun forwarming, nor blame the stone for wounding me; because
neither the sun nor the stone acts from choice, but from neces
sity. Therefore, neither does the latter deserve blame, nor the
former deserve praise. Neither is the one capable of reward,
nor the other of punishment. And if a man does good as
necessarily as the sun, he is no more praiseworthy than that; if
he does evil as necessarily as the stone, he is no more blame
worthy. The dying to save your country is noway rewardable,
if you are compelled thereto; and the betraying your country
is noway punishable, if you are necessitated to do it.
3. It follows, if there be no such thing as virtue or vice, as
moral good or evil, if there be nothing rewardable or punish
able in the actions or passions of men, then there can be no
judgment to come, and no future rewards and punishments.
For might not God as well judge the trees of the wood, or
the stones of the field, as man, if man was as totally passive
as they? as irresistibly determined to act thus or thus?
What should he be commended or rewarded for, who never
did any good but when he could not help it, being impelled
thereto by a force which he could not withstand? What
should he be blamed or punished for, who never did any evil,
to which he was not determined by a power he could no more
resist, than he could shake the pillars of heaven?
This objection the author of the Essay gives in its full
strength: “The advocates for liberty reason thus: If actions
be necessary, and not in our own power, what ground is there
for blame, self-condemnation, or remorse? If a clock were
sensible of its own motions, and knew that they proceeded
according to necessary laws, could it find fault with itself for
striking wrong? Would it not blame the artist, who had so
ill adjusted the wheels? So that, upon this scheme, all the
moral constitution of our nature is overturned; there is an
end to all the operations of conscience, about right and
wrong; man is no longer a moral agent, nor the subject of
praise or blame for what he does.”
He strangely answers: “Certainly the pain, the remorse,
which is felt by any man who had been guilty of a bad action,
springs from the notion, that he has a power over his own
actions, that he might have forborne to do it. It is on this
account, that he is angry at himself, and confesses himself to
be blamable. That uneasiness proceeds on the supposition,
that he is free, and might have acted a better part. And
one under the dominion of bad passions is condemned upon
this ground, that it was in his power to be free from them.
Were not this the case, brutes might be the objects of moral
blame as well as man. But we do not blame them, because
they have not freedom, a power of directing their own actions.
We : therefore admit, that the idea of freedom is
essential to the moral feeling. On the system of universal
necessity, there could be no place for blame or remorse.
And we struggle in vain to reconcile to this system the
testimony which conscience clearly gives to freedom.”
Is this an answer to the objection ? Is it not fairly giving
up the whole cause ?
He adds: “A feeling of liberty, which I now scruple not
to call deceitful, is interwoven with our nature. Man must
be so constituted, in order to attain virtue.” To attain
virtue / Nay, you have yourself allowed, that, on this
supposition, virtue and vice can have no being. You go on :
“If he saw himself as he really is,” (Sir, do not you see
yourself so?) “if he conceived himself and all his actions
necessarily linked into the great chain, which renders the
whole order both of the natural and moral world unalterably
determined in every article, what would follow ** Why,
just nothing at all. The great chain must remain as it was
before; since whatever you see or conceive, that i
“unalterably determined in every article.”
To confute himself still more fully, he says, “If we knew
good and evil to be necessary and unavoidable,” (contradiction
in terms; but let it pass,) “there would be no more place for
praise or blame; no indignation at those who had abused
their rational powers; no sense of just punishment annexed
to crimes, or of any reward deserved by good actions. All
these feelings vanish at once, with the feeling of liberty.
And the sense of duty must be quite extinguished: For we
cannot conceive any moral obligation, without supposing a
power in the agent over his own actions.”
If so, what is he who publishes a book to show mankind
that they have no power over their own actions?
To the objection, that this scheme “makes God the author
of sin,” the Essayist feebly answers: “Sin, or moral turpitude,
lies in the evil intention of him that commits it, or in some
wrong affection. Now, there is no wrong intention in God.”
What then? Whatever wrong intention or affection is in
man, you make God the direct author of it. For you flatly
affirm, “Moral evil cannot exist, without being permitted of
God. And with regard to a first cause, permitting is the
same thing as causing.” That I totally deny: But if it be,
God is the proper cause of all the sin in the universe.
4. Suppose, now, the Judge of all the earth,-having just
pronounced the awful sentence, “Depart, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels,”—
should say to one on the left hand, “What canst thou offer
in thy own behalf?” Might he not, on this scheme, answer,
“Lord, why am I doomed to dwell with everlasting burn
ings? For not doing good? Was it ever in my power to
do any good action? Could I ever do any, but by that grace
which thou hadst determined not to give me? For doing
evil? Lord, did I ever do any, which I was not bound to do
by thy own decree? Was there ever a moment when it was
in my power, either to do good, or to cease from evil? Didst
not thou fix whatever I should do, or not do, or ever I came
into the world? And was there ever one hour, from my
cradle to my grave, wherein I could act otherwise than I
did?” Now, let any man say whose mouth would be
stopped, that of the criminal or the Judge.
5. But if, upon this supposition, there can be no judgment
to come, and no future rewards or punishments, it likewise
follows, that the Scriptures, which assert both, cannot be of
divine original. If there be not “a day wherein God will
judge the world, by that Man whom he hath appointed;” if
the wicked shall not go into eternal punishment, neither the
righteous into life eternal; what can we think of that book
which so frequently and solemnly affirms all these things?
We can no longer maintain, that “all Scripture was given
by inspiration of God,” since it is impossible that the God of
truth should be the author of palpable falsehoods. So that,
whoever asserts the pre-determination of all human actions,
a doctrine totally inconsistent with the scriptural doctrines of
a future judgment, heaven and hell, strikes hereby at the
very foundation of Scripture, which must necessarily stand
or fall with them.
6. Such absurdities will naturally and necessarily follow
from the scheme of necessity. But Mr. Edwards has found
out a most ingenious way of evading this consequence: “I
grant,” says that good and sensible man, “if the actions of
men were involuntary, the consequence would inevitably
follow,-they could not be either good or evil; nor, therefore,
could they be the proper object either of reward or punish
ment. But here lies the very ground of your mistake; their
actions are not involuntary. The actions of men are quite
voluntary; the fruit of their own will. They love, they
desire, evil things; therefore they commit them. But love
and hate, desire and aversion, are only several modes of
willing. Now, if men voluntarily commit theft, adultery, or
murder, certainly the actions are evil, and therefore punish
able. And if they voluntarily serve God, and help their
neighbours, the actions are good, and therefore rewardable.”
7. I cannot possibly allow the consequence, upon Mr.
Edwards's supposition. Still I say, if they are necessitated to
commit robbery or murder, they are not punishable for commit
ting it. But you answer, “Nay, their actions are voluntary,
the fruit of their own will.” If they are, yet that is not enough
to make them either good or evil. For their will, on your sup
position, is irresistibly impelled; so that they cannot help will
ing thus or thus. If so, they are no more blamable for that
will, than for the actions which follow it. There is no blame if
they are under a necessity of willing. There can be no moral
good or evil, unless they have liberty as well as will, which is
entirely a different thing. And the not adverting to this seems
to be the direct occasion of Mr. Edwards's whole mistake.
8. God created man an intelligent being; and endued
him with will as well as understanding. Indeed, it seems,
without this, his understanding would have been given to no
purpose. Neither would either his will or understanding
have answered any valuable purpose, if liberty had not been
added to them, a power distinct from both; a power of
choosing for himself, a self-determining principle. It may
be doubted whether God ever made an intelligent creature
without all these three faculties; whether any spirit ever
existed without them; yea, whether they are not implied in
the very nature of a spirit. Certain it is, that no being can
be accountable for its actions, which has not liberty, as well
as will and understanding.
How admirably is this painted by Milton, supposing God
to speak concerning his new-made creature l—
“I made him just and right,
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
Such I created all the ethereal powers, –
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have given sincere
Of true allegiance, constant faith and love,
Where only what they needs must do appear'd,
Not what they would P What praise could they receive,
What pleasure I, from such obedience paid,
When will and reason, (reason also is choice.)
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoil'd,
Made passive both, had served necessity,
Not me * They therefore, as to right belong’d,
So were created
So without least impulse or shadow of fate,
Or aught by me immutably foreseen,
They trespass, authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge and what they choose: For so
I form'd them free; and free they must remain,
Till they enthral themselves. I else must change
Their nature, and reverse the high decree,
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordain'd
Their freedom; they themselves ordain'd their fall.”
Paradise Lost, Book III.
9. It seems, they who divide the faculties of the human
soul into the understanding, will, and affections, unless they
make the will and affections the same thing; (and then how
inaccurate is the division 1) must mean by affections, the will,
properly speaking, and by the term will, neither more nor
less than liberty; the power of choosing either to do or not to
do, (commonly called liberty of contradiction,) or to do this
or the contrary, good or evil (commonly called liberty of con
trariety). Without the former at least, there can be nothing
good or evil, rewardable or punishable. But it is plain, the
doctrine of necessity, as taught either by ancient Heathens,
or by the moderns, (whether Deists or Christians,) destroys
both, leaves not a shadow of either, in any soul of man:
Consequently, it destroys all the morality of human actions,
making man a mere machine; and leaves no room for any
judgment to come, or for either rewards or punishments.
IV. 1. But whatever be the consequences deducible from
this, that all human actions are necessary, how will you
answer the arguments which are brought in defence of this
position? Let us try whether something of this kind may
not be done in a few words.
Indeed, as to the first scheme, that of the Manichees, the
maintainers of a good and an evil god, though it was formerly
espoused by men of renown, St. Augustine in particular; yet
it is now so utterly out of date, that it would be lost labour
to confute it. A little more plausible is this scheme of the
Stoics', building necessity upon fate, upon the insuperable
stubbornness of matter, or the indissoluble chain of causes
and effects. Perhaps they invented this scheme to exculpate
God, to avoid laying the blame upon him, by allowing He
would have done better if he could; that he was willing to
cure the evil, but was not able. But we may answer them
short, There is no fate above the Most High; that is an idle,
irrational fiction. Neither is there anything in the nature of
matter, which is not obedient to his word. The Almighty is
able, in the twinkling of an eye, to reduce any matter into
any form he pleases; or to speak it into nothing; in a
moment to expunge it out of his creation.
2. The still more plausible scheme of Dr. Hartley, (and I
might add, those of the two gentlemen above-mentioned,
which nearly coincide with it,) now adopted by almost all
who doubt of the Christian system, requires a more particular
consideration, were it only because it has so many admirers.
And it certainly contains a great deal of truth, as will appear
to any that considers it calmly. For who can deny, that not
only the memory, but all the operations of the soul, are now
dependent on the bodily organs, the brain in particular?
insomuch that a blow on the back part of the head (as
frequent cxperience shows) may take away the understanding,
and destroy at once both sensation and reflection; and an
irregular flow of spirits may quickly turn the deepest philoso
pher into a madman. We must allow likewise, that while the
very power of thinking depends so much upon the brain, our
judgments must needs depend thereon, and in the same pro
portion. It must be farther allowed, that, as our sensations,
our reflections, and our judgments, so our will and passions
also, which naturally follow from our judgments, ultimately
depend on the fibres of the brain. But does all this infer the
total necessity of all human actions? “I am sorry for it,”
says the Doctor; “but I cannot help it.” I verily think I can.
I think I can not only cut the knot, by showing (as above)
the intolerable absurdities which this scheme implies; but
fairly untie it, by pointing out just where the fallacy lies.
3. But first permit me to say a word to the author of the
Essay. His grand reason for supposing all mankind in a
dream, is drawn from analogy: “We are in a continual
delusion as to the natural world; why not as to the moral?”
Well; how does he prove, that we are in a continual delusion
as to the natural world? Thus: “All the qualities which
are termed secondary qualities, we by a natural instinct
ascribe to matter. But it is a mere deceit. They do not
belong to matter, neither exist without us.”
As commonly as this is asserted, it is absolutely false, as
will appear quickly.
You instance in colours, and confidently say, “All this
beauty of colours, with which heaven and earth appear to be
clothed, is a sort of romance or illusion. In external objects
there is no other distinction but that of the size and arrange
ment of their constituent parts, whereby the rays of light are
variously reflected or refracted.”
But are those rays of light real? And do they exist without
us? Certainly, as much as the sun does. And are the consti
tuent parts of those objects real? Nobody questions it. But
are they really of such a size, and arranged in such a manner?
They are; and what will you infer from that? I infer, that
colour is just as real as size or figure; and that all colours do
as really exist without us, as trees, or corn, or heaven, or earth.
“But what do you mean by colour?” When I say,
“That cloth is of a red colour,” I mean its surface is so dis
posed as to reflect the red (that is, the largest) rays of light.
When I say, “The sky is blue,” I mean, it is so disposed as
to reflect the blue (that is, the smallest) rays of light. And
where is the delusion here? Does not that disposition, do not
those rays, as really exist, as either the cloth or the sky?
And are they not as really reflected, as the ball in a tennis
court? It is true, that, when they strike upon my eye, a
particular sensation follows in my soul. But that sensation is
not colour; I know no one that calls it so. Colour therefore
is a real material thing. There is no illusion in the case,
unless you confound the perception with the thing perceived.
And all other secondary qualities are just as real as figure or
any other primary one. So you have no illusion in the
natural world to countenance that you imagine to be in the
moral. Wherever, therefore, this argument occurs, (and it
occurs ten times over,)—“The natural world is all illusion;
therefore, so is the moral,”—it is just good for nothing.
But, take it all together, and what a supposition is this ! Is
it not enough to make one's blood run cold 2 “The great
God, the Creator of heaven and earth, the Father of the spirits
of all flesh, the God of truth, has encompassed with falsehood
every soul that he has made I has given up all mankind ‘to a
strong delusion, to believe a lie! yea, all his creation is a
lie; all the natural and all the moral world !” If so, you
make God himself, rather than the devil, (horrid thought !)
“the father of lies !” Such you doubtless represent him,
when you say, not only that he has surrounded us with
illusion on every side; but that the feelings which he has
interwoven with our inmost nature are equally illusive
That all these shadows, which for things we take,
Are but the empty dreams which in death's sleep we make I
And yet, after this, you make a feint of disputing in defence
of a material world ! Inconsistency all over ! What proof
have we of this, what possible proof can we have, if we cannot
trust our own eyes, or ears, or any or all of our senses? But
it is certain I can trust none of my senses, if I am a mere
machine. For I have the testimony of all my outward and
all my inward senses, that I am a free agent. If therefore I
cannot trust them in this, I can trust them in nothing. Do
not tell me there are sun, moon, and stars, or that there are
men, beasts, or birds, in the world. I cannot believe one
tittle of it, if I cannot believe what I feel in myself, namely,
that it depends on me, and no other being, whether I shall
now open or shut my eyes, move my head hither and thither,
or stretch my hand or my foot. If I am necessitated to do
all this, contrary to the whole both of my inward and outward
senses, I can believe nothing else, but must necessarily sink
into universal scepticism.
Let us now weigh the main argument on which this author
builds the melancholy hypothesis of necessity: “Actions neces
sarily arise from their several motives: Therefore, all human
actions are necessary.” Again: “In all cases the choice must
be determined by that motive which appears the best upon the
whole. But motives are not under our power. Man is passive
in receiving impressions of things, according to which the last
judgment is necessarily formed. This the will necessarily
obeys, and the outward action necessarily follows the will.”
Let us take this boasted argument in pieces, and survey it
part by part. (1) “Motives are not under our power.” This
is not universally true: Some are, some are not. That man
has a strong motive to run his neighbour through, namely,
violent anger; and yet the action does not necessarily follow.
Often it does not follow at all; and where it does, not neces
sarily: He might have resisted that motive. (2) “In all
cases the choice must be determined by that motive which
appears the best upon the whole.” This is absolutely false.
It is flatly contrary to the experience of all mankind. Who
may not say on many occasions, Video meliora 2* I know
what I do, is not “best upon the whole?” (3.) “Man is
passive in receiving the impressions of things.” Not
altogether. Even here much depends on his own choice.
In many cases he may or may not receive the impression; in
most he may vary it greatly. (4.) “According to these his
last judgment is necessarily formed.” Nay, this too depends
much upon his choice. Sometimes his first, sometimes his
last, judgment, is according to the impressions which he has
received; and frequently it is not. (5.) “This the will
necessarily obeys.” Indeed it does not. The mind has an
intrinsic power of cutting off the connexion between the
judgment and the will. (6) “And the outward action
necessarily follows the will.” Not so. The thing I would, I
do not; and the thing I would not, that I do. Whatever
then becomes of the chain of events, this chain of argument
has not one good link belonging to it.
* This quotation from Ovid is thus translated by Tate :
“I see my error, yet to ruin move.”–ED1T.
4. But allowing all he contends for, -that upon such vibra
tions of the brain, such sensations directly follow, and indi
rectly, as the various combinations and results of them, all
our judgments and passions, and consequently words and
actions; yet this infers no necessity at all, if there be a God
in the world. Upon this the whole matter turns. And,
“This circumstance the Doctor had forgot.” And so indeed
have almost the whole tribe of modern philosophers. They do
not at all take God into their account; they can do their whole
business without him... But in truth this their wisdom is
their folly; for no system, either of morality or philosophy,
can be complete, unless God be kept in view, from the very
beginning to the end. Every true philosopher will surely go
at least as far as the poor heathen poet:
Ek Atos apxacue6a, kalew Au Anyere Maloal.
“Muses, begin and end with God supreme !”
Now, if there be a God, he cannot but have all power over
every creature that he has made. He must have equal
power over matter and spirits, over our souls and bodies.
What are then all the vibrations of the brain to him? or
all the natural consequences of them ? Suppose there be
naturally the strongest concatenation of vibrations, sensations,
reflections, judgments, passions, actions; cannot He, in a
moment, whenever and however He pleases, destroy that
concatemation ? Cannot he cut off, or suspend, in any degree,
the connexion between vibrations and sensations, between
sensations and reflections, between reflections and judgments,
and between judgments and passions or actions? We cannot
have any idea of God’s omnipotence, without seeing He can
do this if he will.
5. “If he will,” you may say, “we know he can. But
have we any reason to think he will?” Yes; the strongest
reason in the world, supposing that God is love; more especi
ally, suppose he “is loving to every man,” and that “his
mercy is over all his works.” If so, it cannot be, that he
should see the noblest of his creatures under heaven neces
sitated to evil, and incapable of any relief but from himself,
without affording that relief. It is undeniable, that he has
fixed in man, in every man, his umpire, conscience; an inward
judge, which passes sentence both on his passions and actions,
either approving or condemning them. Indeed it has not
power to remove what it condemns; it shows the evil which
it cannot cure. But the God of power can cure it; and the
God of love will, if we choose he should. But he will no more
necessitate us to be happy, than he will permit anything
beneath the sun to lay us under a necessity of being
miserable. I am not careful therefore about the flowing of
my blood and spirits, or the vibrations of my brain; being
well assured, that, however my spirits may flow, or my nerves
and fibres vibrate, the Almighty God of love can control them
all, and will (unless I obstinately choose vice and misery)
afford me such help, as, in spite of all these, will put it into
my power to be virtuous and happy for ever.
GLAsgow,
May 14, 1774.
A THOUGHT ON NEC ES SITY.
I. 1. THE late ingenious Dr. Hartley, in his “Essay on
Man,” resolves all thought into vibrations of the brain. When
any of the fine fibres of the brain are moved, so as to vibrate
to and fro, then (according to his scheme) a perception or
sensation is the natural consequence. These sensations are
at first simple, but are afterwards variously compounded; till,
by farther vibrations, ideas of reflection are added to ideas of
sensation. By the additional vibrations of this curious organ
our judgments of things are also formed; and from the same
fruitful source arise our reasonings in their endless variety.
2. From our apprehensions of things, from our judgments
and reasonings concerning them, all our passions arise;
whether those which are more sudden and transient, or those
of a permanent nature. And from the several mixtures and
modifications of these, our tempers or dispositions flow; very
nearly, if not altogether, the same with what are usually
termed virtues or vices.
3. Our passions and tempers are the immediate source of all
our words and actions. Of consequence, these likewise depend
ing on our passions, and our passions on our judgments and
