An Estimate of the Manners of the Present Times
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
2. We allow likewise the abundant increase of luxury, both
in meat, drink, dress, and furniture. What an amazing profu
sion of food do we see, not only at a Nobleman's table, but at
an ordinary city entertainment; suppose of the Shoemakers’
or Tailors’ Company | What variety of wines, instead of the
good, home-brewed ale, used by our forefathers! What
luxury of apparel, changing like the moon, in the city and
country, as well as at Court ! What superfluity of expensive
furniture glitters in all our great men's houses ! And luxury
naturally increases sloth, unfitting us for exercise either of
body or mind. Sloth, on the other hand, by destroying the
appetite, leads to still farther luxury. And how many does
a regular kind of luxury betray at last into gluttony and
drunkenness; yea, and lewdness too of every kind; which
indeed is hardly separable from them !
3. But allowing all these things, still this is not a true estimate
of the present manners of the English nation. For whatever is
the characteristic of a nation, is, First, universal, found in all
the individuals of it, or at least in so very great a majority, that
the exceptions are not worth regarding. It is, Secondly, con
stant, found not only now and then, but continually, without
intermission; and, Thirdly, peculiar to that nation, in contra
distinction to all others. But neither luxury nor sloth is either
universal or constant in England, much less peculiar to it.
4. Whatever may be the case of many of the Nobility and,
Gentry, (the whole body of whom are not a twentieth part of
the nation,) it is by no means true, that the English in
general, much less universally, are a slothful people. There
are not only some Gentlemen, yea, and Noblemen, who are.
of the ancient stamp, who are patterns of industry in their
calling to all that are round about them, but it is undeniable
that a vast majority of the middle and lower ranks of people
are diligently employed from morning to night, and from the
beginning to the end of the year. And indeed those who
are best acquainted with other nations, will not scruple to
testify, that the bulk of the English are at this day as diligent
as any people in the universe.
5. Neither is sloth the constant, any more than the
universal, character of the English nation. Upon many
occasions even those that are most infected with it arise and
shake themselves from the dust. Witness the behaviour of
those of the highest rank, when they were engaged in war.
Did any one charge sloth on the late Duke of Marlborough,
or the Marquis of Granby ? Witness the behaviour of many
eminent men in the militia, setting an example to all their
troops ' Yea, some of them were neither afraid nor ashamed
to march on foot at the head of their men
6. Least of all is sloth peculiar to the English nation. Is
there no such thing even in Holland? Is there none in
Germany? Certainly there is enough of it, and to spare, in
every part of France; and yet there is a more abundant
harvest of it both in Italy, Spain, and Portugal: So utterly
void of truth is that assertion, that sloth is the present
characteristic of the English nation |
7. Neither is luxury. For it is not universal, no, nor
general. The food which is used by nine-tenths of our mation
is (as it ever was) plain and simple. A vast majority of the
nation, if we take in all the living souls, are not only strangers
to gluttony and drunkenness, but to delicacy either of meat
or drink. Neither do they err in quantity any more than in
quality, but take what nature requires, and no more.
8. And as luxury in food is not universal in England, so
neither is luxury in apparel. Thousands in every part of the
kingdom are utterly guiltless of it. Whether by choice or
necessity, their dress is as plain as their food; and so is
their furniture. We may farther affirm, that even lewdness
is not yet universal in England; although we are making
swift advances toward it, by playhouses, masquerades, and
pantheons.
9. And even where luxury in food and dress is most
prevalent, yet it is not constant. Both the one and the other
are laid aside, at particular seasons, even by Gentlemen and
Noblemen. How many of these are, in time of war, regard
less both of food and apparel! Yea, what a contempt of both
did they show even during the shadow of war, while they lay
cncamped in various parts of the kingdom !
10. Neither is luxury peculiar to the English nation.
What is our luxury in dress to that of the French 7 And
luxury in food is carried to as great a height even in
Germany; and to a much greater in France: The French
scorn to stand on a level herein with the dull Germans. In
the northern kingdoms, too, there are as many gluttons as in
ours, and at least as many drunkards. And as to the basest
branch of luxury, if we may give credit to eye-witnesses, (I
cite Dr. Johnson in particular, and Lady Mary Wortley
Montague,) what is all the lewdness of London, to that of
Vienna, Paris, Rome, and all the large cities of Italy?
English ladies are not attended by their cicisbys yet; nor
would any English husband suffer it. So that, bad as we
are, we are sober and temperate, yea, and modest, in com
parison of our neighbours.
11. But if sloth and luxury are not, what is the present
characteristic of the English nation?
It is ungodliness. This is at present the characteristic of
the English nation. Ungodliness is our universal, our
constant, our peculiar character.
I do not mean Deism; the not assenting to revealed
religion. No ; a Deist is a respectable character, compared
to an ungodly man. But by ungodliness I mean, First, a
total ignorance of God; Secondly, a total contempt of him.
12. And, First, a total ignorance of God is almost universal
among us. The exceptions are exceeding few, whether among
the learned or unlearned. High and low, cobblers, tinkers,
hackney-coachmen, men and maid servants, soldiers, sailors,
tradesmen of all ranks, Lawyers, Physicians, Gentlemen,
Lords, are as ignorant of the Creator of the world as Maho
metans or Pagans. They look up to that “brave o'er-hanged
firmament, fretted with golden fires;” they see the moon
walking in brightness, the sum on his meridian throne; they
look round on the various furniture of the earth, herbs,
flowers, trees, in all their beauty; and coolly ascribe all to
nature, without having any idea affixed to the word. Should
you seriously ask them, What is nature? they know not how
to answer. Perhaps they will say, “Why, it is the course of
things, that always was and always will be.” Always was
Then you assert that the present course of things was from
eternity. If so, the world is eternal; either then there are
two eternals, or there is no God |
13. So much the good people of England in general know
of God their Creator ! And high and low, from the meanest
peasant to the gayest butterfly at court, know just as much of
God their Governor. They know not, they do not in the
least suspect, that he governs the world he has made; that
he is the supreme and absolute Disposer of all things both in
heaven and earth. A poor Heathen (though a Consul, a Prime
Minister) knew Deorum providentid cuncta geri; that “the
providence of God directs all things.” Providence What
is that? Do you know anything about it? “Yes, I do; I
never denied a general Providence.” A general Providence/
What do you mean? What is a general that includes no
particulars? What is a whole that does not contain any
parts? It is a self-contradiction, it is arrant nonsense. Either,
therefore, allow a particular providence, or do not pretend to
believe any providence at all. If you do not believe that the
Governor of the world governs all things in it, small and
great; that fire and hail, snow and vapour, wind and storm,
fulfil his word; that he rules kingdoms and cities, fleets and
armies, and all the individuals whereof they are composed;
(and yet without forcing the wills of men, or necessitating
any of their actions;) do not affect to believe that he governs
anything, or has anything to do in the world. No; be con
sistent with yourself: Say that, as nature produced, so chance
governs, all things. At least, if you must, for decency’s sake,
acknowledge a kind of God, maintain that,
Since he gave things their beginning,
And set this whirligig a-spinning,
he left it, and everything therein, to spin on in its own way.
14. Whether this is right or no, it is almost the universal
sentiment of the English nation. And if high and low are so
totally ignorant of God their Governor, are they likely to
know any more of God their Redeemer, or of God their
Judge, who will shortly reward every man according to his
works? In very deed, God is not in all their thoughts; they
do not think of him from morning to night. Whether they
are forming particular or national schemes, God has no place
therein. They do not take God into their account; they
can do their whole business without him; without considering
whether there be any God in the world; or whether he has
any share in the management of it.
15. And whatever be the event of their undertakings,
whether they have good or ill success, they do not suppose
God to have any part either in the one or the other. They
take it for granted, that the race is to the swift, and the battle
to the strong. Therefore, if things succeed well, they give
no praise to God, but to the conduct of their General and the
courage of their men. And if they succeed ill, they do not
see the hand of God, but impute all to natural causes.
16. The English in general, high and low, rich and poor,
do not speak of God. They do not say anything about Him,
from day to day, from week to week, from year to year.
They talk of anything beside; they are not so squeamish as
the old poet, who would not spend his breath in talking
De villis domibusve alienis;
Nec male necne Lepos saltet.*
We talk indifferently on everything that comes in the way;
on everything—but God. If any one were to name him in
good company, with any degree of seriousness, suppose at a
Gentleman or Nobleman's table, would not they all stand
aghast? Would not a profound silence ensue, till some one
started a more agreeable subject?
17. Again: A vast majority of the English live in the
constant neglect of the worship of God. To form a judgment
of this, you may take a specimen in the good city of London.
How few of the inhabitants worship God in public, even one
day in a week! Do not yet fewer of them make a conscience
of worshipping God in their families? And perhaps they
are a still smaller number that daily worship God in their
closets. Such, if we acknowledge the truth, is the general,
constant ungodliness of the English nation |
18. But negative ungodliness (so to speak) is the least
exceptionable part of our character. Proceed wc then to the
positive ungodliness, which overflows every part of our land.
The first branch of this positive ungodliness, and such as
shows an utter contempt of God, is perjury. And to this the
common people are strongly tempted in our public Courts
of Justice, by the shocking manner wherein oaths are
usually administered there, contrary to all sense and decency.
Forty years ago, (and perhaps it may be so still,) when an
oath was administered in the Court of Savannah in Georgia,
the Judge with all on the bench rose up, and stood uncovered
while it was administering; and Done moved his foot, or
uttered a word, till they sat down again. Has not every
English Judge power to introduce the same solemnity into
every court where he presides? Certainly he has. And
if he does not exert that power, he is inexcusable before
God and man.
19. Till this is done, our shameless manner of administering
oaths will increase the constant perjuries in our nation.
They are farther increased by our multiplying oaths to such
an amazing degree; and that on the slightest occasions.
* This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Boscawen :
“How fine this house, or that estate;
How great a favourite dancer's skill,
Whether he caper well or ill.”-EDIT.
Hence perjury infects the whole nation. It is constant, from
month to month, from year to year. And it is a glory which
no nation divides with us; it is peculiar to ourselves. There
is nothing like it to be found in any other (Christian or
Heathen) nation under heaven.
20. To descend to particulars would be tedious: Suffice it
to observe in general, there are exceeding few Justices of
the Peace, Mayors of Corporations, Sheriffs, Constables, or
Churchwardens; exceeding few Officers of the Customs, the
Excise, or any public office whatever, who are not constantly
perjured, taking oaths which they never intend to keep.
Add to these, thousands, yea, myriads of the voters at
elections, particularly for members of Parliament: Add thou
sands of the students in each University, who swear to a
book of statutes, which they never read, which most of them
never design to read, and much less to observe: Then judge,
whether there be any nation on the face of the earth, which
can vie with the English in perjury !
21. There is one other species of ungodliness, which is, if
possible, still more general among us; which is also constant,
being to be heard in every street every day in the year; and
which is quite peculiar to our nation, to England, and
its dependencies; namely, the stupid, senseless, shameless
ungodliness of taking the name of God in vain. Where in
the habitable world do the people so continually pray the
great God to “damn their souls?” Where else do they so
blaspheme the Majesty of Heaven? so idly swear by the
name of God? Some wretched gentlemen (so called) set
the example, which the small vulgar readily follow. And
these curses and oaths they pour out wantonly, without any
provocation; and desperately, without any remorse. Let
those who are acquainted with ancient and modern history
say, whether there is or ever was any heathen nation,
wherein such a total contempt of God, such horrid ungodli
ness, so generally and constantly prevailed !
22. See then, Englishmen, what is the undoubted charac
teristic of our nation; it is ungodliness. True, it was not
always so: For many ages we had as much of the fear of
God as our neighbours. But in the last age, many who
were absolute strangers to this, made so large a profession
of it, that the nation in general was surfeited, and, at the
Restoration, ran headlong from one extreme to the other.
It was then ungodliness broke in upon us as a flood; and
when shall its dire waves be stayed ?
23. Countrymen, is ungodliness any honour to our nation?
Let men of reason judge. Is this outraging the Greatest
and Best of beings, a thing honourable in itself? Surely
you cannot think so. Does it gain us any honour in the
eyes of other nations? Nay, just the contrary. Some of
them abhor the very name of Englishmen, others despise us,
on this very account. They look upon us as monsters,
hardly worthy to be ranked among human creatures.
24. Ye men of candour, say, does this ungodliness bring
any real advantage to our nation? Innumerable advantages
we enjoy; but might we not have them without discarding
the fear of God? Might we not prosper as well, both by
sea and land, if we did not set God at open defiance? if we
did not so continually affront him to his face, and dare him
to do his worst? If He has not left chance to govern the
world, and if he is really stronger than men, will not our
affairs go on better if God is our friend, than if he is our
enemy? Is God an enemy to be despised? Rather, is
there not reason in those words of the old warrior:
Non me tua fervida terrent
Dicta, ferow; Dii me terrent et Jupiter hostis f*
We have had excellent, well-appointed fleets; we have had
numerous veteran armies. And what have they done?
Have we not more and more reason to make that melancholy
exclamation,
Heu, nihil invitis fas quenquam fidere Divis 1 +
25. Can you believe, that our total ignorance of God, and
our general contempt of Him, who, whether men will acknow
ledge it or no, has still all power in heaven and in earth, can
be well pleasing to him? We need not care for all the
fervida dicta, all the rodomontades, of France and Spain.
But if the Lord of the universe is against us, ought we not
* This quotation from Virgil is thus translated by Pitt –
“Not those insulting empty vaunts I dread;
No ; but the gods with fear my bosom move,
And he, my greatest foe, almighty Jove.”-EDIT.
+ This quotation from the same poet is thus translated by Pitt:
“But, Heaven against us, all attempts must fail.”-EDIT.
M 2
I64 A WORD TO A SABDATH-BREAKER.
to care? unless we are very sure that our fleets and armies:
can prevail against Him ! Otherwise, would it be any
disgrace to humble ourselves, not to man, but to God? to
use every means to secure Him for our friend, now all our
other friends have failed us? Then, admitting “there is no
other that fighteth for us, but only thou, O God,” yet shall
none be able to hurt us, but peace and every other blessing
shall return both to us and to our colonies.
