Thoughts Concerning the Origin of Power
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. By power, I here mean supreme power, the power over
life and death, and consequently over our liberty and
property, and all things of an inferior nature.
2. In many nations this power has in all ages been lodged
in a single person. This has been the case in almost the
whole eastern world, from the earliest antiquity; as in the
celebrated empires of Assyria, of Babylon, of Media, Persia,
and many others. And so it remains to this day, from
Constantinople to the farthest India. The same form of
government obtained very early in very many parts of Afric,
and remains in most of them still, as well as in the empires of
Morocco and Abyssinia. The first adventurers to America
found absolute monarchy established there also ; the whole
power being lodged in the Emperor of Mexico, and the Yncas
of Peru. Nay, and many of the ancient nations of Europe
were governed by single persons; as Spain, France, the
Russias, and several other nations are at this day.
3. But in others, the power has been lodged in a few,
chiefly the rich and noble. This kind of government, usually
styled aristocracy, obtained in Greece and in Rome, after
many struggles with the people, during the later ages of the
republic. And this is the government which at present
subsists in various parts of Europe. In Venice indeed, as
well as in Genoa, the supreme power is nominally lodged in
one, namely, the Doge ; but in fact, he is only a royal shade;
it is really lodged in a few of the nobles.
4. Where the people have the supreme power, it is termed
a democracy. This seems to have been the ancient form of
government in several of the Grecian states. And so it was
at Rome for some ages after the expulsion of the Kings.
From the earliest authentic records, there is reason to believe
it was for espousing the cause of the people, and defending their
rights against the illegal encroachments of the nobles, that
Marcus Coriolanus was driven into banishment, and Manlius
Capitolinus, as well as Tiberius and Caius Gracchus, murdered.
Perhaps formerly the popular government subsisted in several
states. But it is scarce now to be found, being everywhere
swallowed up either in monarchy or aristocracy.
5. But the grand question is, not in whom this power is
lodged, but from whom it is ultimately derived. What is the
origin of power? What is its primary source? This has
been long a subject of debate. And it has been debated
with the utmost warmth, by a variety of disputants. But as
earnest as they have been on each side of the question, they
have seldom come to any good conclusion; but have left the
point undecided still, to be a ball of contention to the next
generation.
6. But is it impossible, in the nature of things, to throw any
light on this obscure subject? Let us make the experiment;
let us (without pretending to dictate, but desiring every one
to use his own judgment) try to find out some ground
whereon to stand, and go as far as we can toward answering
the question. And let not any man be angry on the account,
suppose we should not exactly agree. Let every one enjoy
his own opinion, and give others the same liberty.
7. Now, I cannot but acknowledge, I believe an old book,
commonly called the Bible, to be true. Therefore I believe,
“there is no power but from God: The powers that be are
ordained of God.” (Rom. xiii. 1.) There is no subordinate
power in any nation, but what is derived from the supreme
power therein. So in England the King, in the United Pro
vinces the States are the fountain of all power. And there
is no supreme power, no power of the sword, of life and
death, but what is derived from God, the Sovereign of all.
8. But have not the people, in every age and nation, the
right of disposing of this power; of investing therewith whom
they please, either one or more persons; and that, in what
proportion they see good, and upon what conditions? Con
sequently, if those conditions are not observed, have they not
a right to take away the power they gave 7 And does not
this imply, that they are the judges whether those conditions
are observed or not? Otherwise, if the receivers were judges
of their own cause, this right would fall into nothing.
9. To prove this, that the people in every country are the
source of power, it is argued thus: “All men living upon
earth are naturally equal; none is above another; and all are
naturally free, masters of their own actions. It manifestly
follows, no man can have any power over another, unless by
his own consent. The power therefore which the governors
in any nation enjoy, must be originally derived from the
people, and presupposes an original compact between them
and their first governors.”
10. This seems to be the opinion which is now generally
espoused by men of understanding and education; and that
(if I do not mistake) not in England alone, but almost in
every civilized nation. And it is usually espoused with the
fullest and strongest persuasion, as a truth little less than
self-evident, as what is clear beyond all possibility of doubt,
what commands the assent of all reasonable men. Hence if
any man affected to deny it, he would in most companies be
rather hooted at than argued with; it being so absurd to
oppose what is confirmed by the general suffrage of mankind.
11. But still (suppose it to need no proof) it may need a
little explaining; for every one does not understand the term.
Some will ask, “Who are the people?” Are they every man,
woman, and child? Why not? Is it not allowed, is it not
affirmed, is it not our fundamental principle, our incontestable,
self-evident axiom, that “all persons living upon earth are
naturally equal; that all human creatures are naturally free;
masters of their own actions; that none can have any power
over others, but by their own consent?” Why then should
not every man, woman, and child, have a voice in placing their
governors; in fixing the measure of power to be entrusted with
them, and the conditions on which it is entrusted? And why
should not every one have a voice in displacing them too;
seeing it is undeniable, they that gave the power have a right
to take it away? Do not quibble or shuffle. Do not evade
the question; but come close to the point. I ask, By what
argument do you prove that women are not naturally as free.
as men? And, if they are, why have they not as good a
right as we have to choose their own Governors? Who can
have any power over free, rational creatures, but by their own
consent? And are they not free by nature, as well as we?
Are they not rational creatures?
12. But suppose we exclude women from using their
natural right, by might overcoming right, by main strength,
(for it is sure that we are stronger than they; I mean that
we have stronger limbs, if we have not stronger reason,) what
pretence have we for excluding men like ourselves, yea,
thousands and tens of thousands, barely because they have
not lived one-and-twenty years? “Why, they have not
wisdom or experience to judge concerning the qualifications
necessary for Governors.” I answer, (1.) Who has? How
many of the voters in Great Britain? one in twenty? one in
an hundred? If you exclude all who have not this wisdom,
you will leave few behind. But, (2.) Wisdom and experience
are nothing to the purpose. You have put the matter upon
another issue. Are they men? That is enough. Are they
human creatures? Then they have a right to choose their own
Governors; an indefeasible right; a right inherent, insepar
able from human nature. “But in England, at least, they
are excluded by law.” But did they consent to the making
of that law If not, by your original supposition, it can
have no power over them. I therefore utterly deny that we
can, consistently with that supposition, debar either women
or minors from choosing their own Governors.
13. But suppose we exclude these by main force, (which it
is certain we are able to do, since though they have most
votes they have least strength,) are all that remain, all men
of full age, the people? Are all males, then, that have lived
one-and-twenty years allowed to choose their own Governors?
“Not at all; not in England, unless they are freeholders,
unless they have forty shillings a year.” Worse and worse.
After depriving half the human species of their natural rights
for want of a beard; after depriving myriads more for want
of a stiff beard, for not having lived one-and-twenty years;
you rob others (probably some hundred thousands) of their
birthright for want of money! Yet not altogether on this
account neither; if so, it might be more tolerable. But here
is an Englishman who has money enough to buy the estates
of fifty freeholders, and yet he must not be numbered among
the people because he has not two or three acres of land I
How is this? By what right do you exclude a man from
being one of the people because he has not forty shillings a
year; yea, or not a groat? Is he not a man, whether he be
1 rich or poor? Has he not a soul and a body? Has he not
the nature of a man; consequently, all the rights of a man,
all that flow from human nature; and, among the rest, that
of not being controlled by any but by his own consent.
14. “But he is excluded by law.” By what law? by
a law of his own making? Did he consent to the making
of it? Before this law was passed, was his consent either
obtained or asked ? If not, what is that law to him? No
man, you aver, has any power over another but by his own
consent. Of consequence, a law made without his consent
is, with regard to him, null and void. You cannot say other
wise without destroying the supposition, that none can be
governed but by his own consent.
15. See, now, to what your argument comes. You affirm,
all power is derived from the people; and presently excluded
one half of the people from having any part or lot in the
matter. At another stroke, suppose England to contain eight
millions of people, you exclude one or two millions more.
At a third, suppose two millions left, you exclude three-fourths
of these. And the poor pittance that remains, by I know
not what figure of speech, you call the people of England
16. Hitherto we have endeavoured to view this point in the
mere light of reason. And even by this means it manifestly
appears that this supposition, which is so high in vogue, which
is so generally received, nay, which has been palmed upon us
with such confidence, as undeniable and self-evident, is not
only false, not only contrary to reason, but contradictory to
itself; the very men who are most positive that the people
are the source of power, being brought into an inextricable
difficulty, by that single question, “Who are the people?”
reduced to a necessity of either giving up the point, or owning
that by the people they mean scarce a tenth part of them.
17. But we need not rest the matter entirely on reasoning;
let us appeal to matter of fact. And because we cannot
have so clear and certain a prospect of what is at too great a
distance, whether of time or place, let us only take a view of
what has been in our own country for six or seven hundred
years. I ask, then, When and where did the people of England
(even suppose by that word, the people, you mean only an
inundred thousand of them) choose their own Governors?
Did they choose, to go no farther, William the Conqueror?
Did they choose King Stephen, or King John? As to those
who regularly succeeded their fathers, it is plain the people
are out of the question. Did they choose Henry the Fourth,
Edward the Fourth, or Henry the Seventh? Who will be so
hardy as to affirm it? Did the people of England, or but
fifty thousand of them, choose Queen Mary, or Queen
Elizabeth? To come nearer to our own times, did they choose
King James the First? Perhaps you will say, “But if the
people did not give King Charles the supreme power, at least
they took it away from him. Surely, you will not deny this.”
Indeed I will; I deny it utterly. The people of England no
more took away his power, than they cut off his head. “Yes,
the Parliament did, and they are the people.” No; the
Parliament did not. The lower House, the House of Com
mons, is not the Parliament, any more than it is the nation.
Neither were those who then sat the House of Commons;
no; nor one quarter of them. But suppose they had been
the whole House of Commons, yea, or the whole Parliament;
by what rule of logic will you prove that seven or eight
hundred persons are the people of England? “Why, they
are the delegates of the people; they are chosen by them.”
No; not by one half, not by a quarter, not by a tenth part,
of them. So that the people, in the only proper sense of
the word, were innocent of the whole affair.
18. “But you will allow, the people gave the supreme
power to King Charles the Second at the Restoration.” I will
allow no such thing; unless by the people you mean General
Monk and fifteen thousand soldiers. “However, you will
not deny that the people gave the power to King William at
the Revolution.” Nay, truly, I must deny this too. I cannot
possibly allow it. Although I will not say that William the
Third obtained the royal power as William the First did;
although he did not claim it by right of conquest, which
would have been an odious title; yet certain it is, that he
did not receive it by any act or deed of the people. Their
consent was neither obtained nor asked; they were never
consulted in the matter. It was not therefore the people that
gave him the power; no, nor even the Parliament. It was the
Convention, and none else. “Who were the Convention?”
They were a few hundred Lords and gentlemen, who, observing
the desperate state of public affairs, met together on that
important occasion. So that still we have no single instance
in above seven hundred years of the people of England’s con
veying the supreme power either to one or more persons.
19. Indeed I remember in all history, both ancient and
modern, but one instance of supreme power conferred by the
people; if we mean thereby, though not all the people, yet a
great majority of them. This celebrated instance occurred at
Naples, in the middle of the last century; where the people,
properly speaking, that is, men, women, and children, claimed
and exerted their natural right in favour of Thomas Aniello,
(vulgarly called Masanello,) a young fisherman. But will
any one say, he was the only Governor for these thousand
years, who has had a proper right to the supreme power? I
believe not; nor, I apprehend, does any one desire that the
people should take the same steps in London.
20. So much both for reason and matter of fact. But
one single consideration, if we dwell a little upon it, will
bring the question to a short issue. It is allowed, no man
can dispose of another's life but by his own consent. I add,
No, nor with his consent; for no man has a right to dispose
of his own life. The Creator of man has the sole right to
take the life which he gave. Now, it is an indisputable
truth, Nihil dat quod non habet, “none gives what he has
not.” It plainly follows, that no man can give to another a
right which he never had himself; a right which only the
Governor of the world has, even the wiser Heathens being
judges; but which no man upon the face of the earth either
has or can have. No man therefore can give the power of
the sword, any such power as implies a right to take away
life. Wherever it is, it must descend from God alone, the
sole disposer of life and death.
21. The supposition, then, that the people are the origin.
of power, is every way indefensible. It is absolutely over
turned by the very principle on which it is supposed to stand;
namely, that a right of choosing his Governors belongs to
THoUGHTs on THE PRESENT scARCITY of PRovisions. 53
every partaker of human nature. If this be so, then it
belongs to every individual of the human species; conse
quently, not to freeholders alone, but to all men; not to men
only, but to women also; nor only to adult men and women,
to those who have lived one-and-twenty years, but to those
who have lived eighteen or twenty, as well as those who have
lived threescore. But none did ever maintain this, nor
probably ever will. Therefore this boasted principle falls to
the ground, and the whole superstructure with it. So
common sense brings us back to the grand truth, “There is
no power but of God.”
