The Origin of Image-Worship Among Christians
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
WHEN Christianity was first preached in the world, it
was supported by such miraculous assistance of the divine
power, that there was need of little or no human aid to the
propagation of it. Not only the Apostles, who first preached
it, but even the lay-believers were sufficiently instructed in
all the articles of faith, and were inspired with the power of
working miracles, and the gift of speaking in languages
unknown to them before.
But when the gospel was spread, and had taken root through
the world; when Kings and Princes became Christians, and
when temples were built and magnificently adorned for Chris
tian worship; then the zeal of some well-disposed Christians
brought pictures into the churches, not only as ornaments, but
as instructors of the ignorant; and from thence they were
called libri laicorum,-“the books of the people.” Thus the
walls of the churches were beset with pictures, representing
all the particular transactions mentioned. And they who did
not understand a letter of a book knew how to give a very
good account of the gospel, being taught to understand the
particular passages of it in the pictures of the church. Thus,
as hieroglyphics were the first means of propagating know
ledge, before writing by letters and words was invented; so
the more ignorant people were taught compendiously by
pictures, what, by the scarcity of teachers, they had not an
opportunity of being otherwise fully instructed in.
But these things, which were at first intended for good,
became, by the devil’s subtlety, a snare for the souls of Chris
tians. For when Christian Princes, and the rich and great,
vied with one another, who should embellish the temples with
greatest magnificence, the pictures upon the walls were turned
into gaudy images upon the altars; and the people being
deceived by the outward appearance of the Priests’ bowing and
kneeling, (before those images,) as the different parts of their
devotion led them, they imagined that those gestures were
designed to do honour to the images, before which they were
performed; (which they certainly were not;) and so, from
admiring, the people came to adore them. Thus, what were at
first designed as monuments of edification, became the instru
ments of superstition. This being a fatal oversight in the
Clergy, at first neglected, or winked at, by degrees (as all
errors have crept into the Church) gathered strength; so
that, from being in the beginning the dotage of the ignorant
vulgar, the poison infected those of better rank, and, by their
influence and countenance, brought some of the Priests over
to their opinion, or rather those Priests were the occasion of
deceiving the rich and powerful, especially the female sex, for
ends not very reputable or agreeable to the integrity of their
profession. But so it was, that what the Priests at first
winked at, they afterwards gave countenance to; and what
they once countenanced, they thought themselves obliged in
honour to defend; till, at last, superstition came to be preached
from the pulpits, and gross idolatry obtruded upon the people
for true devotion.
It is true, there were many of the sacred order, whose sound
hearts and clear heads were very averse to this innovation; who
both preached and wrote against the worship of images, showing
both the wickedness and folly of it. But the disease was so far
spread, and the poison had taken such root, that the conse
quence of opposition was the dividing the Church into parties
and schisms, and at last proceeded to blood and slaughter.
N. B. Is it not marvellous that what was so simple in the
beginning, should degenerate into such idolatry as is scarce
to be found in the heathen world! While this, and several
other errors, equally contrary to Scripture and reason, are
found in the Church, together with the abominable lives of
multitudes who call themselves Christians, the very name of
Christianity must stink in the nostrils of the Mahometans,
Jews, and Infidels.
