An Extract of a Letter to the Rev. Mr. Law
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 9 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
REVEREND SIR,
IN matters of religion I regard no writings but the inspired.
Tauler, Behmen, and a whole army of Mystic authors, are
with me nothing to St. Paul. In every point I appeal “to
the law and the testimony,” and value no authority but this.
At a time when I was in great danger of not valuing this
authority enough, you made that important observation: “I
see where your mistake lies. You would have a philosophical
religion; but there can be no such thing. Religion is the
most plain, simple thing in the world. It is only, ‘We love
him, because he first loved us.” So far as you add philo
sophy to religion, just so far you spoil it.” This remark I
have never forgotten since; and I trust in God I never shall.
But have not you? Permit me, Sir, to speak plainly. Have
you ever thought of it since 2 Is there a writer in England
who so continually blends philosophy with religion ? even in
tracts on “The Spirit of Prayer,” and “The Spirit of Love,”
wherein, from the titles of them, one would expect to find no
more of philosophy than in the Epistles of St. John. Con
cerning which, give me leave to observe in general, l. That
the whole of it is utterly superfluous: A man may be full both
of prayer and love, and not know a word of this hypothesis.
2. The whole of this hypothesis is unproved;—it is all pre
carious, all uncertain. 3. The whole hypothesis has a
dangerous tendency. It naturally leads men off from plain,
practical religion, and fills them with the “knowledge” that
“puffeth up,” instead of the “love” that “ edifieth.” And, 4.
It is often flatly contrary to Scripture, to reason, and to itself.
But over and above this superfluous, uncertain, dangerous,
irrational, and unscriptural philosophy, have not you lately
grieved many who are not strangers to the spirit of prayer or
love, by advancing tenets in religion, some of which they think
are unsupported by Scripture, some even repugnant to it?
Allow me, Sir, first to touch upon your philosophy, and then
to speak freely concerning these.
I. As to your philosophy, the main of your theory respects,
1. Things antecedent to the creation: 2. The creation itself:
3. Adam in paradise: 4. The fall of man.
I do not undertake formally to refute what you have asserted
on any of these heads. I dare not; I cannot answer either to
God or man such an employment of my time. I shall only give
a sketch of this strange system, and ask a few obvious questions.
And 1. Of things antecedent to the creation.
“All that can be conceived is God, or nature, or creature.”
(Spirit of Prayer, Part II, p. 33.)
Is nature created, or not created ? It must be one or the
other; for there is no medium. If not created, is it not God?
If created, is it not a creature? How then can there be three,
God, nature, and creature; since nature must coincide either
with God or creature ?
“Nature is initself a hungry, wrathful fire of life.” (Page 34.)
“Nature is and can be only a desire. Desire is the very
being of nature.” (Spirit of Love, Part I., p. 20.)
“Nature is only a desire, because it is for the sake of some
thing else. Nature is only a torment; because it cannot help
itself to that which it wants.” (Page 34.)
“Nature is the outward manifestion of the invisible glories
of God.” (Part II., p. 62.)
Is not the last of these definitions contradictory to all that
precede?
If desire is the very being of nature; if it is a torment, an
hungry, wrathful fire; how is it “the outward manifestation
of the invisible glories of God?”
“Nature as well as God is antecedent to all creatures.”
(Page 59.)
“There is an eternal nature, as universal and as unlimited
as God.” (Page 64.)
Is then nature God? Or are there two eternal, universai,
infinite beings?
* Mr. Law’s words are enclosed all along in commas.
“Nothing is before eternal nature but God.” (Ibid.)
“Nothing but !” Is anything before that which is eternal?
But how is this grand account of nature consistent with what
you say elsewhere?
“Nature, and darkness, and self, are but three different
expressions for one and the same thing.” (Page 18l.)
“Nature has all evil and no evil in it.” (Page 192.) Yea,
“Nature, self, or darkness, has not only no evil in it, but
is the only ground of all good.” (Ibid.)
O rare darkness |
“Nature has seven chief properties, and can have neither
more nor less, because it is a birth from the Deity in nature.”
Is nature a birth from the Deity in nature? Is this sense?
If it be, what kind of proof is it? Is it not ignotum per ceque
ignotum ?* “For God is tri-une, and nature is tri-une.”
“Nature is tri-une !” Is not this flat begging the question?
“And hence arise properties, three and three.” Nay, why not
nine and nine? “And that which brings these three and
three into union is another property.” (Spirit of Love, Part
II., p. 64.) Why so? Why may it not be two, or five, or
nine? Is it not rather the will and power of God?
“The three first properties of nature are the whole essence
of that desire which is, and is called, nature.” (Page 69.)
How? Are the properties of a thing the same as the essence
of it? What confusion is this ! But if they were, can a part
of its properties be the whole essence of it?
“The three first properties of nature are attraction, resist
ance, and whirling. In these three properties of the desire,
you see the reason of the three great laws of matter and
motion, and need not be told that Sir Isaac ploughed with
Jacob Behmen’s heifer.” (Page 37.) Just as much as Milton
ploughed with Francis Quarles's heifer.
How does it appear, that these are any of the properties of
nature, if you mean by nature anything distinct from matter?
And how are they the properties of desire? What a jumbling
of dissonant notions is here !
“The fourth property” (you affirm, not prove) “is called
fire: The fifth, the form of light and love.” What do you
mean by the form of love? Are light and love one and the
* To prove an unknown proposition by one equally unknown.—EDIT.
same thing? “The sixth, sound or understanding.” Are
then sound and understanding the same thing? “The
seventh, a life of triumphing joy.” (Page 58.) Is then a life
of triumphing joy, “that which brings the three and three
properties into union?” If so, how can it be “the result of
that union ?” Do these things hang together?
To conclude this head: You say, “Attraction is an incessant
working of three contrary properties, drawing, resisting, and
whirling.” (Page 200.) That is, in plain terms, (a discovery
worthy of Jacob Behmen, and yet not borrowed by Sir Isaac,)
“Drawing is incessant drawing, resistance, and whirling.”
2. Of the creation:— .
You put these words, with many more equally important,
into the mouth of God himself!
“Angels first inhabited the region which is now taken up
by the sun and the planets that move round him. It was
then all a glassy sea, in which perpetual scenes of light and
glory were ever rising and changing in obedience to their
call. Hence they fancied they had infinite power, and
resolved to abjure all submission to God. In that moment
they were whirled down into their own dark, fiery, working
powers. And in that moment the glassy sea, by the wrathful
workings of these spirits, was broke in pieces, and became a
chaos of fire and wrath, thickness and darkness.” (Spirit of
Prayer, Part I., p. 14, &c.)
I would inquire upon this,
(1) Is it well for a man to take such liberty with the most
high God?
(2.) Is not this being immeasurably “wise above that
which is written ?” wiser than all the Prophets and all the
Apostles put together?
(3.) How can anything of this be proved?—Why thus:
“‘Darkness was upon the face of the deep. What can this
mean, but that the fall of angels brought desolation into the
very place of this world?” (Part II., p. 49.) What a proof!
Secondly. “The Scripture shows, that the Spirit of God
entering into this darkness,” that is, into the very place where
Satan reigned before, “brought forth a new world.” (Page 50.)
Where does it show, that this darkness was the place
where Satan reigned? I cannot find it in my Bible.
Thirdly. “How could the devil be called the prince of this
world if it was not once his own kingdom?” (Ibid.)
May he not be so called, because he now reigns therein?
Is he not now “the ruler of the darkness,” or wickedness,
“of this world P”
Fourthly. “Had it not been their own kingdom, the devils.
could have no power here. This may pass for a demonstration,
that this is the very place in which the angels fell.” (Page 51.)
I doubt it will not pass. Cannot God permit Satan to
exert his power wherever it pleaseth him?
Hitherto then we have not a grain of sound proof. Yet
you pronounce with all peremptoriness,
“The grounds of true religion cannot be truly known but
by going so far back as this fall of angels.” (Pages 37, 38.)
Cannot Positively cannot How few men in England, in
Europe, can or do go back so far ! And are there none but
these, no not one, who knows the grounds of true religion?
“It was their revolt which brought wrath and fire and
thickness and darkness into nature.” (Ibid.)
If it was sin that brought fire in the world, (which is hard
to prove,) did it bring darkness, and thickness too? But if
it did, what harm is there in either? Is not thickness as
good in its place as thinness? And as to darkness, you say
yourself, “It has not only no evil in it, but is the only
ground of all possible good.”
Touching creation in general you aver,
“A creation out of nothing is no better sense than a
creation into nothing.” (Page 60.)
“A creation into nothing ” is a contradiction in terms.
Can you say a creation out of nothing is so? It is indeed
tautology; since the single term creation is equivalent with
production out of nothing.
“That all things were created out of nothing has not the
least tittle of Scripture to support it.” (Page 55.)
Is it not supported (as all the Christian Church has thought
hitherto) by the very first verse of Genesis?
“Nay, it is a fiction big with the grossest absurdities. It
is full of horrid consequences. It separates everything from:
God. It leaves no relation between God and the creature.
For ” (mark the proof!) “if it is created out of nothing, it
cannot have something of God in it.” (Page 58.)
The consequence is not clear. Till this is made good, can
any of those propositions be allowed ?
“Nature is the first birth of God.” Did God create it or
not? If not, how came it out of him? If he did, did he
create it out of something, or nothing?
“St. Paul says, All things are of, or out of, God.” And
what does this prove, but that God is the cause of all things?
“The materiality of the angelic kingdom was spiritual.”
(Spirit of Prayer, Part II., p. 27.) What is spiritual materi
ality? Is it not much the same with immaterial materiality?
“This spiritual materiality brought forth the heavenly
flesh and blood of angels.” (Ibid. p. 57.) That angels have
bodies, you affirm elsewhere. But are you sure they have
flesh and blood? Are not the angels spirits? And surely
a spirit hath not flesh and blood.
“The whole glassy sea was a mirror of beauteous forms,
colours, and sounds, perpetually springing up, having also
fruits and vegetables, but not gross, as the fruits of the
world. This was continually bringing forth new figures of
life; not animals, but ideal forms of the endless divisibility
of life.” (Part I., pp. 18, 19.)
This likewise is put into the mouth of God. But is non
sense from the Most High P
What less is “a mirror of beauteous sounds?” And what are
“figures of life?” Are they alive or dead, or between both, as a
man may be between sleeping and waking? What are “ideal
forms of the endless divisibility of life?” Are they the same
with those forms of stones, one of which Maraton took up (while
he was seeking Yaratilda) to throw at the form of a lion? *
“The glassy sea being become thick and dark, the spirit
converted its fire and wrath into sun and stars, its dross and
darkness into earth, its mobility into air, its moisture into
water.” (Part II., p. 29.)
Was wrath converted into sun or stars, or a little of it
bestowed on both ? How was darkness turned into earth,
or mobility into air? Has not fire more mobility than this?
Did there need omnipotence, to convert fire into fire, into
the sun, or moisture into water?
“Darkness was absolutely unknown to the angels till they
fell. Hence it appears, that darkness is the ground of the mate
riality of nature.” (Page 33.) Appears—to whom? Nothing
appears to me, but the proving ignotum per ignotius.f
* See the Spectator.
+ The proving of an unknown proposition by one still less known.-EDIT.
“All life is a desire.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 198.)
“Every desire, as such, is and must be made up of contra
riety. God’s bringing a sensible creature into existence is
the bringing the power of desire into a creaturely state.”
(Ibid.) Does not all this require a little more proof, and not
a little illustration?
“Hard and soft, thick and thin, could have no existence,
till nature lost its first purity. And this is the one true origin
of all the materiality of this world. Else, nothing thick or
hard could ever have been.” (Part I., p. 21.) Does not this
call for much proof? since most people believe God created
matter, merely because so it seemed good in his sight.
But you add a kind of proof. “How comes a flint to be
so hard and dark? It is because the meekness and fluidity
of the light, air, and water are not in it.” (Ibid.) The
meekness of light, and air, and water / What is that? Is
air or water capable of virtue?
“The first property of nature is a constraining, attracting,
and coagulating power.” (Page 24.) I wait the proof of this.
“God brought gross matter out of the sinful properties of
mature, that thereby the fallen angels might lose all their power
over them.” (Page 27.) And have they lost all power over
them? Is Satan no longer prince of the power of the air?
“As all matter is owing to the first property of nature,
which is an astringing, compressing desire.” (Page 28.)
Stop here, Sir. I totally deny, that any unintelligent being
is capable of any desire at all. And yet this gross, capital
mistake, runs through your whole theory.
“The fourth property is fire.” (Page 49.) Where is the
proof? “Which changes the properties of nature into an
heavenly state.” (Page 48.) Proof again? “The con
junction of God and nature brings forth fire.” This needs
the most proof of all.
“Every right-kindled fire must give forth light.” Why?
“Because the eternal fire is the effect of supernatural light.”
Nay, then light should rather give forth fire.
“The fire of the soul and that of the body has but one
nature.” (Page 52.) Can either Behmen or Spinosa prove
this ?
3. Of Adam in paradise.
“Paradise is an heavenly birth of life.” (Spirit of Prayer,
Part I., p. 6.) How does this definition explain the thing
defined 9
“Adam had at first both an heavenly and an earthly body.
Into the latter, was the spirit of this world breathed; and in this
spirit and body did the heavenly spirit and body of Adam
dwell.” (Page 7.) So he had originally two bodies and two
souls | This will need abundance of proof. “The spirit and
body of this world was the medium through which he was
to have commerce with this world.” The proof? “But it
was no more alive in him, than Satan and the serpent were
alive in him at his first creation. Good and evil were then
only in his outward body and in the outward world.” What!
was there evil in the world, and even in Adam, together with
Satan and the serpent, at his first creation? “But they were
kept unactive by the power of the heavenly man within him.”
Did this case cover the earthly man, or the earthly case the
heavenly 9
But “he had power to choose, whether he would use his out
ward body only as a means of opening the outward world to.
him;” (so it was not quite unactive neither;) “or of opening
the bestial life in himself. Till this was opened in him, nothing
in this outward world, no more than his own outward body,”
(so now it is unactive again,) “could act upon him, make any
impressions upon him, or raise any sensations in him; neither
had he any feeling of good or evil from it.” (Page 9.) All this
being entirely new, we must beg clear and full proof of it.
“God said to man at his creation, Rule thou over this imper
fect, perishing world, without partaking of its impure nature.”
(Page 21.) Was not the world then at first perfect in its kind?
Was it impure then? Or would it have perished if man had
not sinned? And are we sure that God spake thus?
“The end God proposed in the creation was the restoring
all things to their glorious state.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part II.,
p. 61.) “In the creation 1” Was not this rather the end which
he proposed in the redemption?
“Adam was created to keep what is called the curse, covered
and overcome by Paradise. And as Paradise concealed and
overcame all the evil in the elements, so Adam's heavenly man
concealed from him all the evil of the earthly nature that was
under it.” (Page 62.) Can we believe that there was any evil
in man from the creation, if we believe the Bible?
“Our own good spirit is the very Spirit of God; and yet
not God, but the Spirit of God kindled into a creaturely form.”
Is there any meaning in these words? And how are they con
sistent with those that follow * “This spirit is so related to
God, as my breath is to the air.” (Page 195.) Nay, if so,
your spirit is God. For your breath is air.
“That Adam had at first the nature of an angel, is plain
from hence, that he was both male and female in one person.
Now, this (the being both male and female) is the very perfec
tion of the angelic nature.” (Page 65.) Naturalists say that snails
have this perfection. But who can prove that angels have?
You attempt to prove it thus: “‘In the resurrection they
neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels.’
Here we are told, (1.) That the being male and female in one
person is the very nature of angels. (2.) That man shall be
so too at the resurrection: Therefore he was so at first.”
(Page 66.)
Indeed, we are not told here, that angels are hermaphrodites.
No, nor anything like it. The whole passage is: “They who
are accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrec
tion from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage;
neither can they die any more; for they are equal unto the
angels;” (Luke xx. 35, 36;) namely, (not in being male
and female, but) in this, that they “cannot die any more.”
This is the indisputable meaning of the words. So this whole
proof vanishes into air.
You have one more thought, full as new as this: “All
earthly beasts are but creaturely eruptions of the disorder that
is broken out from the fallen spiritual world. So earthly ser
pents are but transitory out-births of covetousness, envy,
pride, and wrath.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 207.)
How shall we reconcile this with the Mosaic account? “And
God said, Let the earth bring forth cattle, and creeping thing,
and beast. And God made the beast of the earth; and God
saw that it was good.” (Gen. i. 24, 25.) Does anything here
intimate that beasts or serpents literally crept out of the womb
of sin? And what have serpents, in particular, to do with
covetousness, or, indeed, with envy, unless in poetic fables?
4. Of the fall of man.
“Adam had lost much of his perfection before Eve was
taken out of him. “It is not good,” said God, ‘that man should
be alone.” This shows that Adam had now made that not to
be good, which God saw to be good when he created him.”
(Spirit of Prayer, p. 74.) Nay, does it show either more or
less than this, that it was not conducive to the wise ends God
had in view, for man to remain single?
“God then divided the human nature into a male and
female creature: Otherwise man would have brought forth
his own likeness out of himself, in the same manner as he
had a birth from God. But Adam let in an adulterous love
of the world: By this his virginity was lost, and he had no
longer a power of bringing forth a birth from himself.”
(Page 75.) We have no shadow of proof for all this.
“This state of inability is called his falling into a deep
sleep.” (Page 76.) How does this agree with, “The Lord
God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam?” (Gen. ii. 21.)
“God took his Eve out of him, as a lesser evil, to avoid a
greater. For it was a less folly to love the female part of
himself, than to love things lower than himself.” (Page 77.)
Who can extract this out of the words of Moses? Who
can reconcile it with the words of our Lord? “He who made
them at the beginning ” (not a word of any previous fall)
“made them male and female, and said, For this cause shall
a man leave father and mother, and cleave unto his wife.”
(Matt. xix. 4, 5.) Is here any intimation, that for a man to
love his wife is only less folly than to love the world? “A
man ought so to love his wife, even as Christ the Church.”
Is there any folly in the love of Christ to the Church 7
“Marriage came in by Adam’s falling from his first per
fection.” (Page 88.) Does this account do honour to that
institution, any more than that memorable saying of an emi
nent Mystic, “Marriage is but licensed whoredom?”
“Had Adam stood, no Eve would have been taken out of
him. But from Eve God raised that angelic man, whom
Adam should have brought forth without Eve, who is called
the Second Adam, as being both male and female.” (Page
79.) Many things herewant proof. How does it appear,
(1.) That Eve would not have been, had Adam stood? (2.)
That had he stood, he would have brought forth the Second
Adam without Eve? (3.) That Christ was both male and
female? and, (4.) That he was on this account called the
Second Adam?
“The Second Adam is now to do that which the first
should have done.” (Page 84.) Is he to do no more than that?
no more than a mere creature should have done? Then what
need is there of his being any more than a creature? What
need of his being God?
“Our having from him a new heavenly flesh and blood,
raised in us by his spiritual power, is the strongest proof that
we should have been born of Adam by the same spiritual
power.” (Page 85.)
Had Adam then the very same spiritual power which
Christ had ? And would he, if he had stood, have trans
mitted to us the very same benefit? Surely none that be
lieves the Christian Revelation will aver this in cool blood |
“From Adam’s desire turned toward the world, the earth
got a power of giving forth an evil tree. It was his will
which opened a passage for the evil hid in the earth,” (I
know not how it came there before Adam fell,) “to bring
forth a tree in its own likeness. No sooner was it brought
forth, than God assured him that death was hid in it: A
plain proof that this tree was not from God, but from a power
in the earth, which could not show itself, till Adam desired
to taste something which was not paradisiacal.” (Page 96.)
This is the marvellous in the highest degree, and affords
many questions not very easy to be answered. But, waving all
these, can anything be more flatly contradictory to the Mosaic
account? We read there, “The Lord God formed man. And
the Lord planted a garden. And out of the ground made the
Lord God every tree to grow that is pleasant to the sight and
good for food; the tree of life also, and the tree of knowledge
of good and evil.” (Gen. ii. 7–9.) Is it not here plainly
taught that this tree was from God? that, not the desire of
Adam, but the Lord God, made this tree to grow, as well as
the tree of life? And when was it that God gave him that
solemn warning, “In the day that thou eatest thereof thou
shalt surely die?” (Verse 17.) Not so soon as that tree was
brought forth; but when Adam was put into the garden.
“At first, all the natural properties of man’s creaturely life
were hid in God, just as the natural qualities of darkness are
hid till glorified by the light.” (Spirit of Love, Part II. p.
181.) Nay, were they not sufficiently hid by the heavenly
man? Need they be hid over and over?
“But when man fell, all these properties broke forth, just as
the darkness, when it has lost the light, must show forth its
own coldness, horror, and other uncomfortable qualities.”
Exemplum placet !” But, are either coldness or horror
natural qualities of darkness? If so, they must be insepar
able from it. But who will affirm this?
“Darkness, though contrary to light, is yet absolutely
necessary to it. Without this, no manifestation or visibility
of light could possibly be.” This is absolutely new and
surprising. But how is it to be proved?
Thus: “God dwelleth in the light which no man can
approach. Therefore, light cannot be manifested to man but
by darkness.” (Page 189.) Ah, poor consequence I Would
not the same text just as well prove transubstantiation?
“Light and darkness do everything, whether good or evil,
that is done in man. Light is all power, light is all things
and nothing.” (Ibid.)
I cannot conceive what ideas you affix to the terms light
and darkness. But I forget. You except against ideas.
Can you teach us to think without them?
Once more : You say, “Darkness is a positive thing, and
has a strength and a substantiality in it.” (Page 182.) I
have scarce met with a greater friend to darkness, except
“the illuminated Jacob Behmen.”
But, Sir, have you not done him an irreparable injury? I
do not mean by misrepresenting his sentiments; (though some
of his profound admirers are positive that you misunderstand
and murder him throughout;) but by dragging him out of his
awful obscurity; by pouring light upon his venerable darkness.
Men may admire the deepness of the well, and the excellence of
the water it contains: But if some officious person puts a light
into it, it will appear to be both very shallow and very dirty.
I could not have borne to spend so many words on so egre
gious trifles, but that they are mischievous trifles:
IIae nuga seria ducent
In mala.t
This is dreadfully apparent in your own case, (I would not
speak, but that Idare not refrain,) whom, notwithstanding your
* The example is pleasing.—EDIT.
# This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Boscawen :
*These trifles serious mischief brecd.”-EDIT,
uncommon abilities, they have led astray in things of the
greatest importance. Bad philosophy has, by insensible
degrees, paved the way for bad divinity: In consequence of
this miserable hypothesis, you advance many things in reli
gion also, some of which are unsupported by Scripture, some
even repugnant to it.
II. Some of these I shall now mention with the utmost
plainness, as knowing for whom, and before whom, I speak.
And, 1. You deny the omnipotence of God.
You say: “As no seeing eye could be created unless there
was, antecedent to it, a natural visibility of things,” (Why not?
Why might not visible things be created at the same instant
with it?) “so no creature could come into any natural life,
unless such a state of nature was antecedent to it.” (Page 60.)
“All that God does is, and must be, done in and by the powers
of nature.” (Page 135.) What then did it avail that, as you
elsewhere say, God was before nature? He not only could not
then do all things, but he could do nothing till nature existed.
But if so, how came nature itself, this second eternal, to
exist at all?
“There cannot possibly be any other difference between
created beings, than arises from that out of which they were
created.” (Page 60.) Why not? Who will stay the hand of
the Almighty, or say unto him, What doest thou?
“No fruits or vegetables could have sprung up in the divided
elements, but because they are parts of that glassy sea, where
angelical fruits grew before.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part I., p. 19.)
But how came those fruits to grow before? How came
they to grow in the glassy sea? Were they not produced
out of nothing at first 7 If not, God was not before nature.
If they were, cannot he still produce out of nothing whatso
ever pleaseth him?
“All outward nature being fallen from heaven,” (that we
deny,) “must, as well as it can, do and work as it did in
heaven.” (Page 20.) “As well as it can l’” What can it do
without God, who upholdeth all things by the word of his
power? And what can it not do, if he pleaseth? Or, rather,
what cannot he do, with or without it?
“Matter could not possibly be, but from sin.” (Spirit of
Love, Part I., p. 23.) That is, in very plain terms, God
could not have created matter if Satan had not sinned !
“God could not create man with a soul and a body, unless
there was such a thing as nature antecedent to the creation of
man.” (Page 30.)
Why could not God do this? Because “body and spirit are
not two separate things, but are only the inward and outward
condition of one and the same being. Every creature must
have its own body, and cannot be without it. For its body is
that” (Who would have thought it!) “which makes it manifest
to itself. It cannot know either that it is, or what it is, but by
its own body 1” (Page 32.)
What a heap of bold assertions is here to curb omnipotence
And not one of them has a tittle of proof, unless one can prove
the other |
But we have more still: “The body of any creature has
nothing of its own, but is solely the outward manifestation of
that which is inwardly in the soul. Every animal has nothing
in its outward form or shape but that which is the form and
growth of its spirit. As no number can be anything else but
that which the units contained in it make it to be, so no body
can be anything else but the coagulation or sum total of those
properties of nature that are coagulated in it.” (Page 33.)
Astonishing! What a discovery is this, that a body is only
a curdled spirit ! that our bodies are only the sum total of our
spiritual properties! and that the form of every man’s body is
only the form of his spirit made visible !
“Every spirit manifests its own nature by that body which
proceeds from it as its own birth.” (Part II., p. 17.)
Does the body then grow out of the spirit, as the hair and
nails grow out of the body; and this in consequence of the
“powers of nature,” distinct from the power and will of God?
To abridge God of his power, after creation, as well as before
it, you affirm, farther,
“This is an axiom that cannot be shaken, Nothing can rise
higher than its first created nature; and therefore an angel at
last must have been an angel at first. Do you think it possible
for an ox to be changed into a rational philosopher? Yet this
is as possible as for one who has only by creation the life of this
world to be changed into an angel of heaven. The life of this
world can reach no farther than this world; no omnipotence of
God can carry it farther: Therefore, if man is to be an angel at
last, he must have been created an angel; because no creature
can possibly have any other life, or higher degree of life, than
that which his creation brought forth in him.” (Spirit of
Prayer, Part II., p. 81.)
I have quoted this passage at some length, that the sense
of it may appear beyond dispute. But what divinity ! and
what reasoning to support it! Can God raise nothing higher
than its first created state? Is it not possible for him to
change an ox or a stone into a rational philosopher, or a child
of Abraham ? to change a man or a worm into an angel of
heaven? Poor omnipotence which cannot do this! Whether
he will or no, is another question. But if he cannot do it,
how can he be said to do “whatsoever pleaseth him in
heaven, and in earth, and in the sea, and in all deep places?”
Thus does your attachment to a miserable philosophy, lead
you to deny the almighty power of God.
2. It leads you, in the Second place, to deny his justice;
to abridge this no less than his power.
This I may be permitted to consider more at large; because,
though it was allowed by all the wiser Heathens of past ages,
yet it is now one main hinge on which the controversy
between Christianity and Deism turns. To convert a
thousand Deists, therefore, by giving up this point, with the
doctrine of justification which is built upon it, is little more
than it would be to convert as many Jews by allowing the
Messiah is not yet come. It is converting them by allowing
all they contend for; by granting them the main point in
question. Consequently, it is no other than establishing
Deism, while it pretends to overturn it.
I would greatly wish, in weighing what you have advanced
on this head, to forget who speaks, and simply consider what
is spoken. The person I greatly reverence and love: The
doctrine I utterly abhor; as I apprehend it to be totally
subversive of the very essence of Christianity.
God himself hath declared, that, in consequence of his
justice, he will, in the great day of general retribution,
“render to every man according to his works, whether they
be good or evil.”
But man says, No: “There is no righteous wrath or vindic
tive justive in God.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 108.) If so,
ye may go on, ye children of the devil, in doing the works of
your father. It is written, indeed, “The wrath of God is revealed
from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousncss:” But
this is not literally to be taken; for, properly speaking, there
is no such thing as the wrath of God!
Fear not the bugbear of everlasting burnings. There is
not only no everlasting punishment, but no punishment at
all; no such thing in the universe. It is a mere vulgar errror!
I should be extremely glad to prophesy these smooth things
too, did not a difficulty lie in the way. As nothing is more
frequently or more expressly declared in Scripture, than God’s
anger at sin, and his punishing it both temporally and eter
nally, every assertion of this kind strikes directly at the credit
of the whole revelation. For if there be one falsehood in the
Bible, there may be a thousand; neither can it proceed from
the God of truth. However, I will weigh all your assertions.
And may the God of truth shine on both our hearts!
I must premise, that I have no objection to the using the
words wrath (or anger) and justice as nearly synonymous;
seeing anger stands in the same relation to justice, as love
does to mercy; love and anger being the passions (speaking
after the manner of men) which correspond with the dis
positions of mercy and justice. Whoever therefore denies
God to be capable of wrath or anger, acts consistently in
denying his justice also.
You begin: “(1.) No wrath (anger, vindictive justice) ever
was or ever will be in God. If a wrath of God were any
where, it must be everywhere.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part I.,
p. 27.) So it is, as sure as the just God is everywhere.
“(2.) Wrath and pain dwell only in the creatures.” (Page28.)
Pain is only in creatures. Of wrath, we are to inquire farther.
“(3.) To say, God ever punished any creature out of wrath,
is as absurd as to say, He began the creation out of wrath.”
I conceive, not. It is not as absurd to say, “God is angry at
the guilty,” as to say, “God is angry at the innocent.” Now,
it is certain, when God began the creation of man, no guilty
men were in being.
“(4.) He must always will that to his creatures, which he
willed at the creation of them.” True; and he willed, at the very
creation of men, “to reward every one as his work should be.”
“(5.) God is incapable of willing painto any creature, because
he is nothing but goodness.” (Page 29.) You mean, because
his goodness excludes justice. Nay, that is the very question.
“(6.) God can give nothing but happiness from himself,
because he hath nothing else in himself.” (Spirit of Love,
Part I., p. 3.) As if you had said, “God can give nothing
but infinity from himself, because he has nothing else in him
self.” It is certain he has not. He is all infinity. Yet that
argument will not hold.
“(7.) God can no more begin to have any wrath after the
creature is fallen, than he could be infinite wrath and rage
from all eternity.” (Part II., p. 4.) No changing the terms.
We have nothing to do with rage. This properly means
excessive anger. Setting this aside, I answer to the argument,
God was infinitely just from all eternity: In consequence
of which, his anger then began to show itself, when man had
sinned.
“(8.) No wrath can be in God, unless God was, from all
eternity, an infinity of wrath.” just. (Page 6.) That is, infinitely
So he was and will be to all eternity.
“(9.) There must either be no possibility of wrath, or no
possibility of its having any bounds.” (Page 7.) The divine
justice cannot possibly have any bounds. It is as unlimited
as his power.
“(10.) Two things show the nature of wrath,-a tempest,
and a raging sore. The former is wrath in the elements; the
latter is wrath in the body. Now, both these are a disorder;
but there is no disorder in God: Therefore there is no wrath
in God.” (Page 13.)
“A tempest is wrath in the elements; a raging sore is
wrath in the body.” It is not. Neither the body, the elements,
nor anything inanimate is capable of wrath. And when we
say, “The sore looks angry,” does any one dream this is to
be taken literally? The pillars of the argument, therefore, are
rotten. Consequently, the superstructure falls to the ground.
In vain would you prop it up by saying, “Wrath can have
no other nature in body than it has in spirit, because it can
have no existence in body, but what it has from spirit.” (Page
15.) Nay, it can have no existence in body at all, as yourself
affirm presently after. Yet you strangely go on: “There is
but one wrath in all outward things, animate or inanimate.”
Most true; for all wrath is in animals; things inanimate are
utterly incapable of it.
“There can be but one kind of wrath, because nothing can
be wrathful but spirit.” (Page 18.)
Never then let us talk of wrathful elements, of wrathful
tempests or sores, again.
“(11.) Wrath and evil are but two words for the samething.”
(Ibid.) This is home; but it cannot be granted without proof.
“ (12.) God is as incapable of wrath, as of thickness, hard
ness, and darkness; because wrath can exist nowhere else
but in thickness, hardness, and darkness.” (Page 71.)
So far from it, that wrath cannot exist in thicknees or
hardness at all. For these are qualities of bodies; and
“nothing can be wrathful but spirit.”
“(13.) Wrath cannot be in any creature, till it has lost
its first perfection.” (Page 72.) That remains to be proved.
Thus far you have advanced arguments for your doctrine.
You next attempt to answer objections:—
And to the objection, that Scripture speaks so frequently
of the wrath of God, you answer,
“(1.) All the wrath and vengeance that ever was in any
creature, is to be called and looked on as the wrath and ven
geance of God.”
I totally deny that proposition, and call for the proof of it.
“(2.) God works everything in nature. Therefore all death,
or rage, or curse, wherever it is, must be said, in the language
of Scripture, to be the wrath or vengeance of God.” (Page 55.)
I deny the consequence. The latter proposition does not
follow from the former. And indeed it is not true. All
death, and rage, and curse, is not in the language of Scripture
termed the wrath and vengeance of God.
“(3) Because the devils have their life from God; there
fore, their cursed, miserable, wrathful life is said to be the
curse, and misery, and wrath of God upon them.” (Page 53.)
Neither can this be proved, that the devils having their
life from God, is the reason why they are said to be under
his wrath. Nor does the Scripture ever term their wrathful,
miserable life, the wrath or misery of God.
“(4.) Devils are his, as well as holy angels. Therefore all the
wrath and rage of the one must be as truly his wrath and rage
burning in them, as the joy of the others is his joy.” (Page 54.)
So it seems, the wrath of God in Scripture means no more
or less than the wrath of the devil! However, this argument
will not prove it. The joy of saints (not of angels that I
remember) is styled the joy of their Lord, because he pre
pared it for them, and bestows it on them. Does he prepare
and bestow the rage of devils upon them?
“(5.) His wrath and his vengeance are no more in God,
than what the Psalmist calls his ice and his frost.” (Page 74.)
There is nothing parallel in the case. We cannot take the
latter expression literally, without glaring absurdity; the
former we may.
“(6.) ‘The earth trembled because he was wroth. No
wrath here but in the elements.”
Nay, if so, here was no wrath at all. For we are agreed,
“Only spirits can be wrathful.”
(7.) One more text, usually cited against your opinion,
you improve into an argument for it: “‘Avenge not your
selves, for vengeance is mine. This is a full proof that
vengeance is not in God. If it was, then it would belong to
every child of God, or he could not ‘be perfect as his Father
is perfect.’ ” (Page 76.)
Yes, he could in all his imitable perfections. But God has
peculiarly forbidden our imitating him in this. Wengeance,
says he, is mine, incommunicably mine; unless so far as he
delegates it to those who are in authority. This therefore
clearly shows, that God executes vengeance; though justice,
not vengeance, is properly in Him.
Having now proved (as you suppose) that God has neither
anger nor justice, it remains only to show (which indeed fol
lows by easy and natural consequence) that he never did nor
can punish.
“To say, Adam’s miserable state was a punishment in
flicted upon him by God is an utter absurdity.” (Spirit of
Prayer, Part I., p. 24.) “His sin had not the least punish
ment of any kind inflicted upon it by God.” (Page 26.)
This is flat and plain. But let us see how far this account
agrees with that which God himself hath given:—
“Of the tree of knowledge of good and evil thou shalt not
eat : In the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.”
(Gen. ii. 17.) “And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall
not die.” (iii. 4.) “And the woman, being deceived,” did eat;
(1 Tim. ii. 14;) “and gave unto her husband, and he did eat.”
(Gen. iii. 6.) “And the Lord God said unto the serpent,
Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed. Dust thou shalt
eat all the days of thy life;” (verse 14;) “and I will put enmity
between thee and the woman.” (Verse 15.) “Unto the
woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and” (that
is, in) “thy conception.” (Verse 16.) “And unto Adam he
said, Because thou hast eaten of the tree, cursed is the
ground for thy sake: In sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the
days of thy life.” (Verse 17.) “Dust thou art, and unto
dust thou shalt return.” (Verse 19.)
Can any man read this and affirm, “God did not inflict the
least punishment, of any kind, either on Eve, or Adam, or
the serpent?” With what eyes or understanding then must
he read |
But you say, “All that came on Adam was implied in
what he chose to himself.” (Page 25.) It was. He chose
it to himself in the same sense that he who robs chooses to
be hanged. But this does not at all prove, that the death
which one or the other suffers is no punishment.
You go on: “Fire and brimstone, or manna, rained on the
earth, are only one and the same love. It was the same love
that preserved Noah, burned up Sodom, and overwhelmed
Pharaoh in the Red Sea.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., pp. 72,78.)
Surely nothing can equal this, unless you add, (which
indeed you must do, to be consistent with yourself) “It is
one and the same love which will say, ‘Come, ye blessed,’
and, ‘Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire.’”
You add: “‘Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth.’ Here
you have God's own word for it, nothing but love chasteneth.”
(Page 81.) We know his love chasteneth his children. Of
these only God is speaking here, as appears from the latter
clause of the sentence. And yet we cannot say even as to
them, “It is nothing but his love.” It is mercy mixed with
justice.
You cite one text more: “I have smitten you; Yet have
ye not returned to me;” (Amos iv. 9;) and say, “Now, how
is it possible for words to give stronger proof?” (Ibid.) Proof
of what? Not that God did not punish them; but that “ in
the midst of wrath He remembered mercy.”
To these texts of Scripture (wide enough of the point) you
subjoin: “The doctrine of atonement made by Christ is the
strongest demonstration, that the wrath to be atoned cannot
be in God.” (Page 85.) Who talks of wrath to be atoned?
“The wrath to be atoned” is neither sense nor English,
though it is a solecism you perpetually run into: (I hope,
not on purpose to puzzle the cause:) That the sin to be
atoned cannot be in God, we all allow; but it does not affect
the question.
Once more, to silence all contradiction at once, to stop the
mouths of all gainsayers, you say, “This (that there is no
anger, no vindictive justice in God, no punishment at all
inflicted by him) is openly asserted, constantly affirmed and
repeated, in the plainest letter of Scripture.” Whether this,
or the very reverse, is true, will appear from a few out of
numberless texts, which I shall barely set down, without any
comment, and leave to your cool consideration.
You say, (1.) There is no vindictive, avenging, or punitive
justice in God. (2.) There is no wrath or anger in God.
(3.) God inflicts no punishment on any creature, neither in
this world, nor that to come.
God says,—
(1) “The just Lord is in the midst of you.” (Zeph. iii. 5.)
“Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne.”
(Psalm lxxxix. 14.) “Wilt thou condemn him that is most
just P” (Job xxxiv. 17.) “He is excellent in power, and in
plenty of justice.” (xxxvii. 23.) “Just and true are thy ways,
O King of saints.” (Rev. xv. 3.) “Thou art just in all that is
brought upon us.” (Neh. ix. 33.) “There is no God beside
me, a just God and a Saviour.” (Isaiah xlv. 21.) “Whom
God hath set forth, that he might be just, and the justifier
of him that believeth in Jesus.” (Rom. iii. 25, 26.)
(2.) “The Lord heard their words, and was wroth.” (Deut.
i. 34.) “The Lord was wroth with me for your sakes.”
(iii. 26.) “I was wroth with my people.” (Isaiah xlvii. 6.)
“For his covetousness I was wroth.” (lvii. 17.) “And the
anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel.” (Num. xxv. 3.)
“His wrath is against them that forsake him.” (Ezra viii. 22.)
“Thou art very wroth with us.” (Lam. v. 22.) “Thou art
wroth, for we have sinned.” (Isaiah lxiv. 5.) “Who may
stand in thy sight when thou art angry?” (Psalm lxxvi. 7.)
“I have mingled my drink with weeping, because of thine
indignation and thy wrath.” (cii. 9, 10.) “In my wrath I
smote thee.” (Isaiah lx. 10.) “He hath visited in his anger.”
(Job xxxv. 15.) “God distributeth sorrows in his anger.”
(xxi. 17.) “I have seen affliction by the rod of his wrath.”
(Lam. iii. 1.) “I sware in my wrath, they shall not enter
into my rest.” (Psalm xcv. 11.) “He casteth upon them
the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation. He
made a way to his anger; he spared not their soul from
death.” (lxxviii.49, 50.) “At his wrath the earth shall trem
ble.” (Jer. x. 10.) “The land is desolate because of his anger.”
(xxv. 38.) “By his anger they are consumed.” (Job iv. 9.)
“The Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire
shall devour them.” (Psalm xxi. 9.) “The Lord turned not
from his wrath.” (2 Kings xxiii. 26.) “For all this his anger
is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.”
(Isaiah v. 25.) “The Lord is slow to anger, and of great
kindness; he will not always chide, neither keepeth he his
anger for ever.” (Psalm ciii. 8, 9.) “The Lord turned from
the fierceness of his anger.” (Joshua vii. 26.) “In wrath
remember mercy.” (Hab. iii. 2.) “Though thou wast angry,
thine anger is turned away.” (Isaiah xii. 1.) “Many a time
turned he his anger away.” (Psalm lxxviii. 38.)
(3) “I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked
for their iniquity.” (Isaiah xiii. 11.) “Behold, the Lord
cometh to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their
iniquity.” (xxvi. 21.) “Is not destruction to the wicked, and
a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity?” (Job
xxxi. 3.) “I will punish you according to the fruit of your
doings.” (Jer. xxi. 14.) “I will punish you for all your
iniquities.” (Amos iii. 2.) “If ye will not hearken unto me,
then I will punish you seven times more for your sins.” (Lev.
xxvi. 18.) “I will punish all that oppress them.” (Jer. xxx.20.)
Now, which am I to believe? God or man?
Your miserable philosophy leads you, in the Third place,
totally to deny the scripture doctrine of justification. Indeed,
you do not appear to have the least conception of the matter;
no, not even to know what the term justification means.
Accordingly, you affirm,
“Salvation, which all Divines agree includes both justifica
tion and sanctification, is nothing else but to be made like
Christ.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part I., p. 53.)
“Regeneration is the whole of man’s salvation.” (Part II.,
p. 37.)
“Redemption is nothing else but the life of God in the
soul.” (Part I., p. 79.)
“The one only work of Christ as your Redeemer is to
raise into life the smothered spark of heaven in you.” (Spirit
of Love, Part II., p. 45.)
“He is our atonement and reconciliation with God, because
by him we are set again in our first state of holiness.” (Part
I., p. 10.)
“The atonement of the divine wrath or justice,” (a mere
solecism, on which your whole reasoning for several pages is
built) “and the extinguishing of sin in the creature, are only
different expressions of the same thing.”(Part II.,p.86) Nay,
the former is an expression of nothing: It is flat nonsense.
“All that Christ does as an atonement, has no other opera
tion but that of renewing the fallen nature of man.” (Page 106.)
Here are seven peremptory assertions. But till they are
fully proved I cannot give up my Bible.
But you grow bolder and bolder, and say, “The satisfaction
of Christ is represented in all our systems of divinity, as a
satisfaction made to God; and the sufferings and death of
Christ, as that which could only avail with God to have mercy
on man. Nay, what is still worse, if possible, the ground, and
nature, and efficacy of this great transaction between God and
man is often explained by debtor and creditor; man as having
contracted a debt with God, which he could not pay, and God
as having a right to insist upon the payment of it.” (Page 91.)
“There is no wrath in God, no fictitious atonement, no
folly of debtor and creditor.” (Page 131.)
“What is still worse, if possible! Folly of debtor and cre
ditor!” Surely I would not have spoken thus, unless I had
been above the Son of God.
“After this manner pray ye, Forgive us our debts as we
forgive our debtors.” (Matthew vi. 9, 12.) “And Jesus said,
There was a certain creditor which had two debtors.” Luke
vii. 41.) “The kingdom of heaven is likened to a king who
would take account of his servants. And one was brought unto
him who owed him ten thousand talents. But forasmuch as
he had not to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and
all that he had. The servant fell down, saying, Lord, have
patience with me. And his Lord was moved with compassion,
and forgave him the debt.” Yet, afterwards, on his unmerci
fulness to his fellow-servant, he retracted that forgiveness;
“ and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all
that was due unto him. So likewise shall my heavenly Father
do unto you also, if ye from your heart forgive not every one
his brother their trespasses.” (Matthew xviii. 23, &c.)
Is not man here represented as having contracted a debt with
God which he cannot pay? and God as having, nevertheless
a right to insist upon the payment of it? and a right, if he
hath not to pay, of delivering him to the tormentors? And is
it not expressly asserted, that God will, in some cases, claim
this right, and use it to the uttermost P Upon whom, then,
lights this imputation of folly, and of “what is still worse?”
“Lord,lay not this sin to their charge I Forgive them, for
they know not what they do.”
But if the Son of God did not die to atone for our sins,
what did he die for ?
You answer: “He died,
“(1.) To extinguish our own hell within us.” (Spirit of
Prayer, Part II., p. 159.)
Nay, the Scripture represents this, not as the first, but the
second, end of his death.
“(2.) To show that he was above the world, death, hell, and
Satan.” (Pages 130, 131.)
Where is it written that he died for this end? Could he
not have done this without dying at all?
“(3.) His death was the only possible way of overcoming all
the evil that was in fallen man.” (Page 129.)
This is true, supposing he atoned for our sins. But if this
supposition be not made, his death was not the only possible
way whereby the Almighty could have overcome all things.
“(4.) Through this he got power to give the same victory to
all his brethren of the human race.” (Page (132.)
Had he not this power before? Otherwise, how was he
O ov, He that is ; “God over all, blessed for ever?”
If Christ died for no other ends than these, what need was
there of his being more than a creature?
As you seem never to have employed your thoughts on
justification or redemption, in the Scripture sense, I beg leave
to subjoin a plain account thereof, wrote by a woman of the
last century:—*
“(1.) Christ hath acquired for us a right to eternal life by his
satisfaction and merits alone. Neither our repentance nor
amendment can be any satisfaction for sin. It is only ‘through
his blood that we have redemption.” (Ephesians i. 7.) This alone
“cleanseth us from all sin.” (1 John i. 7.) And herein “was the
* Annae Mariac a Schurman EvkAmpua, Pars II, p. 118, &c.
love of God manifested towards us, that he sent his Son to be
the propitiation for our sins.” (1 John iv. 9, 10.) So was the
Lord ‘our righteousness;’ (Jer. xxiii. 6;) without which we
could not have been justified. As man owed his Creator the
perfect obedience of his whole life, or a punishment propor
tioned to his transgression, it was impossible he could satisfy
him by a partial and imperfect obedience. Neither could he
merit anything from Him to whom he owed all things. There
was need therefore of a Mediator who could repair the immense
wrong he had done to the Divine Majesty, satisfy the Supreme
Judge, who had pronounced the sentence of death against the
transgressors of his law, suffer in the place of his people, and
merit for them pardon, holiness, and glory. Accordingly, he
“gave himself a ransom for all, (1 Tim. ii. 6) and “by himself
purged our sins.” (Heb. i. 3.) “He loved us, and gave himself
for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God.” (Eph. v. 2.) So we
read, God “raised him from the dead; who was delivered for
our offences, and raised again for our justification: Because
our Surety’s being discharged by the will and act of the Judge
himself, is a full proof that he has paid our whole debt.
“(2.) Nor is there any more sure way to the imitation of
Christ, than faith in Christ crucified, in Him ‘who suffered
for us, leaving us an example,’ that we might tread in his
steps; who ‘died for us, while we were yet enemies,” that we
might be ‘justified by his blood.’ (Rom. v. 9.) Yet it is true,
this doctrine finds no place in those who are proud of heart,
who love their own reasonings, and have notaste for ‘the sincere
milk of the word. But it is precious to them who feel the
weight of their sins, who know they ‘are by nature children
of wrath,’ and, at the same time, utterly incapable either of
paying the debt, of rising from the death of sin, of conquering
themselves, the world, and the devil, or of meriting eternal life.
“(3.) The origin and cause of our redemption is, the ineffable
love of God the Father, who willed to redeem us by the blood
of his own Son;—the grace of the Son, who freely took our
curse upon him, and imparts his blessing and merits to us;—
and the Holy Spirit, who communicates the love of the Father
and the grace of the Son to our hearts.
“When we speak of this, and of the satisfaction of Christ,
we speak of the inmost mystery of the Christian faith. There
ore all the inventions of men ought now to be kept at the
utmost distance; nor can anything certain be established, with
out the express authority of Scripture. And herein is offered
first to our consideration, the only-begotten Son of God, as the
Head of the redeemed, the righteous Servant of God, who by
the knowledge of himself “shall justify many. (Isaiah liii. 11.)
Him God hath constituted the ‘surety of that better covenant,’
(Heb. vii.22,)—the covenant of grace. And how clearly is his
execution of this office described in the fifty-third chapter of
Isaiah ! where the Prophet describes him as ‘bearing our
griefs, or sins, ‘and carrying our sorrows. (Verse 4.) “All
we,” says he, “like sheep have gone astray; we have turned
every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him
the iniquity of us all.” (Verse 6.) All mankind have forsaken
God, and placed their own will upon his throne, and so
were liable to the highest punishment, when the Mediator
voluntarily interposed himself between them and the just
Judge. And the incomprehensible love of God, that he might
spare them, ‘spared not his own Son.” This is shown in those
words: ‘The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all. It
was on this account that ‘He was oppressed and afflicted, and
brought as a lamb to the slaughter;’ (verse 7;) while God
‘made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him.’ (2 Cor. v. 21.)
This is expressed in the ninth and tenth verses: ‘He had done
no violence, nor was any deceit in his mouth. Yet it pleased
the Lord to bruise him, when he ‘made his soul an offering for
sin.” How exactly do his own words agree with these: “I am
the good Shepherd, and I lay down my life for the sheep !”
(John x. 14, 15.) For them “was he taken from prison and from
judgment, and cut off out of the land of the living.” (Isai. liii.
8.) How doth God herein “commend his love towards’ us, in
‘delivering up his own Son to die for us!’ Yea, God “was
pleased with bruising him, when, clothed with our flesh, and
bearing our sins, he manifested to angels and men his infinite
love of divine justice, till, being ‘made obedient unto death,
even the death of the cross,’ he satisfied its utmost demand.
“It was then God “was pleased to bruise him, when “he
made his soul an offering for sin. He then appeared before the
Judge of all, under ‘the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, as
the Apostle speaks. And therefore God was pleased ‘to condemn
sin in the flesh;” (Rom. viii.3,4;) to ‘bruise him” whosustained
the person of sinners. But this was only the prelude of a
glorious victory. Therefore, the Prophet adds: ‘He shall
see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of
the Lord shall prosper in his hand. (Isai. liii. 10.) After
repeating (verse 11) the sum of all, “He shall bear their
iniquities, he subjoins the cause of his reward: ‘Because he
poured out his soul unto death, and was numbered with the
transgressors; for he bore the sin of many, and made inter
cession for the transgressors.” (Verse 12.)
“The fifth verse, of which I have not yet spoken, renders
this great truth still more evident: ‘He was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: The chastise
ment of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are
healed. He loved his own body less than his mystical body,
the Church, and therefore gave the former for the latter, “to
redeem and purchase it with his own blood, by paying himself
as a ransom for it. Hereby “nailing the handwriting which
was against us to his cross, he took it out of the way,’ and so
became “our peace.”
“(4.) From all which it appears, that Christ was not only a
pattern, but, first and principally, the surety of the new cove
nant, yea, a sacrifice and a victim for the sins of his people;
‘whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in
his blood.’ (Rom. iii.25.) And that precious sacrifice offered
on the cross is the very centre and marrow of the gospel. To
that one offering whereby our great High Priest ‘hath perfected
for ever them that are sanctified,’ (Heb. x. 14) all the ancient
sacrifices referred, as well as numberless other types and figures.
“All these, says the Apostle, “were shadows of things to
come; but the body is Christ.” (Col. ii. 17.) He it was, who,
‘not by the blood of bulls and goats, but by his own blood,
entered into the holiest, having obtained eternal redemption
for us.” (Heb. ix.12.) In consequence of this we are accepted,
‘through the offering of the body of Christ once for all.’ (x. 10.)
In all the ancient types and figures, “without shedding of
blood there was no remission; which was intended to show,
there never could be any without the blood of the great
Antitype; without that grand propitiatory sacrifice, which
(like the figure of it) was to be offered “without the gate.’
“Indeed, the whole worship of the Old Testament teaches
nothing else but the satisfaction made by the blood of Christ,
and our reconciliation with God thereby: Hence he is styled,
“The Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world; with
a view to the paschal lamb, and the other lambs that were
offered in sacrifice: On which account the inhabitants of
heaven likewise ‘give glory, and sing a new song, because he
hath redeemed’ them ‘unto God by his blood, out of every
tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation.” (Rev. v. 9.)
“(5.) To this might be added the numerous figures that
occur in the lives of the old patriarchs, prophets, and kings.
But it may suffice to add to the preceding only two testimonies
more of the manner of our redemption by a proper sacrifice;
the one that of St. Paul,—‘Christ hath delivered us from the
curse of the law, being made a curse for us; as it is written,
Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree;’ (Gal. iii. 13;)
the other of St. Peter,-‘Who himself bore our sins in his
own body on the tree.” (1 Peter ii. 24.) From all this abun
dantly appears the substitution of the Messiah in the place
of his people, thereby atoning for their sins, and restoring
them to the favour of God.
“These are the points which are so vehemently opposed by
Socinus and his followers, who rob Christ of the principal
part of his priestly office, and leave him only that of inter
ceding for us by prayer; as if any intercession were worthy
of Christ, which had not his full satisfaction and propitiatory
sacrifice for its foundation. Indeed these cannot be put
asunder, as sufficiently appears from the words cited before,—
‘He bore the sin of many, and made intercession for the
transgressors; where the Holy Ghost closely joins his inter
cession with his satisfaction made by sacrifice. These and a
thousand other solid arguments that might be advanced in
proof of this fundamental doctrine, overturn all the cavils
that flow from corrupt reason, which indeed are weak and
thin as a spider’s web.”
I have dwelt the longer on this head, because of its inex
pressible moment. For whether or no the doctrine of justifi
cation by faith be, as all Protestants thought at the time of
the Reformation, articulus stantis vel cadentis Ecclesiae, “a
doctrine without which there can be no Christian church;”
most certainly there can be none where the whole notion of
justification is ridiculed and exploded, unless it be such a
Church as includes, according to your account, every child
of man, of which, consequently, Turks, Deists, and Pagans
are as real members as the most pious Christian under the
sun. I cannot but observe, that this is the very essence of
Deism; no serious Infidel need contend for more. I would
therefore no more set one of this opinion to convert Deists,
than I would set a Turk to convert Mahometans.
4. As every one that is justified is born of God, I am natu
rally led to consider, in the next place, (so far as it is delivered
in the tracts now before us,) your doctrine of the new birth.
“In the day that Adam ate of the tree, he died; that is,
his heavenly spirit, with its heavenly body, were extinguished.
To make that heavenly spirit and body to be alive again in
man, this is regeneration.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part I., p. 9.)
O no; this is not; nor anything like it. This is the unscrip
tural dream of Behmen’s heated imagination.
“See the true reason why only the Son of God could be
our Redeemer. It is because he alone could be able to bring
to life again that celestial spirit and body which had died in
Adam.” (Ibid.)
Not so; but he alone could be our Redeemer, because he
alone, “by that one oblation of himself once offered” could
make “a sufficient sacrifice and satisfaction for the sins of
the whole world.”
“See also why a man must “be born again of water and of
the Spirit.” He must be born again of the Spirit, because
Adam’s heavenly spirit was lost.” (Ibid.) Nay, but because
Adam had lost the inward image of God, wherein he was
created. And no less than the almighty Spirit of God could
renew that image in his soul.
“He must be born of water, because that heavenly body
which Adam lost was formed out of the heavenly materiality,
which is called water.” (Ibid.)
Vain philosophy | The plain meaning of the expression,
“Except a man be born of water,” is neither more nor less
than this, “Except he be baptized.” And the plain reason
why he ought to be thus born of water is, because God hath
appointed it. He hath appointed it as an outward and visible
sign of an inward and spiritual grace, which grace is, “a
death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness.”
“The necessity of our regaining our first heavenly body is
the necessity” (I presume you mean, the ground of the neces
sity) “of our eating the body and blood of Christ.” (Page 10.)
Neither can I believe this, till I find it in the Bible. I am
there taught to believe, that our “spiritually receiving the body
aud blood of Christ,” which is most eminently done in the
Lord’s supper, is necessary to “strengthen and refresh our
souls, as our bodies are by the bread and wine.”
“The necessity of having again our first heavenly spirit is
shown by the necessity of our being baptized with the Holy
Ghost !” (Ibid.)
No. That we “must be baptized with the Holy Ghost,”
implies this and no more, that we cannot be “renewed in
righteousness and true holiness” any otherwise than by
being over-shadowed, quickened, and animated by that
blessed Spirit.
“Our fall is nothing else but the falling of our soul from
its heavenly body and spirit, into a bestial body and spirit.
Our redemption” (you mean, our new birth) “is nothing else
but the regaining our first angelic spirit and body.” (Ibid.)
What an account is here of the Christian redemption How
would Dr. Tindal have smiled at this ! Where you say, “Re
demption is nothing else but the life of God in the soul,” you
allow an essential part of it. But here you allow it to be no
thing else but that which is no part of it at all; nothing else
but a whim, a madman’s dream, a chimera, a mere non-entity!
“This,” (angelic spirit and body,) “in Scripture, is called
our ‘new’ or ‘inward man.’” (Ibid.)
The “inward man” in Scripture means one thing, the
“new man” another. The former means, the mind, opposed
to the body: “Though our outward man,” our body, “perish,
yet the inward man,” the mind or soul, “is renewed day by
day.” (2 Cor. iv. 16.) The latter means, universal holiness:
“Put off the old man, which is corrupt; and put on the new
man, which, after God, is created in righteousness and true
holiness.” (Eph. iv. 22, 24.) But neither does the one nor
the other ever mean “this angelic spirit and body.”
You yourself know better what the new birth is. You
describe it better, though still with amazing queerness of
language, where you say, -
“Man hath the light and water of an outward nature to
quench the wrath of his own life, and the light and meekness
of Christ, as a seed born in him, to bring forth anew the
image of God.”
But it is not strange, that you speak so confusedly and
darkly, as you generally do, of the new birth, seeing you seem
to have no conception of that faith whereby we are born again.
This abundantly appears from your frank declaration,
“We are neither saved by faith, nor by works.” (Spirit of
Prayer, Part II., p. 36.) Flatly contrary to the declaration
of St. Paul, “By grace we are saved through faith.”
To put the matter out of dispute, you declare that you mean
by faith, “a desire to be one with Christ.” (Part I., p. 50.)
Again: “The desire of turning to God is the coming of
Christ into the soul. This faith will save thee.” (Page 76.)
So, in your judgment, saving faith is, “a desire of coming
to God, or of being one with Christ.” I know the contrary
from experience. I had this desire many years before I even
knew what saving faith was.
Faith is so far from being only this desire, that it is no
desire at all. It differs from all desire toto genere, although
doubtless all good desires accompany it. It is, according
to St. Paul, an exeyxos, an “evidence” or “conviction”
(which is totally different from a desire) “of things not
seen,” a supernatural, a divine evidence and conviction of
the things which God hath revealed in his word; of this in
particular, that the Son of God hath loved me and given
himself for me. Whosoever hath this faith is born of God.
Whosoever thus believeth is saved; and if he endure therein
to the end, shall be saved everlastingly.
The process of this work in the soul, of the present salva
tion which is through faith, you likewise describe confusedly
and obscurely. The sum of what you say is this:—
“The painful sense of what you are, kindled into a working
state of sensibility by the light of God, is the light and fire
from whence the spirit of prayer proceeds. In its first kind
ling, nothing is found but pain, wrath, and darkness: And
therefore its first prayer is all humility.” (Part II., p. 172.)
Would it not be more intelligible if one had said, “The con
vincing Spirit of God gives you to see and feel that you are a
poor undone, guilty, helpless sinner: At the same time, he in
cites you to cry for help to Him who is “mighty to save?” This
is true. But it is not true, that, in the first kindling of this
fire, in plain terms, during the first convictions, “nothing is
found but pain, wrath, and darkness.” Very often there are
found even in the first conviction, sweet gleams of light, touches
of joy, of hope, and of love, mixed with sorrow and fear. Much
less is it true, that the first prayer of an awakening sinner is all
humility. (Ibid.) On the contrary, a sinner newly awakened
has always more or less confidence in himself, in what he is,
or has, or does, and will do; which is not humility, but
downright pride. And this mingles itself with all his prayer,
till the day-star is just rising in his heart.
You add: “This prayer is met by the divine love, and
changed into hymns, and songs, and thanksgivings.” (Ibid.)
It is so, when “being justified by faith, we have peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ.” “This state of fervour
melts away all earthly passions and affections, and leaves no
inclination in the soul, but to delight in God alone.” (Ibid.)
It is certain, this is the genuine effect of “the love of God
shed abroad in the heart;” which expression ef St. Paul, I
suppose, means the same with “this state of fervour.” “Then
its prayer changes again, and continually stands in fulness of
faith, in purity of love, in absolute resignation to do and be
what and how his Beloved pleaseth. This is the last state of
the spirit of prayer, and is our highest union with God in this
life.” (Page 173.)
Assuredly it is: Fulness of faith, beholding, with open face,
the glory of the Lord; purity of love, free from all mixture of
its contrary, yielding the whole heart to God; absolute resig
nation, excluding every degree of self-will, sacrificing every
thought, word, and work to God. But do we change directly,
from our first love, into the highest union with God? Surely
not. There is an intermediate state between that of “babes
in Christ,” and that of fathers. You yourself are very sensible
there is, although you here speak as if there were not.
You go on : “People who have long dwelt in this fervour
are frighted when coldness seizes upon them;” (page 174;)
that is, when they lose it, when their love grows cold. And
certainly, well they may, if this fervour was to bring them to
“fulness of faith, purity of love, and absolute resignation.”
Well they may be affrighted, if that fervour be lost before “it
has done its work.”
Indeed, they might be affrighted when it is not lost, if that
which follows be true : “Fervour is good, and ought to be
loved; but distress and coldness are better. It brings the soul
nearer to God than the fervour did.” (Pages 175, 176.)
The fervour, you said, brought the soul to “its highest
union with God in this life.” Can coldness do more? Can it
bring us to an union higher than the highest?
To explain this, you say, “The fervour made the soul delight
in God. But it was too much an own delight. It was a fancied
self-holiness, and occasioned rest and satisfaction in itself, in
a spiritual self.” (Page 175.) Either fervour does bring us to
purity of love, and absolute resignation, or not. To say it does
not, contradicts what you said before: To say, it does, contra
dicts what you say now. For if it does, we cannot say, “Cold
ness does the work which fervour did in a higher degree.”
I should not insist so long on these glaring inconsistencies,
were not thedoctrine you are here labouring to support abso
lutely inconsistent with that of St. Paul, and naturally pro
ductive of the most fatal consequences. St. Paul asserts, the
present kingdom of God in the soul is “righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.” He continually teaches,
that these, which God hath joined, man ought not to put
asunder; that peace and joy should never be separated from
righteousness, being the divine means both of preserving and
increasing it; and that we may, yea, ought, to rejoice ever
more, till the God of peace sanctifies us wholly. But if these
things are so, then “distress and coldness are ” not “better”
than fervent love, and joy in the Holy Ghost.
Again: The doctrine, that it is better and more profitable
for the soul to lose its sense of the love of God than to keep
it, is not only unscriptural, but naturally attended with the
most fatal consequences. It directly tends to obstruct, if not
destroy, the work of God in the heart, by causing men to bless
themselves in those ways which damp the fervour of their
affections; and to imagine they are considerably advanced in
grace, when they have grieved, yea, quenched, the Spirit.
Nay, but let all who now feel the love of God in their hearts,
and “walk in the light as he is in the light,” labour, by every
possible means, to “keep themselves in the love of God.” Let
them be ever “fervent in spirit;” let them “rejoice evermore,”
and stir up the gift of God which is in them. And if, at any
time, “coldness seizes upon them,” let them be assured, they
have grieved the Spirit of God. Let them be affrighted; let
them fear lest they sink lower and lower; yea, into total
deadness and hardness of heart. At the peril of their souls,
let them not rest in darkness, but examine themselves, search
out their spirits, cry vehemently to God, and not cease till he
restores the light of his countenance.
5. If this doctrine of the profitableness of coldness above
fervour directly tends to make believers easy, while they are
sliding back into unbelief, you have another which tends as
directly to make them easy who never believed at all; I mean,
that of Christ in every man. What you advance on this head,
I desire next to consider, as the importance of it requires.
“The birth of Christ is already begun in every one. Jesus
is already within thee, (whoever thou art,) living, stirring,
calling, knocking at the door of thy heart.” (Spirit of Prayer,
Part I., p. 55.)
“Every man has Christ in his spirit, lying there as in a state
of insensibility and death.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p.34)
But he is living, for all that. And though “in a state of
insensibility,” he is “stirring, calling, knocking at the door
of the heart l”
“Something of heaven” (you use this phrase as equivalent
with Christ) “lies, in every soul, in a state of inactivity and
death.” (Page 35.)
“All the holy nature, tempers, and Spirit of Christ lie hid
as a seed in thy soul.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part I., p. 68.)
But are they active or inactive? living and stirring, or in
a state of insensibility and death?
“Thou art poor, and blind, and naked, and miserable, while
all the peace and joy of God are within thee.” (Page 74.)
This is most wonderful of all ! Are these within him who
is “dead in sin,” who is a “stranger to all that is holy and
heavenly ?” If they are, how can he be miserable, who has
“all the peace and joy of God within him?” Will you say,
“They are in him, but he does not feel them?” Nay, then,
they are not in him. I have peace in me no longer than I
feel peace; I feel joy, or I have it not.
“See here the extent of the Catholic Church of Christ ! It
takes in all the world.” (Page 56.)
So Jews, Mahometans, Dsists, Heathens, are all members
of the Church of Christ ! Should we not add devils too,
seeing these also are to dwell with us in heaven?
“Poor sinner, Christ dwelleth in the centre, the fund or
bottom, of thy soul.” (Page 59.)
What is this? What is either the centre, the top, or bot
tom of a spirit?
“When Adam fell, this centre of his soul became a prisoner
in an earthly animal. But from the moment God spoke
Christ into Adam, all the treasures of the divine nature, the
light and Spirit of God, came again into man, into the centre
of his soul.” (Page 60.)
I cannot find in the Bible when that was, when “God
spoke Christ into Adam.”
We come now to the proofs of these strong assertions:—
And, (1) “No faith could ever begin, unless every man
had Christ in him.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 34.)
This proposition needs just as much proof itself, as that
which it is brought to prove.
(2) “Unless the remains of the perfect love of God were in
every man, it would be impossible he should ever love God
at all.” (Page 38.)
Why so? Cannot God give his love this moment to one
who never loved him before ?
(3.) “Unless Christ was hidden in the soul, there could not
be the least beginning of man’s salvation. For what could
begin to desire heaven, unless something of heaven was hid in
the soul?” (Page 35.)
What could? Why, any soul which had nothing but hell
in it before, the moment grace was infused from above.
(4) “The Ten Commandments lay hid in men's souls,”
(how?) “till called into sensibility by writing them on stone.
Just so Christ lies in the soul, till awakened by the media
torial office of the holy Jesus.” (Page 37.)
This is only assertion still, not proof. But what do you
mean by the mediatorial office of Christ? And how is Christ
“awakened by the mediatorial office of the holy Jesus?”
(5) “The sea cannot be moved by any other wind than
that which had its birth from the sea itself.” (Page 40.)
I think it can. I have seen it “moved by a wind which
had its birth from the’’ land.
(6) “The musician cannot make his instrument give any
other melody than that which lies hid in it, as its own inward
state.” (Page 42.)
Did the tune, then, lie hid in the trumpet, before the trum
peter biew? And was this tune, or another, or all that ever
were and will be played on it, the inward state of the trumpet?
“No more can the mind have any grief or joy but that
which is from itself.” (Page 43.)
An unhappy comparison | For the instrument can have
no melody or sound at all from itself; and most unhappily
applied to the operations of God upon the souls of men. For
has God no more power over my soul, than I have over a
musical instrument?
These are your arguments to prove that Christ is in every
man: A blessing which St. Paul thought was peculiar to
believers. He said, “Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates,” unbelievers. You say, Christ is in you, whether
ye be reprobates or no. “If any man hath not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his,” saith the Apostle. Yea, but “every
man,” saith Mr. Law, “hath the Spirit of God. The Spirit
of Christ is in every soul.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part I., p. 63.)
“He that hath not the Son of God hath not life,” saith St.
John. But Mr. Law saith, “Every man hath the Son of
God.” Sleep on, then, ye sons of Belial, and take your rest;
ye are all safe; for “he that hath the Son hath life.”
There can hardly be any doctrine under heaven more
agreeable to flesh and blood; nor any which more directly
tends to prevent the very dawn of conviction, or, at least, to
hinder its deepening in the soul, and coming to a sound issue.
None more naturally tends to keep men asleep in sin, and to
lull asleep those who begin to be awakened. Only persuade
one of this, “Christ is already in thy heart; thou hast now
the inspiration of his Spirit; all the peace and joy of God
are within thee, yea, all the holy nature, tempers, and Spirit
of Christ;” and you need do no more; the siren song quiets
all his sorrow and fear. As soon as you have sewed this
pillow to his soul, he sinks back into the sleep of death.
6. But you have made an ample amends for this, by pro
viding so short and easy a way to heaven; not a long,
narrow, troublesome, round-about path, like that described in
the Bible; but one that will as compendiously save the soul,
as Dr. Ward’s “pill and drop” heal the body: A way so
plain, that they who follow it need no Bible, no human
teaching, no outward means whatever; being every one able
to stand alone, every one sufficient for himself!
“The first step is, to turn wholly from yourself, and to
give up yourself wholly unto God.” (Part II., p. 22.)
If it be, no flesh living shall be saved. How grievously do
we stumble at the threshold! Do you seriously call this the first
step,-to turn wholly from myself, and give up myself wholly
unto God? Am I then to step first on the highest round of
the ladder? Not unless you turn it upside down. The way
to heaven would be short indeed, if the first and the last
step were all one; if we were to step as far the moment we
set out, as we can do till we enter into glory.
But what do you mean by giving up myself to God? You.
answer: “Every sincere wish and desire after Christian
virtues, is giving up yourself to him, and the very perfection
of faith.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 217.)
Far, very far from it: I know from the experience of a
thousand persons, as well as from Scripture, and the very
reason of the thing, that a man may have sincere desires.
after all these, long before he attains them. He may sincerely
wish to give himself up to God, long before he is able so to
do. He may desire this, not only before he has the per
fection, but before he has any degree, of saving faith.
More marvellous still is that which follows: “You may
easily and immediately, by the mere turning of your mind,
have all these virtues,—patience, meekness, humility, and
resignation to God.” (Page 212.)
Who may ? Not I; not you; not any that is born of a.
woman; as is proved by the daily experience of all that know
what patience, meekness, or resignation means.
But how shall I know whether I have faith or not? “I will
give you an infallible touchstone. Retire from all conversation.
only for a month. Neither write, nor read, nor debate anything
with yourself. Stop all the former workings of your heart and
mind, and stand all this month in prayer to God. If your heart
cannot give itself up in this manner to prayer, be fully assured
you are an infidel.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part II., p. 163.)
If this be so, the infidels are a goodly company l if every
man be of that number who cannot “stop all the former
workings of his heart and mind, and stand thus in prayer to:
God for a month together.”
But I would gladly know by what authority you give us this
touchstone; and how you prove it to be infallible. I read
nothing like it in the oracles of God. I cannot find one word
there of “refraining from all conversation, from writing, and
reading, for a month.” (I fear you make no exception in favour
of public worship or reading the word of God.) Where does
the Bible speak of this? of stopping for a month, or a day,
all the former workings of my heart and mind? of refraining
from all converse with the children of God, and from reading
his word? It would be no wonder, should any man make
this unscriptural (if not anti-scriptural) experiment, if Satan
were permitted to work in him “a strong delusion,” so that
he should “believe a lie.”
Nearly related to this touchstone is the direction which
you give elsewhere: “Stop all self-activity; be retired, silent,
passive, and humbly attentive to the inward light.” (Part I.,
pp. 77, 82.)
But beware “the light which is in thee be not darkness; ”
as it surely is, if it agree not with “the law and the testi
mony.” “Open thy heart to all its impressions,” if they
agree with that truly infallible touchstone. Otherwise regard
no impression of any kind, at the peril of thy soul,—“wholly
stopping the workings of thy own reason and judgment.”
I find no such advice in the word of God. And I fear they
who stop the workings of their reason, lie the more open to
the workings of their imagination.
There is abundantly greater danger of this when we fancy
we have no longer need to “be taught of man.” To this
your late writings directly lead. One who admires them
will be very apt to cry out, “I have found all that I need
know of God, of Christ, of myself, of heaven, of hell, of sin,
of grace, and of salvation.” (Part II., p. 4.) And the rather,
because you yourself affirm roundly, “When once we appre
hend the all of God, and our own nothingness,” (which a
man may persuade himself he does, in less than four-and
twenty hours,) “it brings a kind of infallibility into the soul
in which it dwells; all that is vain, and false, and deceitful, is
forced to vanish and fly before it.” (Part I., p. 95.) Agree
ably to which, you tell your convert, “You have no questions
to ask of any body.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p.218.) And
if, notwithstanding this, he will ask, “But how am I to keep
up the flame of love?” you answer, “I wonder you should
want to know this. Does a blind, or sick, or lame man want
to know how he should desire sight, health, or limbs?” (Spirit
of Prayer, Part II., p. 165.) No; but he wants to know how
he should attain, and how he should keep, them. And he
who has attained the love of God, may still want to know
how he shall keep it. And he may still inquire, “May I
not take my own passions, or the suggestions of evil spirits,
for the workings of the Spirit of God?” (Page 198.) To this
you answer, “Every man knows when he is governed by the
spirit of wrath, envy, or covetousness, as easily and as cer
tainly as he knows when he is hungry.” (Ibid.) Indeed he
does not; neither as easily nor as certainly. Without great
care, he may take wrath to be pious zeal, envy to be virtuous
emulation, and covetousness to be Christian prudence or
laudable frugality. “Now, the knowledge of the Spirit of
God in yourself is as perceptible as covetousness.” Perhaps
so; for this is as difficultly perceptible as any temper of the
human soul. “And liable to no more delusion.” Indeed it
need not ; for this is liable to ten thousand delusions.
You add: “His spirit is more distinguishable from all
other spirits, than any of your natural affections are from one
another.” (Page 199.) Suppose joy and grief: Is it more
distinguishable from all other spirits, than these are from one
another? Did any man ever mistake grief for joy? No, not
from the beginning of the world. But did none ever mistake
nature for grace? Who will be so hardy as to affirm this?
But you set your pupil as much above the being taught by
books, as being taught by men. “Seek,” say you, “for help
no other way, neither from men, nor books; but wholly
leave yourself to God.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 225.)
But how can a man “leave himself wholly to God,” in the
total neglect of his ordinances? The old Bible way is, to
“leave ourselves wholly to God,” in the constant use of all
the means he hath ordained. And I cannot yet think the
new is better, though you are fully persuaded it is. “There
are two ways,” you say, “ of attaining goodness and virtue;
the one by books or the ministry of men, the other by an
inward birth. The former is only in order to the latter.”
This is most true, that all the externals of religion are in
order to the renewal of our soul in righteousness and true
holiness. But it is not true, that the external way is one,
and the internal way another. There is but one scriptural
way, wherein we receive inward grace, through the outward
means which God hath appointed.
Some might think that when you advised, “not to seek help
from books,” you did not include the Bible. But you clear up
this, where you answer the objection, of your not esteeming the
Bible enough. You say, “How could you more magnify John
the Baptist, than by going from his teaching, to be taught by
that Christ to whom he directed you? Now, the Bible can
have no other office or power, than to direct you to Christ.
How then can you more magnify the Bible than by going
from its teaching, to be taught by Christ?” So you set Christ
and the Bible in flat opposition to each other l And is this the
way we are to learn of him? Nay, but we are taught of him,
not by going from the Bible, but by keeping close to it. Both
by the Bible and by experience we know, that his word and
his Spirit act in connexion with each other. And thus it is,
that by Christ continually teaching and strengthening him
through the Scripture, “the man of God is made perfect, and
throughly furnished for every good word and work.”
According to your veneration for the Bible, is your regard
for public worship and for the Lord’s supper. “Christ,” you
say, “is the Church or temple of God within thee. There the
supper of the Lamb is kept. When thou art well grounded in
this inward worship, thou wilt have learned to live unto God
above time and place. For every day will be Sunday to thee;
and wherever thou goest, thou wilt have a Priest, a church, and
an altar along with thee.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part I., p. 73.)
The plain inference is, Thou wilt not need to make any
difference between Sunday and other days. Thou wilt need
no other church than that which thou hast always along with
thee; no other supper, worship, Priest, or altar. Be well
grounded in this inward worship, and it supersedes all the rest.
This is right pleasing to flesh and blood; and I could most
easily believe it, if I did not believe the Bible. But that
teaches me inwardly to worship God, as at all times and in
all places, so particularly on his own day, in the congregation
of his people, at his altar, and by the ministry of those his
servants whom he hath given for this very thing, “for the
perfecting of the saints,” and with whom he will be to the
end of the world.
Extremely dangerous therefore is this other gospel, which
leads quite wide of the gospel of Christ. And what must the
consequence be, if we thus “break,” yea, “and teach men so,”
not “one” only, neither “the least,” of “his commandments?”
Even that we “shall be called the least in the kingdom of
heaven.” God grant this may not fall on you or me !
7. However, whether we have a place in heaven or not, you
are very sure we shall have none in hell. For there is no hell
in rerum naturá, “no such place in the universe.” You
declare this over and over again, in great variety of expres
sions. It may suffice to mention two or three: “Hell is no
penalty prepared or inflicted by God.” (Spirit of Prayer,
Part II, p. 33.) “Damnation is only that which springs up
within you.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 47.) “Hell and
damnation are nothing but the various operations of self.”
(Spirit of Prayer, Part I., p. 79.)
I rather incline to the account published a few years ago, by
a wise and pious man, (the late Bishop of Cork) where he is
speaking of theimprovement of human knowledge by revelation.
Some of his words are: “Concerning future punishments, we
learn from revelation only, (1.) That they are both for soul
and body, which are distinguished in Scripture by “the worm
that dieth not,’ and ‘the fire which never shall be quenched:”
And accordingly we are bid to “fear him who is able to
destroy both body and soul in hell. Upon which I shall only
remark, that whereas we find by experience, the body and
soul in this life are not capable of suffering the extremity of
pain and anguish at the same time, insomuch that the greatest
anguish of mind is lost and diverted by acute and pungent
pain of body; yet we learn from Scripture, that in hell the
wicked will be subject to extreme torments of both together.”
(Procedure, &c., of Human Understanding, p. 350.)
“(2.) That the chief cause of their eternal misery will be
an eternal exclusion from the beatific vision of God. This
exclusion seems to be the only punishment to which we can
now conceive a pure spirit liable. And according as all
intelligent beings are at a less or greater distance from this
fountain of all happiness, so they are necessarily more or less
miserable or happy.
“(3.) That one part of those punishments will be by fire,
than which we have not any revelation more express and
positive. And as it is an instance of great goodness in God,
that the joys of heaven are represented to us under the
figurative images of light and glory and a kingdom, and that
the substance shall exceed the utmost of our conception; so
it is an argument of his strict justice, that future punishments
are more literally threatened and foretold.
“(4.) The eternity of these punishments is revealed as plainly
as words can express it. And the difficulty of that question,
‘What proportion endless torments can bear to momentary
sin,” is quite removed by considering, that the punishments
denounced are not sanctions entirely arbitrary, but are withal
so many previous warnings or declarations of the matural
tendency of sin itself. So that an unrepenting sinner must
be miserable in another life by a necessity of nature.
Therefore he is not capable of mercy; since there never
can be an alteration of his condition, without such a change
of the whole man as would put the natural and settled order
of the creation out of course.” (Page 351.)
Doubtless this eminent man (whose books on the Human
Understanding, and on Divine Analogy, I would earnestly
recommend to all who either in whole or in part deny the
Christian Revelation) grounded his judgment both of the
nature and duration of future punishments on these and the
like passages of Scripture :
“If we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge
of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins; but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation,
which shall devour the adversaries. He that despised Moses’
law died without mercy: of how much sorer punishment
shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the
Son of God! For we know him that hath said, Vengeance
belongeth unto me, I will recompense. It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God.” (Heb. x. 26–31.)
And let not any who live and die in their sins, vainly hope
to escape his vengeance. “For if God spared not the angels
that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them
into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment; the
Lord knoweth how to reserve the unjust unto the day of
judgment to be punished.” (2 Peter ii. 4—9.) In that day,
peculiarly styled, “the day of the Lord,” they “that sleep in
the dust of the earth shall awake; some to everlasting life,
and some to everlasting shame and contempt.” (Dan. xii. 2.)
Among the latter will all those be found, who are now, by
their obstinate impenitence, “treasuring up to themselves
wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righ
teous judgment of God; who will” then render “indignation
and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man
that doeth evil.” (Rom. ii. 5–9.) He hath declared the very
sentence which he will then pronounce on all the workers of
iniquity: “Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels.” (Matt. xxv. 41.) And in that
hour it will be executed; being “cast into outer darkness,
where is wailing and gnashing of teeth,” (verse 30,) they
“will be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.”
(2 Thess. i. 9.) A punishment not only without end, but
likewise without intermission. For when once “they are
cast into that furnace of fire,” that “lake of fire burning
with brimstone, the worm,” gnawing their soul, “ dieth not,
and the fire,” tormenting their body, “is not quenched.” So
that “they have no rest day or night; but the smoke of their
torment ascendeth up for ever and ever.”
Now, thus much cannot be denied, that these texts speak
as if there were really such a place as hell, as if there were a
real fire there, and as if it would remain for ever. I would
then ask but one plain question : If the case is not so, why
did God speak as if it was? Say you, “To affright men from
sin?” What, by guile, by dissimulation, by hanging out
false colours? Can you possibly ascribe this to the God of
truth? Can you believe it of Him? Can you conceive the
Most High dressing up a scarecrow, as we do to fright chil
dren? Far be it from him ! If there be then any such fraud
in the Bible, the Bible is not of God. And indeed this must be
the result of all: If there be “no unquenchable fire, no ever
lasting burnings,” there is no dependence on those writings
wherein they are so expressly asserted, nor of the eternity of
heaven, any more than of hell. So that if we give up the one, we
must give up the other. No hell, no heaven, no revelation 1
In vain you strive to supply the place of this, by putting
purgatory in its room; by saying, “These virtues must have
their perfect work in you, if not before, yet cert inly after,
death. Everything else must be taken from you by fire, either
here or hereafter.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 232.) Poor,
broken reed ! Nothing will “be taken from you” by that
fire which is “prepared for the devil and his angels,” but all
rest, all joy, all comfort, all hope. For “the worm dieth not,
and the fire is not quenched.”
I have now, Sir, delivered my own soul. And I have used
great plainness of speech; such as I could not have prevailed
on myself to use to one whom I so much respect, on any
other occasion.
O that your latter Works may be more and greater than
your first! Surely they would, if you could ever be persuaded to
study, instead of the writings of Tauler and Behmen, those
of St. Paul, James, Peter, and John; to spew out of your
mouth and out of your heart that vain philosophy, and speak
neither higher nor lower things, neither more nor less, than
the oracles of God; to renounce, despise, abhor all the high
flown bombast, all the unintelligible jargon of the Mystics,
and come back to the plain religion of the Bible, “We love
him, because he first loved us.”
LONDON,
