A Letter to the Rev. Dr. Free
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. A LITTLE tract appearing under your name was yesterday
put into my hands. You therein call upon me to speak, if L
have any exceptions to make to what is advanced: and promise
to reply as fairly and candidly as I can expect, “provided those
exceptions be drawn up, as you have set the example, in a short
compass, and in the manner wherein all wise and good people
would choose to manage a religious dispute.” (Page 22.)
2. “In a short compass,” Sir, they will certainly be drawn
up, for my own sake as well as yours: For I know the value of
time, and would gladly employ it all in what more immediately
relates to eternity. But I do not promise to draw them up in
that manner whereof you have set the example. I cannot, I
dare not; for I fear God, and do really believe there is a judg
ment to come. Therefore, I dare not “return evil for evil,”
neither “railing for railing.” Nor can I allow that your
manner of treating this subject is that “wherein all wise and
good people would choose to manage a religious dispute.”
Far, very far, from it. I shall rejoice if a little more fairness
and candour should appear in your future writings. But I
cannot expect it; for the nigrae succus loliginis, “wormwood
and gall,” seem to have infected your very vitals.
3. The quotation from Bishop Gibson, which takes up five
out of nineteen pages, I have answered already; * and in a man
ner wherewith I have good reason to believe his Lordship was
entirely satisfied. With his Lordship, therefore, I have no
present concern; my business now is with you only: And seeing
you are “now ready,” as you express it, “to run a tilt,” I must
make what defence I can. Only you must excuse me from
meeting you on the same ground, or fighting you with the same
* In “A Letter to the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of London.”
weapons: My weapons are only truth and love. May the
God of truth and love strengthen my weakness |
4. I wave what relates to Mr. V ’s personal character,
which is too well known to need my defence of it; as like
wise the occurrence (real or imaginary I cannot tell) which
gave birth to your performance. All that I concern myself
with is your five vehement assertions with regard to the peo
ple called Methodists. These I shall consider in their order,
and prove to be totally false and groundless.
5. The first is this: “Their whole ministry is an open and
avowed opposition to one of the fundamental articles of our
areligion.” (Page 4.) How so? Why, “the Twentieth Article
declares, we may not so expound one scripture, that it be
repugnant to another. And yet it is notorious, that the
Methodists do ever explain the word ‘faith’ as it stands in
some of St. Paul’s writings, so as to make his doctrine a
direct and flat contradiction to that of St. James.” (Page 5.)
This stale objection has been answered an hundred times,
so that I really thought we should have heard no more of it.
But since it is required, I repeat the answer once more: By
faith we mean “the evidence of things not seen; ” by justi
fying faith, a divine evidence or conviction, that “Christ
loved me, and gave himself for me.” St. Paul affirms, that
a man is justified by this faith; which St. James never
denies, but only asserts, that a man cannot be justified by a
dead faith: And this St. Paul never affirms.
“But St. James declares, ‘Faith without works is dead.”
Therefore it is clearly St. James's meaning, that a faith
which is without virtue and morality cannot produce salva
tion. Yet the Methodists so explain St. Paul, as to affirm
that faith without virtue or morality will produce salvation.”
(Page 6.) Where? in which of their writings? This needs
some proof: I absolutely deny the fact. So that all which
follows is mere flourish, and falls to the ground at once; and
all that you aver of their “open and scandalous opposition to
the Twentieth Article” (ibid.) is no better than open and
scandalous slander.
6. Your Second assertion is this: “The Methodist, for the
perdition of the souls of his followers, openly gives our Saviour
the lie, loads the Scripture with falsehood and contradic
tion; ” (and pray what could a Mahometan, or infidel, or the
devil himself do more?) “yea, openly blasphemes the name of
Christ, by saying that the works of men are of no consideration
at all; that God makes no distinction between virtue and vice,
that he does not hate vice or love virtue. What blasphemy
then and impiety are those wretches guilty of who, in their
diabolical frenzy, dare to contradict our Saviour's authority,
and that in such an essential article of religion l” (Pages 7–9.)
Here also the Methodists plead, Not Guilty, and require you
to produce your evidence; to show in which of their writings
they affirm that God “will not reward every man according to:
his works; that he makes no distinction between virtue and
vice; that he does not hate vice or love virtue.” These are
positions which they never remember to have advanced. If
you can, refresh their memory.
7. You assert, Thirdly, the Methodists, by these positions,
“destroy the essential attributes of God, and ruin his character
as Judge of the world.” Very true; if they held these positions.
But here lies the mistake. They hold no such positions.
They never did. They detest and abhor them. In arguing,
therefore, on this supposition, you are again “beating the air.”
8. You assert, Fourthly, the Methodists “teach and propa
gate downright Atheism,-a capital crime; and Atheists in
some countries have been put to death. Hereby they make
room for all manner of vice and villany; by which means the
bands of society are dissolved. And therefore this attempt
must be considered as a sort of treason by Magistrates.”
(Pages 10, 11.)-
Again we deny the whole charge, and call for proof; and,
blessed be God, so do the Magistrates in Great Britain. Bold,
vehement asseverations will not pass upon them for legal evi
dence: Nor indeed on any reasonable men. They can distin
guish between arguing and calling names: The former be
comes a gentleman and a Christian: But what is he who can
be guilty of the latter?
9. You assert, Lastly, that any who choose a Methodist
Clergyman for their Lecturer, “put into that office, which
should be held by a Minister of the Church of England, an
enemy, who undermines not only the legal establishment of
that Church, but also the foundation of all religion.” (Page 13.)
Once more we must call upon you for the proof; the proof
of these two particulars, First, that I, John Wesley, am “an
enemy to the Church; and that I undermine not only the legal
establishment of the Church of England, but also the very foun
dation of all religion.” Secondly. That “Mr. V— is an
enemy to the Church, and is undermining all religion, as
well as the establishment.”
10. Another word, and I have done: Are there “certain
qualifications required of all Lecturers, before they are by law
permitted to speak to the people?” (Page 14.) And is a
subscription to the Thirty-nine Articles of religion one of
these qualifications? And is a person who does not “conform
to such subscription” disqualified to be a Lecturer? or, who
“has ever held or published anything contrary to what the
Church of England maintains?” Then certainly you, Dr. John
Free, are not “permitted by law to speak to the people;” nei
ther are you “qualified to be a Lecturer” in any church
in London or England, as by law established. For you
flatly deny and openly oppose more than one or two of those
Articles. You do not in anywise conform to the subscription
you made before you was ordained either Priest or Deacon.
You both hold and publish (if you are the author and publisher
of the tract before me) what is grossly, palpably “contrary to
what the Church of England maintains,” in her Homilies as
well as Articles; those Homilies to which you have also sub
scribed, in subscribing the Thirty-sixth Article. You have sub
cribed them, Sir; but did you ever read them? Did you ever
read so much as the three first Homilies? I beg of you, Sir, to
read these at least, before you write again about the doctrine of
the Church of England. And would it not be prudent to read
a few of the writings of the Methodists before you undertake a
farther confutation of them? At present you know not the
men, or their communication. You are as wholly unacquainted
both with them and their doctrines, as if you had lived all your
days in the islands of Japan, or the deserts of Arabia. You
have given a furious assault to you know not whom ; and you
have done it, you know not why. You have not hurt me
thereby; but you have hurt yourself, perhaps in your cha
racter, certainly in your conscience. For this is not doing
to others “as you would they should do unto you.” When
you grow cool, I trust you will see this clearly; and will no
more accuse, in a manner so remote from fairness and candour,
Reverend Sir,
Your servant for Christ’s sake,
JOHN WESLEY.
