A Letter to a Friend Concerning Tea
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Year: 1748
Author: John Wesley
---
1. I HAve read your letter with attention, and much
approve of the spirit with which it is wrote... You speak in
love. I desire to do so too; and then no harm can be done
on either side. You appear not to be wedded to your own
opinion, but open to further conviction. I would willingly
be of the same temper; not obstimately attached to either
side of the question. I am clearly satisfied of the necessity
of this; a willingness to see what as yet I see not. For I
know, an unwillingness to be convinced would utterly blind
either you or me; and that if we are resolved to retain our
present opinion, reason and argument signify nothing.
2. I shall not therefore think it is time or pains misem
ployed, to give the whole cause a second hearing; to recite
the occasion of every step I have taken, and the motives
inducing me so to do; and then to consider whatsoever
either you or others have urged on the contrary side of the
question.
3. Twenty-nine years since, when I had spent a few
months at Oxford, having, as I apprehended, an exceeding
good constitution, and being otherwise in health, I was a
little surprised at some symptoms of a paralytic disorder. I
could not imagine what should occasion the shaking of my
hand; till I observed it was always worst after breakfast;
and that if I intermitted drinking tea for two or three days,
it did not shake at all. Upon inquiry, I found tea had the same
effect upon others also of my acquaintance; and therefore saw
that this was one of its natural effects, (as several Physicians
have often remarked,) especially when it is largely and fre
quently drank; and most of all on persons of weak nerves. Upon
"--~" --
this I lessened the quantity, drank it weaker, and added
more milk and sugar. But still for above six-and-twenty
years I was more or less subject to the same disorder.
4. July was two years I began to observe that abundance
of the people of London, with whom I conversed, laboured
under the same, and many other, paralytic disorders, and
that in a much higher degree; insomuch that some of their
nerves were quite unstrung; their bodily strength quite
decayed, and they could not go through their daily labour.
I inquired, “Are you not a hard drinker?” and was
answered by one and another, and another, “No, indeed,
Sir, not I; I drink scarce anything but a little tea, morning
and night.” I immediately remembered my own case; and,
after weighing the matter throughly, easily gathered from
many concurring circumstances, that it was the same case
with them.
5. I considered, “What an advantage would it be to these
poor enfeebled people, if they would leave off what so
manifestly impairs their health, and thereby hurts their
business also ! Is there nothing equally cheap which they
could use? Yes, surely; and cheaper too. If they used
English herbs in its stead, (which would cost either nothing,
or what is next to nothing,) with the same bread, butter, and
milk, they would save just the price of the tea. And hereby
they might not only lessen their pain, but in some degree
their poverty too; for they would be able to work (as well as
to save) considerably more than they can do now. And by
this means, if they are in debt, they might be more just,
paying away what they either earned or saved. If they are
not in debt, they might be more merciful, giving it away to
them that want.”
6. I considered farther: “What an advantage might this
be, particularly in such a body of men as those are who are
united together in these societies, who are both so numerous
and so poor ! How much might be saved in so numerous a
body, even in this single article of expense ! And how greatly
is all that can possibly be saved, in every article, wanted daily
by those who have not even food convenient for them l”
7. I soon perceived that this latter consideration was of a
more general nature than the former; and that it affected
many of those whom the other did not so immediately
concern; seeing it was as needful for all to save needless
expenses, as for some to regain the health they had
impaired; especially, considered as members of a society,
the wants of which they could not be unapprized of They
knew, of those to whom they were so peculiarly united, some
had not food to sustain nature; some were destitute of even
necessary clothing; some had not where to lay their head.
They knew, or might know, that the little contributions
made weekly did in nowise suffice to remove these wants,
being barely sufficient to relieve the sick; and even that in
so scanty a manner, that I know not if some of them have
not, with their allowance, pined away, and at length died for
want. If you and I have not saved all we could to relieve
these, how shall we face them at the throne of God?
8. I reflected: “If one only would save all, that he could
in this single instance, he might surely feed or clothe one of
his brethren, and perhaps save one life. What then might be
done, if ten thousand, or one thousand, or only five hundred,
would do it? yea, if half that number should say, ‘I will
compute this day what I have expended in tea, weekly or
yearly. I will immediately enter on cheaper food: And
whatever is saved hereby, I will put into that poor-box
weekly, to feed the hungry, and to clothe the naked.” I am
mistaken, if any among us need want either food or raiment
from that hour.”
9. I thought farther: “It is said, nay, many tell me to
my face, I can persuade this people to anything. I will make
a fair trial. If I cannot persuade them, there may be some
good effect. All who do not wilfully shut their eyes will see
that I have no such influence as they supposed. If I can
persuade any number, many who are now weak or sick will
be restored to health and strength. Many will pay those
debts, which others, perhaps equally poor, can but ill afford
to lose. Many will be less straitened in their own families.
Many, by helping their neighbour, will lay up for themselves
treasures in heaven.”
10. Immediately it struck into my mind, “But example
must go before precept; therefore I must not plead an
exemption for myself, from a daily practice of twenty-seven
years. I must begin.” I did so. I left it off myself in
August, 1746. And I have now had sufficient time to try
the effects, which have fully answered my expectation. My
paralytic complaints are all gone; my hand is steady as it
was at fifteen; although I must expect that or other weak
nesses soon, as I decline into the vale of years. And so
considerable a difference do I find in my expense, that I can
make it appear, from the accounts now in being, in only
those four families at London, Bristol, Kingswood, and
Newcastle, I save upwards of fifty pounds a year.
11. The first to whom I explained these things at large,
and whom I advised to set the same example to their
brethren, were a few of those who rejoice to assist my brother
and me, as our sons in the gospel. A week after, I proposed
it to about forty of those whom I believed to be strong in
faith; and the next morning to about sixty more, entreating
them all to speak their minds freely. They did so; and, in
the end, saw the good which might ensue; yielded to the
force of Scripture and reason; and resolved all, (but two or
three,) by the grace of God, to make the trial without delay.
12. In a short time, I proposed it, but with all the tender
mess I could, first, to the body of those who are supposed to
have living faith, and, after staying a few days, (that I
might judge the better how to speak,) to the whole society.
It soon appeared (as I doubted not but it would) how far
these were from calling me Rabbi, from implicitly submitting
to my judgment, or implicitly following my example. Objec
tions rose in abundance from all sides. These I now proceed
to consider; whether they are advanced by you, or by others;
and whether pointed at the premises, or directly at the
conclusion.
13. I. Some objected: “Tea is not unwholesome at all;
not in any kind prejudicial to health.”
To these I reply, First, You should not be so sure of this.
Even that casual circumstance, related in Dr. Short's history
of it, might incline you to doubt; namely, that “while the
Chinese dry the leaves, and turn it with their hands upon
the tin plates, the moisture of them is so extremely corrosive,
that it eats into the flesh, if not wiped off immediately.” It
is not probable, then, that what remains in the leaves is
quite friendly to the human body.
Secondly, Many eminent Physicians have declared their
judgment, that it is prejudicial in several respects; that it
gives rise to numberless disorders, particularly those of the
nervous kind; and that, if frequently used by those of weak
nerves, it is no other than a slow poison.
Thirdly, If all physicians were silent in the case, yet plain
fact is against you. And this speaks loud enough. It was
prejudicial to my health; it is so to many to this day.
14. “But it is not so to me,” says the objector: “Why
then should I leave it off?”
I answer, First, To give an example to those to whom it is
undeniably prejudicial.
Secondly, That you may have the more wherewith to give
bread to the hungry, and raiment to the naked.
15. “But I cannot leave it off; for it helps my health.
Nothing else will agree with me.”
I answer, First, Will nothing else agree with you? I
know not how to believe that. I suppose your body is much
of the same kind with that of your great-grandmother. And
do you think nothing else agreed with her, or with any of
her progenitors? What poor, puling, sickly things, must
all the English then have been, till within these hundred
years! But you know they were not so. Other things
agreed with them; and why not with you?
Secondly, If, in fact, nothing else will, if tea has already
weakened your stomach, and impaired your digestion to such
a degree, it has hurt you more than you are aware. It has
prejudiced your health extremely. You have need to abhor
it as deadly poison, and to renounce it from this very hour.
So says a drinker of drams: “Nothing else will agree
with me. Nothing else will raise my spirits. I can digest
nothing without them.” Indeed! Is it so? Then touch
no more, if you love your life.
Thirdly, Suppose nothing else agrees with you at first;
yet in a while many things will. When I first left off tea, I
was half asleep all day long; my head ached from morning
to night. I could not remember a question asked, even till
I could return an answer; but in a week’s time all these
inconveniences were gone, and have never returned since.
Fourthly, I have not found one single exception yet; not
one person in all England, with whom, after sufficient trial
made, nothing else would agree.
It is therefore well worth while for you to try again, if you
have any true regard for your own health, or any compassion
for those who are perishing all around you for want of the
common necessaries of life.
16. If you are sincere in this plea, if you do not talk of
your health, while the real objection is your inclination,
make a fair trial thus: (1.) Take half a pint of milk every
morning, with a little bread, not boiled, but warmed only:
A man in tolerable health might double the quantity. (2.)
If this is too heavy, add as much water, and boil it together,
with a spoonful of oatmeal. (3.) If this agrees not, try half
a pint, or a little more, of water-gruel, neither thick nor
thin; not sweetened, for that may be apt to make him sick,
but with a very little butter, salt, and bread. (4.) If this
disagrees, try sage, green balm, mint, or penny-royal tea,
infusing only so much of the herb as just to change the
colour of the water. (5.) Try two or three of these mixed,
in various proportions. (6.) Try ten or twelve other English
herbs. (7.) Try foltron, a mixture of herbs to be had at many
grocers’, far healthier, as well as cheaper, than tea. (8.) Try
cocoa. If, after having tried each of these for a week or ten
days, you find none of them will agree with your constitution,
then use (weak green) tea again; but at the same time know,
that your having used it so long has brought you near the
chambers of death.
17. II. “I do not know,” says another, “but tea may
hurt me; but there is nothing saved by leaving it off; for I
am sure other things cost full as much.” I pray, what
other things? Sack-and-sugar costs more; and so do
ragouts, or pheasants, or ortolans. But what is this to the
point? We do not say, All things are cheaper: But any of
the things above mentioned are; at least, if prudently
managed. Therefore, if you really desire to save what you
can, you will drink tea no more.
18. “Well, I do not design to buy any more myself; but
where others drink it, there is nothing saved by my
abstaining.” I answer, First, Yes, something is saved,
though but little; especially if you tell them before, “I shall
not drink tea.” And many a little you know, put together,
will make a great sum.
Secondly, If the whole saved were ever so little, if it
were but two mites, when you save this for God, and your
brethren’s sake, it is much.
Thirdly, Your example in saving a little now, may occasion
the saving of more by and by.
Fourthly, It is not a little advantage which you may
reap, even now, to your own soul; by habituating yourself
$510 LETTER TO A FRIEND
not to be ashamed of being singular in a good thing; by
taking up your cross, and denying yourself even in so small
an instance, and by accustoming yourself to act on rational
grounds, whether in a little matter or a great.
19. “But what is saved will be no better employed.” Do
you say this with regard to yourself, or others? If with
regard to yourself, it will be your fault if you do not employ
it better. I do not say you will, but I am sure you may;
and if you do not, it is your own sin, and your own shame.
If with regard to others, how do you know that it will not
be employed better? I trust it will. It cannot be denied
that it often has, and that it always may be. And it is
highly probable all who save anything from the best motive,
will lay it out to the best purpose.
20. “As to example,” you say, “I have lately been
without hopes of doing any good by it.” I suppose you
mean, because so exceeding few will follow either your
example or mine. I am sorry for it. This only gives me a
fresh objection to this unwholesome, expensive food; viz.,
that it has too much hold on the hearts of them that use it;
that, to use a scriptural phrase, they are “under the power
of ” this trifle. If it be so, were there no other reason than
this, they ought to throw it away at once; else they no more
regard St. Paul than they do you or me; for his rule is
home to the point: “All things are lawful for me; but I
will not be brought under the power of amy.” Away with it
then, however lawful, (that is, though it were wholesome as
well as cheap,) if you are already brought “under the power
of ” it.
And the fewer they are who follow this rule, the greater
reason there is that you should add one example more to
those few. Though, blessed be God, they are not so few
as you suppose. I have met with very many in London who
use less of it than they had done for many years; and above
an hundred who have plucked out the right eye and cast it
from them, who wholly abstain from it.
21. You add, “But I am equally, yea, abundantly more,
concerned to set an example in all Christian behaviour.” I
grant it: This, therefore, “ought you to have done, and not
to leave the other undone.”
22. But “one day,” you add, “I saw your brother drink
tea; which he said was for fear of giving offence.”
I answer, First, Learn from hence to follow neither his
nor my practice implicitly; but weigh the reason of each,
and then follow reason, wheresoever it stands. But,
Secondly, Examine your heart, and beware inclination
does not put on the shape of reason.
Thirdly, You see with your own eyes, I do not drink it
at all, and yet I seldom give offence thereby. It is not then
the bare abstaining, but the manner of doing it, which
usually gives the offence.
Fourthly, There is therefore a manner wherein you may
do it too, and yet give no more offence than I. For
instance: If any ask you, simply reply, “I do not drink tea;
I never use it.” If they say, “Why, you did drink it;”
answer, “I did so; but I have left it off a considerable
time.” Those who have either good-nature or good manners
will say no more. But if any should impertinently add, “O,
but why did you leave it off?” answer, mildly, “Because I
thought water-gruel (suppose) was wholesomer, as well as
cheaper.” If they, with still greater ill-manners and
impertinence, go on, “What, you do it because Mr. Wesley
bids you;” reply, calmly, “True; I do it because Mr.
Wesley, on good reasons, advises me so to do.” If they add
the trite cant phrase, “What, you follow man!” reply,
without any emotion, “Yes, I follow any man, you or him,
or any other, who gives me good reason for so doing.” If
they persist in cavilling, close the whole matter with, “I
neither drink it, nor dispute about it.”
23. If you proceed in this manner, with mildness and love,
exceeding few will be offended. “But you ought,” say
some, “to give up an indifferent thing, rather than give an
offence to any. So St. Paul: ‘I will eat no flesh whilst the
world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend.’” I
reply, This is not an indifferent thing, if it affects the health
either of myself or my brethren. Therefore that rule
relating wholly to things indifferent is not applicable to this
case. Would St. Paul have said, “I will drink drams while
the world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend?”
“But tea is not so hurtful as drams.” I do not believe it is.
But it is hurtful; and that is enough. The question does
not turn on the degree of hurtfulness. “However, it is but
a small thing.” Nay, nothing is small if it touches con
science: Much less is it a small thing to preserve my own
or my brother's health, or to be a faithful steward cven of
the manmon of unrighteousness. O think it not a small
thing, whether only one for whom Christ died be fed or
hungry, clothed or naked !
To conclude the head of offence: You must at least allow
that all this is no plea at all for your drinking tea at home.
“Yes, it is; for my husband or parents are offended if I do
not drink it.” I answer, First, Perhaps this, in some rarc
cases, may be a sufficient reason why a wife or a child should
use this food, that is, with them; but nowhere else. But,
Secondly, try, and not once or twice only, if you cannot
overcome that offence by reason, softness, love, patience,
longsuffering, joined with constant and fervent prayer.
24. Your next objection is, “I cannot bear to give
trouble; therefore, I drink whatever others drink where I
come, else there is so much hurry about insignificant me.”
I answer,
First, This is no plea at all for your drinking tea at home
Therefore, touch it not there, whatever you do abroad.
Secondly, Where is the trouble given, even when you are
abroad, if they drink tea, and you fill your cup with milk
and water?
Thirdly, Whatever trouble is taken, is not for “insignifi
cant me,” but for that poor man who is half-starved with
cold and hunger; for that miserable woman who, while she
is poisoning herself, wipes her mouth, and says she does no
evil; who will not believe the poison will hurt her, because
it does not (sensibly at least) hurt you. O throw it away!
let her have one plea less for destroying her body, if not her
soul, before the time !
25. You object, farther, “It is my desire to be unknown.
for any particularity, unless a peculiar love to the souls of
those who are present.” And I hope, to the souls of the
absent too; yea, and to their bodies also, in a due propor
tion, that they may be healthy, and fed, and clothed, and
warm, and may praise God for the consolation.
26. You subjoin : “When I had left it off for some
months, I was continually puzzled with, Why, What, &c.;
and I have seen no good effects, but impertinent questions
and answers, and unedifying conversation about eating and
drinking.”
I answer, First, Those who were so uneasy about it, plainly
showed that you touched the apple of their eye. Conse
quently, these, of all others, ought to leave it off; for they
are evidently “brought under the power of it.”
Secondly, Those impertinent questions might have been
cut short, by a very little steadiness and common sense.
You need only have taken the method mentioned above, and
they would have dropped in the midst.
Thirdly, It is not strange you saw no good effects of
leaving it off, where it was not left off at all. But you saw
very bad effects of not leaving it off; viz., the adding sin to
sin; the joining much unedifying conversation to wasteful,
unhealthy self-indulgence.
Fourthly, You need not go far to see many good effects
of leaving it off: You may see them in me. I have reco
vered thereby that healthy state of the whole nervous system,
which I had in a great degree, and I almost thought irre
coverably, lost for considerably more than twenty years. I
have been enabled hereby to assist, in one year, above fifty
poor with food or raiment, whom I must otherwise have left
(for I had before begged for them all I could) as hungry and
maked as I found them. You may see the good effects in
above thirty poor people just now before you, who have been
restored to health, through the medicines bought by that
money which a single person has saved in this article. And
a thousand more good effects you will not fail to see, when
her example is more generally followed.
27. Neither is there any need that conversation should be
unedifying, even when it turns upon eating and drinking.
Nay, from such a conversation, if duly improved, numberless
good effects may flow. For how few understand, “Whether
ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of
God l” And how glad ought you to be of a fair occasion to
observe, that though the kingdom of God does not consist in
“meats and drinks,” yet, without exact temperance in these,
we cannot have either “righteousness, or peace, or joy in the
Holy Ghost !”
It may therefore have a very happy effect, if, whenever
people introduce the subject, you directly close in, and push
it home, that they may understand a little more of this
important truth.
28. But “I find at present very little desire to change
either my thoughts or practice.” Shall I speak plain? I
fear, by not standing your ground, by easiness, cowardice,
and false shame, you have grieved the Spirit of God, and
thereby lost your conviction and desire at once.
Yet you add: “I advise every one to leave off tea, if it
hurts their health, or is inconsistent with frugality; as I
advise every one to avoid dainties in meat, and vanity in
dress, from the same principle.” Enough, enough ! Let
this only be well pursued, and it will secure all that I
contend for. I advise no persons living to leave it off, if it
does not hurt the health either of them or their brethren;
and if it is not inconsistent with the Christian frugality of
cutting off every needless expense.
29. But “to be subject to the consequences of leaving it
off again! this I cannot bear.”
I answer, First, It may be so. You cannot easily bear it.
For, by your giving up the point once, you have made it
much harder to stand your ground now than it was at first.
Yet still it is worth all your courage and labour; since the
reasons for it are as strong as at the beginning.
Secondly, As to the consequences you fear, they are
shadowy all; they are a mere lion in the streets. “Much
trouble to others.” Absolutely none at all, if you take the
tea-kettle, and fill your cup with water. “Much foolish
discourse.” Take the preceding advice, and it will be just
the reverse. “Nothing helpful toward the renewal of my
soul in the image of Jesus Christ.” What a deep mistake is
this ! Is it not helpful to speak closely of the nature of his
inward kingdom ? to encourage one another in casting off
every weight, in removing every hinderance of it? to inure
ourselves to the bearing his cross? to bring Christianity into
common life, and accustom ourselves to conduct even our
minutest actions by the great rules of reason and religion?
30. Is it “not of any importance” to do this? I think,
it is of vast importance. However, “it is a very small
circumstance in self-denial.” It is well if you find it so. I
am sure I did not. And I believe the case is the same with
many others at this day. But you say, “I have so many
other assaults of self-indulgence, that this is nothing.” “It
is nothing,” said one to a young woman, “to fast once or
twice a week; to deny yourself a little food. Why do not
you deny yourself as to anger and fretfulness, as to peevish
mess and discontent?” She replied, “That I want; so I
deny myself in little things first, till I am able to do it in
greater.” Neither you nor I can mend her reply. Go thou
and do likewise.
31. I have done what I proposed; and indeed in many
more words than I at first intended. I have told you the
occasions of every step I have taken, and the motives induc
ing me thereto; and have considered what either you or
others have urged on the contrary side of the question.
And now, the advice I would give upon the whole is this:
First, Pray earnestly to God for clear light; for a full,
piercing, and steady conviction, that this is the more excel
lent way. Pray for a spirit of universal self-denial, of
cheerful temperance, of wise frugality; for bowels of mercies;
for a kind, compassionate spirit, tenderly sensible of the
various wants of your brethren; and for firmness of mind; for
a mild, even courage, without fear, anger, or shame. Then
you will once more, with all readiness of heart, make this
little (or great) sacrifice to God; and withal present your
soul and body a living sacrifice, acceptable unto God through
Jesus Christ.
