The Principles of a Methodist
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Year: 1742
Author: John Wesley
---
1. I HAVE often wrote on controverted points before; but
not with an eye to any particular person. So that this is the
first time I have appeared in controversy, properly so called.
Indeed I have not wanted occasion to do it before; particu
larly when, after many stabs in the dark, I was publicly
attacked, not by an open enemy, but by my own familiar
friend. But I could not answer him. I could only cover my
face and say, Kat ovels exeuvov; Kat ov, Texvov; “Art thou
also among them? Art thou, my son?”
2. I now tread an untried path “with fear and trembling;”
fear, not of my adversary, but of myself. I fear my own
spirit, lest I “fall where many mightier have been slain.” I
never knew one man (or but one) write controversy, with what
I thought a right spirit. Every disputant seems to think (as
every soldier) that he may hurt his opponent as much as he
can; nay, that he ought to do his worst to him, or he cannot
make the best of his own cause; that so he do not belie or
wilfully misrepresent him, he must expose him as far as he is
able. It is enough, we suppose, if we do not show heat or
passion against our adversary. But, not to despise him, or
endeavour to make others do so, is quite a work of super
erogation.
3. But ought these things to be so? (I speak on the Chris
tian scheme.) Ought we not to love our neighbour as ourselves?
And does a man cease to be our neighbour, because he is of a
different opinion; nay, and declares himself so to be? Ought
we not, for all this, to do to him as we would he should do to
us? But do we ourselves love to be exposed, or set in the
worst light? Would we willingly be treated with contempt?
If not, why do we treat others thus? And yet who scruples
it? Who does not hit every blow he can, however foreign to
the merits of the cause? Who, in controversy, casts the
mantle of love over the nakedness of his brother? Who
keeps steadily and uniformly to the question, without ever
striking at the person? Who shows, in every sentence, that
he loves his brother only less than the truth?
4. I have made a little faint essay towards this. I have a
brother who is as my own soul. My desire is, in every word I
say, to look upon Mr. Tucker as in his place; and to speak no
tittle concerning the one in any other spirit than I would
speak concerning the other. But whether I have attained this
or no, I know not; for my heart is “deceitful and desperately
wicked.” If I have spoken anything in another spirit, I pray
God it may not be laid to my charge; and that it may not
condemn me in that day when the secrets of all hearts shall be
made manifest! Meanwhile,my heart's desireand prayer to God
is, that both I, and all who think it their duty to oppose me, may
“put on bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind,
meekness, long-suffering; forbearing one another, and forgiving
one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven us.”
THE
1. THERE has lately appeared in the world a tract, entitled,
“A Brief History of the Principles of Methodism.” I doubt
not but the writer’s design was good, and believe he has a real
desire to know the truth. And the manner wherein he pursues
that design is generally calm and dispassionate. He is, indeed,
in several mistakes; but as many of these are either of small
consequence in themselves, or do not immediately relate to me,
it is not my concern to mention them. All of any consequence
which relates to me, I think, falls under three heads:
First. That I believe justification by faith alone.
Secondly. That I believe sinless perfection. And,
Thirdly. That I believe inconsistencies.
Of each of these I will speak as plainly as I can.
2. First. That I believe justification by faith alone. This I
allow. For I am firmly persuaded, that every man of the off
spring of Adam is very far gone from original righteousness,
and is of his own nature inclined to evil; that this corruption
of our nature, in every person born into the world, deserves
God’s wrath and damnation; that therefore, if ever we receive
the remission of our sins, and are accounted righteous before
God, it must be only for the merit of Christ, by faith, and not
for our own works or deservings of any kind. Nay, I am per
suaded, that all works done before justification, have in them
the nature of sin; and that, consequently, till he is justified, a
man has no power to do any work which is pleasing and accept
able to God.
3. To express my meaning a little more at large: I believe,
three things must go together in our justification: Upon God’s
part, his great mercy and grace; upon Christ's part, the satis
faction of God’s justice, by the offering his body, and shedding
his blood; and upon our part, true and living faith in the
merits of Jesus Christ. So that in our justification there is not
only God’s mercy and grace, but his justice also. And so the
grace of God does not shut out the righteousness of God in
our justification; but only shuts out the righteousness of man,
that is, the righteousness of our works.
4. And therefore St. Paul requires nothing on the part of
man, but only a true and living faith. Yet this faith does not
shut out repentance, hope, and love, which are joined with faith
in every man that is justified. But it shuts them out from the
office of justifying. So that although they are all present toge
ther in him that is justified, yet they justify not all together.
5. Neither does faith shut out good works, necessarily to be
done afterwards. But we may not do them to this intent,-to be
justified by doing them. Our justification comes freely, of the
mere mercy of God; for whereas all the world was not able to
pay any part towards their ransom, it pleased him, without any
of our deserving, to prepare for us Christ’s body and blood,
whereby our ransom might be paid, and his justice satisfied.
Christ, therefore, is now the righteousness of all them that
truly believe in him.
6. Butlet it be observed, the true sense of those words, “We
are justified by faith in Christ only,” is not, that this our own
act, “to believe in Christ,” or this our faith which is within us,
justifies us; for that were to account ourselves to be justified
by some act or virtue that is within us; but that although we
have faith, hope, and love within us, and do never so many good
works, yet we must renounce the merit of all, of faith, hope,
love, and all other virtues and good works, which we either
have done, shall do, or can do, as far too weak to deserve our
justification; for which, therefore, we must trust only in God’s
mercy, and the merits of Christ. For it is he alone that
taketh away our sins. To him alone are we to go for this;
forsaking all our virtues, good words, thoughts, and works, and
putting our trust in Christ only.
7. In strictness, therefore, neither our faith nor our works
justify us, that is, deserve the remission of our sins. But God
himself justifies us, of his own mercy, through the merits of his
Son only. Nevertheless, because by faith we embrace the pro
mise of God’s mercy and of the remission of our sins, therefore
the Scripture says, that faith does justify, yea, faith without
works. And it is all one to say, “Faith without works,” and
“Faith alone, justifies us,” Therefore the ancient Fathers from
time to time speak thus: “Faith alone justifies us.” And
because we receive faith through the only merits of Christ,
and not through the merit and virtue we have, or work we
do; therefore in that respect we renounce, as it were, again,
faith, works, and all other virtues. For our corruption through
original sin is so great, that all our faith, charity, words, and
works, cannot merit or deserve any part of our justification for
us. And therefore we thus speak, humbling ourselves before
God, and giving Christ all the glory of our justification.
8. But it should also be observed, what that faith is whereby
we are justified. Now, that faith which brings not forth good
works, is not a living faith, but a dead and devilish one. For
even the devils believe that Christ was born of a virgin; that
he wrought all kinds of miracles, declaring himself to be very
God; that for our sakes he died and rose again, and ascended
into heaven; and at the end of the world shall come again, to
judge the quick and the dead. This the devils believe; and so
they believe all that is written in the Old and New Testament:
And yet still, for all this faith, they are but devils; they remain
still in their damnable estate, lacking the true Christian faith.
9. The true Christian faith is, not only to believe the Holy
Scriptures and the articles of our faith are true; but also, to
have “a sure trust and confidence to be saved from everlasting
damnation by Christ,” whereof doth follow a loving heart, to
obey his commandments. And this faith neither any devil hath,
nor any wicked man. No ungodly man hath or can have this
“sure trust and confidence in God, that by the merits of Christ
his sins are forgiven, and he reconciled to the favour of God.”
10. This is what I believe (and have believed for some years)
concerning justification by faith alone. I have chose to express
it in the words of a little treatise, published several years ago;
as being the most authentic proof, both of my past and present
sentiments. If I err herein, let those who are better informed
calmly point out my error to me; and I trust, I shall not
shut my eyes against the light, from whatsoever side it comes.
11. The Second thing laid to my charge is, that I believe
sinless perfection. I will simply declare what I do believe
concerning this also, and leave unprejudiced men to judge.
12. My last and most deliberate thoughts on this head were
published but a few months since, in these words:
(1) “Perhaps the general prejudice against Christian per
fection may chiefly arise from a misapprehension of the nature
of it. We willingly allow, and continually declare, there is no
such perfection in this life, as implies either a dispensation
from doing good and attending all the ordinances of God; or
a freedom from ignorance, mistake, temptation, and a thou
sand infirmities necessarily connected with flesh and blood.
(2.) “First. We not only allow, but earnestly contend, that
there is no perfection in this life, which implies any dispensa
tion from attending all the ordinances of God, or from ‘doing
good unto all men, while we have time, though “specially unto
the household of faith. We believe, that not only the babes
in Christ, who have newly found redemption in his blood, but
those also who are “grown up into perfect men, are indis
pensably obliged, as often as they have opportunity, “to eat
bread and drink wine in remembrance of Him,” and to ‘search
the Scriptures; by fasting, as well as temperance, to “keep
their bodies under, and bring them into subjection;’ and,
above all, to pour out their souls in prayer, both secretly and
in the great congregation.
(3) “We, Secondly, believe, that there is no such perfection in
his life as implies an entire deliverance, either from ignorance or
mistake, in things not essential to salvation, or from manifold
temptations, or from numberless infirmities wherewith the cor
ruptible body more or less presses down the soul. We cannot
find any ground in Scripture to suppose, that any inhabitant of
a house of clay is wholly exempt, either from bodily infirmities,
or from ignorance of many things; or to imagine any is inca
pable of mistake, or falling into divers temptations.
(4) “‘But whom then do you mean by one that is perfect P”
We mean one in whom ‘is the mind which was in Christ,’ and
who so “walketh as Christ walked; a ‘man that hath clean
hands and a pure heart, or that is “cleansed from all filthiness
of flesh and spirit; one in whom ‘is no occasion of stumbling,
and who accordingly ‘doth not commit sin. To declare this
a little more particularly: We understand by that scriptural
expression, “a perfect man, one in whom God hath fulfilled his
faithful word, “From all your filthiness and from all your idols
will I cleanse you: I will also save you from all your unclean
nesses. We understand hereby one whom God hath “sancti
fied throughout, in body, soul, and spirit; one who “walketh in
the light as he is in the light, in whom is no darkness at all; the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son having cleansed him from all sin.”
(5.) “This man can now testify to all mankind, ‘I am cru
cified with Christ: Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ
liveth in me.’ He is ‘holy, as God who called him is holy, both
in heart and ‘in all manner of conversation.’ He ‘loveth the
Lord his God with all his heart, and serveth him “with all his
strength.’ He ‘loveth his neighbour, every man, “as himself;’
yea, “as Christ loved us;’ them, in particular, that “despite
fully use him and persecute him, because they know not the Son,
neither the Father.” Indeed his soul is all love, filled with
‘bowels of mercies, kindness, meekness, gentleness, longsuffer
ing. And his life agreeth thereto, full of ‘the work of faith,
the patience of hope, the labour of love. And whatsoever he
doeth either in word or deed, he doeth it all in the name, in
the love and power, ‘of the Lord Jesus. In a word, he doeth
‘the will of God on earth, as it is done in heaven.’
(6.) “This it is to be ‘a perfect man,’ to be sanctified through
out: Even ‘to have a heart so all-flaming with the love of God,”
to use Archbishop Usher's words, “as continually to offer up
every thought, word, and work, as a spiritual sacrifice, acceptable
to God through Christ.’ In every thought of our hearts, in
every word of our tongues, in every work of our hands, to ‘show
forth his praise, who hath called us out of darkness into his
marvellous light.’ O that both we, and all who seek the
Lord Jesus in sincerity, may thus be made perfect in one!”
13. If there be anything unscriptural in these words, any
thing wild or extravagant, anything contrary to the analogy of
faith, or the experience of adult Christians, let them “smite
me friendly and reprove me;” let them impart to me of the
clearer light God has given them. How knowest thou, Oman,
“but thou mayest gain thy brother;” but he may at length
come to the knowledge of the truth; and thy labour of love,
shown forth with meekness of wisdom, may not be in vain?
14. There remains yet another charge against me, that I
believe inconsistencies; that my tenets, particularly concerning
justification, are contradictory to themselves; that Mr. Wesley,
“since his return from Germany, has improved in the spirit of
inconsistency.” “For then he published two treatises of Dr.
Barnes, the Calvinist, or Dominican rather, who suffered in
1541; ”(let us spare the ashes of the dead. Were I such a
Dominican as he was, I should rejoice too to die in the flames;)
“the first on “Justification by faith only;” the other on ‘the
sinfulness of man’s natural will, and his utter inability to do
works acceptable to God, until he be justified. Which prin
ciples, if added to his former tenets,” (nay, they need not be
added to them, for they are the very same,) “will give the
whole a new vein of inconsistency, and make the contradic
tions more gross and glaring than before.”
15. It will be necessary to speak more largely on this head,
than on either of the preceding. And in order to speak as
distinctly as I can, I propose taking the paragraphs one by
one, as they lie before me.
16. (1.) It is “asserted that Mr. Law’s system was the
creed of the Methodists.” But it is not proved. I had been
eight years at Oxford before I read any of Mr. Law’s writings;
and when I did, I was so far from making them my creed, that
I had objections to almost every page. But all this time my
manner was, to spend several hours a day in reading the
Scripture in the original tongues. And hence my system, so
termed, was wholly drawn, according to the light I then had.
17. It was in my passage to Georgia, I met with those Teach
ers who would have taught me the way of God more perfectly.
But I understood them not. Neither, on my arrival there, did
they infuse any particularities into me, either about justifica
tion or anything else. For I came back with the same motions I
went. And this I have explicitly acknowledged in my second
Journal, where some of my words are these: “When Peter
Böhler, as soon as I came to London, affirmed of true faith in
Christ, (which is but one,) that it had these two fruits insepa
rably attending it, “dominion over sin, and constant peace from
a sense of forgiveness, I was quite amazed, and looked upon it
as a new gospel. If this was so, it was clear I had no faith.
But I was not willing to be convinced of this. Therefore I
disputed with all my might, and laboured to prove that faith
might be where these were not; especially, where that sense of
forgiveness was not; for, all the scriptures relating to this I had
been long since taught to construe away, and to call all Pres
byterians who spoke otherwise. Besides, I well saw, no one
could (in the nature of things) have such a sense of forgive
ness, and not feel it. But I felt it not. If then there was
no faith without this, all my pretensions to faith dropped at
once.” (Vol. I. p. 101.)
18. (2.) Yet it was not Peter Böhler who convinced me that
conversion (I mean justification) was an instantaneous work.
On the contrary, when I was convinced of the nature and fruits
of justifying faith, still “I could not comprehend what he
spoke of an instantaneous work. I could not understand how
this faith should be given in a moment; how a man could at
once be thus turned from darkness to light, from sin and misery
to righteousness and joy in the Holy Ghost. I searched the
Scriptures again, touching this very thing, particularly the Acts
of the Apostles. But to my utter astonishment, I found scarce
any instances there of other than instantaneous conversions;
scarce any others so slow as that of St. Paul, who was three
days in the pangs of the new birth. I had but one retreat left,
viz., ‘Thus, I grant, God wrought in the first ages of Chris
tianity; but the times are changed. What reason have I to
believe he works in the same manner now?’
“But on Sunday, 23, I was beat out of this retreat too, by
the concurring evidence of several living witnesses, who testi
fied God had thus wrought in themselves; giving them, in a
moment, such a faith in the blood of his Son, as translated
them out of darkness into light, out of sin and fear into holiness
and happiness. Here ended my disputing. I could now only
cry out, ‘Lord, help thou my unbelief!’” (Vol. I. p. 91.)
The remaining part of this section, with the third and fourth,
contain my own words, to which I still subscribe.
And if there is a mistake in the fifth, it is not material.
20. (3.) It is true, that “on Wednesday, July 12, the
Count spoke to this effect:
(1) “Justification is the forgiveness of sins.
(2) “The moment a man flies to Christ, he is justified.
(3) “And has peace with God, but not always joy.
(4) “Nor perhaps may he know he is justified till long
after.
(5) “For the assurance of it is distinct from justification
itself.
(6) “But others may know he is justified, by his power
over sin, by his seriousness, his love of the brethren, and his
hunger and thirst after righteousness; which alone proves the
spiritual life to be begun.
(7) “To be justified is the same thing as to be born of
God: When a man is awakened, he is begotten of God, and
his fear, and sorrow, and sense of the wrath of God, are the
pangs of the new birth.”
It is true also, that I then recollected what P. Böhler had
often said on this head, which was to this effect:
(1) “When a man has living faith in Christ, then he is
justified.
(2.) “This is always given in a moment.
(3) “And in that moment he has peace with God.
(4.) “Which he cannot have without knowing that he has it.
(5) “And being ‘born of God, he sinneth not.
(6.) “Which deliverance from sin he cannot have without
knowing that he has it.”
21. I did not apprehend it possible for any man living to
have imagined, that I believed both these accounts; the words
whereof I had purposely so ranged, and divided into short sen
tences, that the gross, irreconcilable difference between them
might be plain to the meanest reader. I cannot therefore but
be a little surprised at the strength of that prejudice which
could prevent any one’s seeing, that, in opposition to the
Count’s opinion, (which in many respects I wholly disapproved
of) I quoted the words of one of his own Church, which, if
true, overturn it altogether.-
22. I have motning to object to the quotations made in the
seventh, eighth, and ninth sections. In the tenth are these
words: “Now, since Mr. Wesley went so far to gather such
materials together, let us see what was the system (or rather
the medley) of principles he had to return with to England.”
“OF THE AssuBANCE OF JUSTIFICATION.
“I BELIEVE that conversion is an instantaneous work; and
that the moment a man is converted, or has living faith in
Christ, he is justified: Which faith a man cannot have, with
out knowing that he hath it.
“Yet I believe he may not know that he is justified (that is,
that he has living faith) till a long time after.
“I believe, also, that the moment a man is justified he has
peace with God.
“Which he cannot have without knowing that he has it.
“Yet I believe he may not know that he is justified (that is,
that he has peace with God) till a long time after.
“I believe, when a man is justified he is born of God.
“And being born of God, he sinneth not.
“Which deliverance from sin he cannot have without
knowing it.
“Yet I believe he may not know that he is justified (that
is, delivered from sin) till a long time after.
“Though I believe that others may know that he is justified,
by his power over sin, his seriousness, and love of the brethren.”
23. “OF THE CONDITIONS OF JUSTIFICATION.
“I BELIEVE that Christ ‘formed in us,’ subordinately to
Christ ‘given for us,’ (that is, our own inherent righteousness
subordinate to Christ’s merits,) ought to be insisted upon, as
necessary to our justification.
“And it is just and right that a man should be humble and
penitent, and have a broken and contrite heart, (that is, should
have Christ formed in him,) before he can expect to be justified.
“And that this penitence and contrition is the work of the
Holy Ghost.
“Yet I believe that all this is nothing towards, and has no
influence on, our justification.
“Again, I believe that, in order to justification, I must go
straight to Christ, with all my ungodliness, and plead nothing
else.
“Yet I believe that we should not insist upon anything we
do or feel, as if it were necessary previous to justification.”
24. “OF THE EFFECTs OF JUSTIFICATION.
“I BELIEVE that justification is the same thing as to be born
of God. Yet a man may have a strong assurance that he is
justified, and not be able to affirm that he is born of God.
“A man may be fully assured that his sins are forgiven, yet
may not be able to tell the hour or day when he received this
full assurance, because it may grow up in him by degrees.
Though he can remember that, from the time this full assurance
was confirmed in him, he never lost it, no, not for a moment.
“A man may have a weak faith at the same time that he
hath peace with God, not one uneasy thought, and freedom
from sin, not one unholy desire.
“A man may be justified, that is, born of God, who has
not a clean heart, that is, is not sanctified.
“He may be justified, that is, born of God, and not have
the indwelling of the Spirit.”
VOL. VII.
25. I entirely agree, “that the foregoing creed is a very
extraordinary and odd composition.” But it is not mine: I
neither composed it, nor believe it; as, I doubt not, every im
partial reader will be fully convinced, when we shall have gone
over it, once more, step by step.
The parts of it which I do believe I shall barely repeat: On
the others it will be needful to add a few words.
“OF THE AssURANCE OF JUSTIFICATION.
“I BELIEVE that conversion,” meaning thereby justification,
“is an instantaneous work; and that the moment a man has
living faith in Christ, he is converted or justified.” (So the
proposition must be expressed to make it sense.) “Which
faith he cannot have, without knowing that he has it.”
“Yet I believe he may not know that he has it till long
after.” This I deny: I believe no such thing.
“I believe the moment a man is justified he has peace with
God:
“Which he cannot have without knowing that he has it.”
“Yet I believe he may not know he has it till long after.”
This again I deny. I believe it not; nor Michael Linner
neither; to clear whom entirely, one need only read his own
words:
“About fourteen years ago, I was more than ever convinced
that I was wholly different from what God required me to be.
I consulted his word again and again; but it spoke nothing but
condemnation; till at last I could not read, nor indeed do any
thing else, having no hope and no spirit left in me. I had been
in this state for several days, when, being musing by myself,
those words came strongly into my mind, “God so loved the
world that he gave his only-begotten Son, to the end that all
who believe in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.’
I thought, ‘All ! Then I am one. Then He is given for me.
But I am a sinner: And he came to save sinners.’ Immedi
ately my burden dropped off, and my heart was at rest.
“But the full assurance of faith I had not yet, nor for the
two years I continued in Moravia. When I was driven out
thence by the Jesuits, I retired hither, and was soon after
received into the Church. And here, after some time, it pleased
our Lord to manifest himself more clearly to my soul; and give
me that full sense of acceptance in him, which excludes all
doubt and fear.
“Indeed, the leading of the Spirit is different in different
souls. His more usual method, I believe, is, to give, in one
and the same moment, forgiveness of sins, and a full assurance
of that forgiveness. Yet in many he works as he did in me;
giving first the remission of sins, and after some weeks, or
months, or years, the full assurance of it.” (Vol. I. p. 128.)
All I need observe is, that the first sense of forgiveness is
often mixed with doubt or fear. But the full assurance of
faith excludes all doubt and fear, as the very term implies.
Therefore, instead of, “He may not know that he has peace
with God till long after,” it should be, (to agree with Michael
Linner’s words,) “He may not have, till long after, the full
assurance of faith, which excludes all doubt and fear.”
“I believe a man is justified at the same time that he is
born of God.
“And he that is born of God sinneth not.
“Which deliverance from sin he cannot have, without
knowing that he has it.”
“Yet I believe he may not know it till long after.” This
also I utterly deny.
26. “OF THE CONDITIONS OF JUSTIFICATION.
“I believe, that Christ ‘formed in us” ought to be insisted
on, as necessary to our justification.”
I no more believe this than Christian David does, whose
words concerning it are these:—
“It pleased God to show me, that Christ in us, and Christ
for us, ought to be both insisted on.
“But I clearly saw we ought not to insist on any thing we
feel, any more than any thing we do, as if it were necessary
previous to our justification.
“And before a man can cKpect to be justified, he should be
humble and penitent, and have a broken and contrite heart,
that is, should have Christ formed in him.” No; that is quite
another thing. I believe every man is penitent before he is
justified; he repents before he believes the gospel. But it is
never before he is justified, that Christ is formed in him.
“And that this penitence and contrition is the work of the
Holy Ghost.
“Yet I believe that all this is nothing towards, and has no
influence on, our justification.”
Christian David’s words are, “Observe, this is not the foun
dation. It is not this by which (for the sake of which) you are
justified. This is not the righteousness, this is no part of the
righteousness, by which you are reconciled to God. You grieve
for your sins; you are deeply humbled; your heart is broken.
Well; but all this is nothing to your justifieation.” The
words immediately following fix the sense of this otherwise
exceptionable sentence. “The remission of your sins is not
owing to this cause, either in whole or in part. Your humilia
tion has no influence on that.” Not as a cause; so the very
last words explain it.
“Again, I believe that in order to obtain justification, I
must go straight to Christ, with all my ungodliness, and plead
nothing else.”
“Yet I believe we should not insist on anything we door feel,
as if it were necessary previous to justification.” No, nor on
anything else. So the whole tenor of Christian David’s words
implies.
OF THE EFFECTS OF JUSTIFICATION.
27. “I believe a man may have a strong assurance he is jus
tified, and not be able to affirm he is a child of God.”
Feder’s words are these: “I found my heart at rest, in good
hope that mysins were forgiven; of which I had a stronger assur
ance six weeks after.” (True, comparatively stronger, though
still mixed with doubt and fear.) “But I dare not affirm, I am
a child of God.” I see no inconsistency in all this. Many such
instances I know at this day. I myself was one for some time.
“A man may be fully assured that his sins are forgiven, yet
may not be able to tell the day when he received this full assur
ance; because it grew up in him by degrees.” (Of this also I
know a few other instances.) “But from the time this full
assurance was confirmed in him, he never lost it.” Very true,
and, I think, consistent.
Neuser's own words are, “In him I found true rest to my
soul, being fully assured that all my sins were forgiven. Yet
I cannot tell the hour or day when I first received that full
assurance. For it was not given me at first, neither at once;”
(not in its fulness;) “but grew up in me by degrees. And from
the time it was confirmed in me, I have never lost it, having
never since doubted, no, not for a moment.”
“A man may have a weak faith, at the same time that he
has peace with God, and no unholy desires.”
A man may be justified, who has not a clean heart.
28. (11.) Not in the full sense of the word. This I doverily
believe is sound divinity, agreeable both to Scripture and ex
perience. And I believe it is consistent with itself. As to the
“hundred other absurdities which might be fully and fairly
made out,” it will be time enough to consider them, when they
are produced.
29. (12, 13.) But whether I have succeeded in attempting
to reconcile these things or no, I verily think Mr. Tucker has.
I desire not a more consistent account of my principles, than
he has himself given in the following words:
“Our spiritual state should be considered distinctly under
each of these views.
“1. Before justification; in which state we may be said to
be unable to do any thing acceptable to God; because then we
can do nothing but come to Christ; which ought not to be
considered as doing anything, but as supplicating (or waiting)
to receive a power of doing for the time to come.
“For the preventing grace of God, which is common to all,
is sufficient to bring us to Christ, though it is not sufficient to
carry us any further till we are justified.
“2. After justification. The moment a man comes to Christ
(by faith) he is justified, and born again; that is, he is born
again in the imperfect sense, (for there are two [if not more]
degrees of regeneration,) and he has power over all the stirrings
and motions of sin, but not a total freedom from them. There
fore he hath not yet, in the full and proper sense, a new and
clean heart. But being exposed to various temptations, he
may and will fall again from this condition, if he doth not
attain to a more excellent gift.”
3. Sanctification, the last and highest state of perfection in
this life. For then are the faithful born again in the full and
* “Mr. Charles Wesley,” the note says, “was not persuaded of the truth of the
Moravian faith, till some time after his brother's return from Germany.” There
is a great mistake in this. I returned not from Germany till Saturday, September
16. Whereas my brother was fully persuaded of the truth of the Moravian
faith (so called) on Wednesday, May 3, preceding. The note adds, “This,”
that is, justifying faith, “he received but very lately.” This also is a mistake.
What he believed to be justifying faith, he received May 21, 1788. (Vol.
I. pp. 93, 96.) .
perfect sense. Then is there given unto them a new and clean
heart; and the struggle between the old and new man is over.*
30. (14.) That I may say many things which have been said
before, and perhaps by Calvin or Arminius, by Montanus or
Barclay, or the Archbishop of Cambray, is highly probable.
But it cannot thence be inferred that I hold “a medley of all
their principles;—Calvinism, Arminianism, Montanism,
Quakerism, Quietism, all thrown together.” There might as
well have been added, Judaism, Mahometanism, Paganism. It
would have made the period rounder, and been full as easily
proved; I mean asserted. For no other proof is yet produced.
31. I pass over the smaller mistakes which occur in the fif
teenth and sixteenth paragraphs, together with the prophecy or
prognostication concerning the approaching divisions and
downfal of the Methodists. What follows to the end, concerning
the ground of our hope, is indeed of greater importance. But
we have not as yet the strength of the cause; the dissertation
promised, is still behind. Therefore, as my work is great, and
my time short, I wave that dispute for the present. And per
haps, when I shall have received farther light, I may be con
vinced, that “gospel holiness,” as Mr. Tucker believes, “is a
necessary qualification, antecedent to justification.” This
appears to me now to be directly opposite to the gospel of
Christ. But I will endeavour impartially to consider what shall
be advanced in defence of it. And may He who knoweth my
simpleness, teach me his way, and give me a right judgment
in all things!
* The next note runs thus: “Mr. Wesley has such a peculiar turn and ten
dency towards inconsistencies in his principles, that in his Preface to Hali
burton's Life, (wrote February 9, 1738–9, just after his return from Germany,)
he contradicts all that he has said elsewhere for this sinless perfection; viz., “But
it may be said, the gospel covenant does not promise entire freedom from sin.
What do you mean by the word sin? the infection of nature, or those number
less weaknesses and follies, sometimes (improperly) termed sins of infirmity? If
you mean only this, you say most true. We shall not put off these, but with our
bodies. But if you mean, it does not promise entire freedom from sin, in its pro
per sense, or from committing sin; this is by no means true, unless the Scriptures
be false. For thus it is written, Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin,
unless he lose the Spirit of adoption, if not finally, yet for a while, as did this child
of God: For his seed remaineth in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of
God. He cannot sin, so long as he keepeth himself; for then the wicked one
toucheth him not.’”
The question is not, whether this be right or wrong; but whether it contradict
any thing I have said elsewhere. Thrice I have spoken expressly on this subject,
—in a sermon, and in two prefaces. If in any of these I have contradicted what
