Thoughts on the Present Scarcity of Provisions
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
MANY excellent things have been lately published con
cerning the present scarcity of provisions; and many causes
have been assigned for it, by men of experience and reflec
tion. But may it not be observed, there is something
wanting still, in most of those publications? One writer
assigns and insists on one cause, another on one or two
more. But who assigns all the causes that manifestly
concur to produce this melancholy effect? at the same time
pointing out, how each particular cause affects the price of
each particular sort of provision?
I would willingly offer to candid and benevolent men a few
hints on this important subject; proposing a few questions,
and subjoining to each what seems to be the plain and direct
anSWer.
I. 1. I ask, First, Why are thousands of people starving,
perishing for want, in every part of the nation? The fact I
know; I have seen it with my eyes, in every corner of the
land. I have known those who could only afford to eat a
little coarse food once every other day. I have known one
in London (and one that a few years before had all the
conveniencies of life) picking up from a dunghill stinking
sprats, and carrying them home for herself and her children.
I have known another gathering the bones which the dogs.
had left in the streets, and making broth of them, to prolong
a wretched life I I have heard a third artlessly declare,
“Indeed I was very faint, and so weak I could hardly walk,
until my dog, finding nothing at home, went out, and
brought in a good sort of bone, which I took out of his
mouth, and made a pure dinner !” Such is the case at this
day of multitudes of people, in a land flowing, as it were,
with milk and honey! abounding with all the necessaries,
the conveniencies, the superfluities of life
Now, why is this? Why have all these nothing to eat?
Because they have nothing to do. The plain reason why
they have no meat is, because they have no work.
2. But why have they no work? Why are so many
thousand people, in London, in Bristol, in Norwich, in every
county, from one end of England to the other, utterly
destitute of employment?
Because the persons that used to employ them cannot
afford to do it any longer. Many that employed fifty men,
now scarce employ ten; those that employed twenty, now
employ one, or none at all. They cannot, as they have no
vent for their goods; food being so dear, that the generality
of people are hardly able to buy anything else.
3. But why is food so dear? To come to particulars:
Why does bread-corn bear so high a price? To set aside
partial causes, (which indeed, all put together, are little more
than the fly upon the chariot-wheel,) the grand cause is,
because such immense quantities of corn are continually
consumed by distilling. Indeed, an eminent distiller near
London, hearing this, warmly replied, “Nay, my partner and
I generally distil but a thousand quarters a week.” Perhaps
so. And suppose five-and-twenty distillers, in and near the
town, consume each only the same quantity: Here are five
and-twenty thousand quarters a week, that is, above twelve
hundred and fifty thousand a year, consumed in and about
London | Add the distillers throughout England, and have
we not reason to believe, that (not a thirtieth or a twentieth
part only, but) little less than half the wheat produced in the
kingdom is every year consumed, not by so harmless a way
as throwing it into the sea, but by converting it into deadly
poison; poison that naturally destroys not only the strength
and life, but also the morals, of our countrymen?
It may be objected, “This cannot be. We know how
much corn is distilled by the duty that is paid. And hereby
it appears, that scarce three hundred thousand quarters a
year are distilled throughout the kingdom.” Do we know
certainly, how much corn is distilled by the duty that is
paid? Is it indisputable, that the full duty is paid for all
the corn that is distilled? not to insist upon the multitude
of private stills, which pay no duty at all. I have myself
heard the servant of an eminent distiller occasionally aver,
that for every gallon he distilled which paid duty, he distilled
six which paid none. Yea, I have heard distillers themselves
affirm, “We must do this, or we cannot live.” It plainly
follows, we cannot judge, from the duty that is paid, of the
quantity of corn that is distilled.
“However, what is paid brings in a large revenue to the
King.” Is this an equivalent for the lives of his subjects?
Would His Majesty sell an hundred thousand of his subjects
yearly to Algiers for four hundred thousand pounds? Surely
no. Will he then sell them for that sum, to be butchered
by their own countrymen? “But otherwise the swine for
the Navy cannot be fed.” Not unless they are fed with
human flesh ! Not unless they are fatted with human
blood O, tell it not in Constantinople, that the English
raise the royal revenue by selling the flesh and blood of their
countrymen I
4. But why are oats so dear? Because there are four
times as many horses kept (to speak within compass) for
coaches and chaises in particular, as were a few years ago.
Unless, therefore, four times the oats grew now that grew
then, they cannot be at the same price. If only twice as
much is produced, (which, perhaps, is near the truth,) the
price will naturally be double to what it was.
And as the dearness of grain of one kind will always raise
the price of another, so whatever causes the dearness of wheat
and oats must raise the price of barley too. To account,
therefore, for the dearness of this, we need only remember
what has been observed above; although some particular
causes may concur in producing the same effect.
5. Why are beef and mutton so dear? Because many
considerable farmers, particularly in the northern counties,
who used to breed large numbers of sheep, or horned cattle,
and very frequently both, now breed none at all: They no
longer trouble themselves with either sheep, or cows, or
oxen; as they can turn their land to far better account by
breeding horses alone. Such is the demand, not only for
coach and chaise horses, which are bought and destroyed in
incredible numbers, but much more for bred horses, which
are yearly exported by hundreds, yea, thousands, to France.
6. But why are pork, poultry, and eggs so dear? Because
of the monopolizing of farms; perhaps as mischievous a
monopoly as was ever introduced into these kingdoms. The
land which was some years ago divided between ten or twenty
little farmers, and enabled them comfortably to provide for
their families, is now generally engrossed by one great farmer.
One farms an estate of a thousand a year, which formerly
maintained ten or twenty. Every one of these little farmers
kept a few swine, with some quantity of poultry; and, having
little money, was glad to send his bacon, or pork, or fowls
and eggs to market continually. Hence the markets were
plentifully served; and plenty created cheapness. But at
present, the great, the gentlemen-farmers are above attending
to these little things. They breed no poultry or swine,
unless for their own use; consequently they send none to
market. Hence it is not strange if two or three of these,
living near a market-town, occasion such a scarcity of these
things, by preventing the former supply, that the price of
them is double or treble to what it was before. Hence, (to
instance in a small article,) in the same town wherein, within
my memory, eggs were sold six or eight a penny, they are
now sold six or eight a groat.
Another cause (the most terrible one of all, and the most
destructive both of personal and social happiness) why not
only beef, mutton, and pork, but all kinds of victuals, are so
dear, is luxury. What can stand against this? Will it not
waste and destroy all that mature and art can produce? If a
person of quality will boil down three dozen of meats' tongues,
to make two or three quarts of soup, (and so proportionably
in other things,) what wonder that provisions fail? Only
look into the kitchens of the great, the nobility and gentry,
almost without exception; (considering withal, that “the toe
of the peasant treads upon the heel of the courtier;”) and
when you have observed the amazing waste which is made
there, you will no longer wonder at the scarcity, and conse
quently dearness, of the things which they use so much art
to destroy.
7. But why is land so dear? Because, on all these
accounts, gentlemen cannot live as they have been accus
tomed to do without increasing their income; which most of
them cannot do, but by raising their rents. And then the
farmer, paying an higher rent for the land, must have an
higher price for the produce of it. This again tends to raise
the price of land; and so the wheel runs round.
8. But why is it, that not only provisions and land, but well
nigh everything else, is so dear? Because of the enormous
taxes, which are laid on almost everything that can be named.
INot only abundant taxes are raised from earth, and fire, and
water; but, in England, the ingenious Statesmen have found
a way to lay a tax upon the very light! Yet one element
remains: And surely some man of honour will find a way to
tax this also. For how long shall the saucy air strike a
gentleman on the face, nay, a Lord, without paying for it?
9. But why are the taxes so high 7 Because of the national
debt. They must be so while this continues. I have heard
that the national expense, seventy years ago, was, in time of
peace, three millions a year. And now the bare interest of
the public debt amounts yearly to above four millions ! to
raise which, with the other stated expenses of government,
those taxes are absolutely necessary.
To sum up the whole: Thousands of people throughout the
land are perishing for want of food. This is owing to various
causes; but above all, to distilling, taxes, and luxury.
Here is the evil, and the undeniable causes of it. But
where is the remedy?
Perhaps it exceeds all the wisdom of man to tell: But it
may not be amiss to offer a few hints on the subject.
II. 1. What remedy is there for this sore evil,—many thou
sand poor people are starving? Find them work, and you will
find them meat. They will then earn and eat their own bread.
2. But how can the masters give them work without
ruining themselves? Procure vent for what is wrought, and
the masters will give them as much work as they can do.
And this would be done by sinking the price of provisions;
for then people would have money to buy other things too.
3. But how can the price of wheat and barley be reduced?"
By prohibiting for ever, by making a full end of that bane of
health, that destroyer of strength, of life, and of virtue, -distil
ling. Perhaps this alone might go a great way toward answer
ing the whole design. It is not improbable, it would speedily
sink the price of corn, at least one part in three. If anything
more were required, might not all starch be made of rice, and
the importation of this, as well as of corn, be encouraged?
4. How can the price of oats be reduced ? By reducing
the number of horses. And may not this be effectually done,
(without affecting the ploughman, the waggoner, or any of
those who keep horses for common work,) (1.) By laying a
tax of ten pounds on every horse exported to France, for
which (notwithstanding an artful paragraph in a late public
paper) there is as great a demand as ever? (2.) By laying
an additional tax on gentlemen’s carriages? Not so much
on every wheel, (barefaced, shameless partiality !) but five
pounds yearly upon every horse. And would not these two
taxes alone supply near as much as is now paid for leave to
poison His Majesty’s liege subjects?
5. How can the price of beef and mutton be reduced ?
By increasing the breed of sheep and horned cattle. And
this would soon be increased sevenfold, if the price of horses
was reduced; which it surely would be, half in half, by the
method above mentioned.
6. How can the price of pork and poultry be reduced ?
Whether it ever will, is another question. But it can be
done, (1.) By letting no farms of above an hundred pounds
a year: (2.) By repressing luxury; whether by laws, by
example, or by both. I had almost said, by the grace of
God; but to mention this has been long out of fashion.
7. How may the price of land be reduced? By all the
methods above-named, as each tends to lessen the expense
of housekeeping: But especially the last; by restraining
luxury, which is the grand and general source of want.
8. How may the taxes be reduced? (1.) By discharging
half the national debt, and so saving, by this single means,
above two millions a year. (2.) By abolishing all useless
pensions, as fast as those who now enjoy them die: Espe
cially those ridiculous ones given to some hundreds of idle
men, as Governors of forts or castles; which forts have
answered no end for above these hundred years, unless to
shelter jackdaws and crows. Might not good part of a
million more be saved in this very article?
But will this ever be done? I fear not : At least, we have
no reason to hope for it shortly; for what good can we expect
(suppose the Scriptures are true) for such a nation as this,
where there is no fear of God, where there is such a deep,
-avowed, thorough contempt of all religion, as I never saw,
never heard or read of, in any other nation, whether Chris
tian, Mahometan, or Pagan? It seems as if God must
shortly arise and maintain his own cause. But, if so, let us
fall into the hands of God, and not into the hands of men.
LEwishAM,
January 20, 1773.
