A Serious Address to the People of England
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
I would fain lay a few plain considerations before you,
before all men of candour and common sense, who are not so
totally swallowed up of prejudice as to be incapable of hearing
reason. I beg you to weigh the matter calmly; not to be
overborne by noisy or wordy men, but to use your own senses,
your own eyes and ears, and your own understanding. Do not
run away (as many do) with part of a story; but hear the
whole, and then judge. Have patience to lay all circumstances
together, and then you may form a just judgment.
A solemn inquiry was lately made concerning the state of
the nation. If such an inquiry were properly made, so that
the real state of the nation might be clearly and distinctly
shown, it might be attended with excellent consequences.
It might enable the legislative power to redress or prevent
numerous evils. And it might lead those who conduct public
affairs to take the most effectual measures for promoting the
solid and lasting welfare of all their fellow-subjects.
On the other hand, if such an inquiry were improperly
made, and consequently the state of the nation misrepre
sented,—if it were represented as far worse than it really is,
—exceeding bad consequences might follow. It would
naturally tend to disturb, to frighten, to discourage the
people. It would tend to depress and sour their spirits, to
embitter them against others, and to make them disaffected
to His Majesty, and all that act under him. It would make
them utterly unthankful to God, for all the blessings that
surround them; the ready way to weaken our hands and
strengthen the hands of our common enemies.
Should not then an inquiry of so important a nature be
made with the greatest accuracy? And in order to this,
should not the question be stated with all possible exactness?
But in a late inquiry, I cannot find that the question was
stated at all. The inquirers jumped into the middle of it at
once, in defiance of all logic and common sense. “The state
of the nation” is a very vague and indeterminate expression;
so indeterminate, that, if the meaning of the phrase be not
fixed before the inquiry concerning it is begun, men of elo
quence may make vehement speeches, of two or three hours
long, while neither the speakers nor the hearers know what they
are talking about. And speeches of this kind tend to inflame,
not to inform, our homest countrymen. They are calculated,
not to bring light, but fire; to raise the nation into a flame.
But to come to the point: You are desirous to inquire
concerning the state of the nation. But what is it you would
know concerning it? “Certainly, whether it be prosperous
or not?” In what respects? It may be prosperous in one
respect, and not so in another. Tell us coolly and distinctly,
what is the question? And what is it you would prove?
It is this: “Is not the nation ruined?” Ruined / What
can you mean? The great men of another nation asked the
King, “Knowest thou not that Egypt is destroyed?” How
was it destroyed? Why, all the cattle of Egypt were killed
by the murrain. And not only all the flax and corn, all the
wheat and barley were consumed, but the locusts had devoured
every herb and leaf, and left no green thing in the land.
Countrymen, judge | Is England thus destroyed? Are all
our cattle killed? Have you no oxen, or cows, or sheep, or
swine?—no horses, mules, asses left? Whatever be the case
elsewhere, are not a few of them left alive in London? Is all
your corn destroyed? Look round upon the fields; is there no
green thing left? See with your own eyes. You do see, that
there is as fair a prospect, as has been for many years. I can
testify, that for more than half a century, there has not been
greater plenty, either of cattle or vegetables of every kind,
than there is at this day. England therefore is not destroyed.
“But is it not in the high road to destruction? What is its
present state? good or bad? increasing or decreasing?”
Increasing or decreasing, in what respects? I beg leave
to offer you, on this head, some of the most sensible remarks
I have seen on the subject, with some little variations and
additions:
“The state of the nation has respect to nine capital
articles; population, agriculture, manufactures; the land and
fresh-water carriage of goods, salt-water carriage of goods;
the state of our fisheries at home and abroad, the tendency
of our taxes, the clear amount of the revenue, and the
national debt. All of these, taken together, form that
complex idea which we call ‘the state of the nation.’
“In order therefore to know the state of the nation, we
should compare each of these articles, as they subsist at
present, with the like articles as they subsisted in some
former period, in order to see whether our national affairs
have gone backward or forward since that time. And what
time more proper than the year 1759?—that period of glory
and of conquest, when everything was supposed to go right,
as we are told that everything now goes wrong.”
1. “Im regard to population, it is to be feared that our
numbers have decreased since the year 1759.” This has been
boldly affirmed, and that over and over; yet I cannot allow it
by any means; and I have such opportunities of being informed
as few persons in England have; as I see almost all the large
towns in the kingdom, once in two years at least, and can there
fore make these inquiries on the spot, as minutely as I please.
We may allow, that within this time, twenty or thirty
thousand English soldiers have been sent abroad. Allow,
likewise, seventy or eighty thousand emigrants, from England
and Scotland only. Hereby there is a decrease of an hundred
thousand, within less than twenty years. I read likewise, in a
very beautiful Poem, of a “Deserted”—what? province?
county? metropolis ? No-‘‘Village,” somewhere on the
Wiltshire Downs! Yet not quite deserted; for a gentleman
who lives there informs me, he cannot learn it has had more
inhabitants within these hundred years than it has at this day.
I allow too, that some of the villages near the Land’s End
are less populous than formerly; but what is all this loss,
taken together, in comparison of the increase? I cannot but
think there has been, within twenty years, an increase of more
than an hundred thousand, in six cities and towns only; I
mean, in London, Bristol, Birmingham, Sheffield, Manchester,
and Liverpool. Do not you see with your eyes in all these
places, not only houses, but whole streets added continually?
And can any one persuade you, in the mean time, that there
is no increase of inhabitants? And yet some have wonder
fully affirmed that there is a decrease of inhabitants even in
London | Why do they not affirm, there is a decrease of
houses too? When I see one, I will believe the other.
And it is not only in cities and large towns, as some have
intimated, but even on commons, heaths, and mountains, yea,
all over the Peak of Derbyshire, that you may see little
houses (and many not very little) shooting up on every side.
And does not this denote an increase of people? Or are
they inhabited only by rats and mice? Considering these
things which I have seen with my own eyes, I cannot doubt
one moment but England has a million more inhabitants
than it had twenty years ago.
2. “As to agriculture, what was the state of it last year,
compared with the state of it in 1759? Has it advanced or
declined since that time? You may judge by considering a
very few particulars. Are your old farm-houses, barns, out
houses, tumbling down? And are no new ones erected? Are
your old enclosures, fences, drains, running to decay, and no
new ones making? Is there less land tilled and improved now,
than there was in 1759? Nay more, as is notoriously known,
by many hundred thousand acres. Are our farmers in general
grown poorer than heretofore? Are their stocks of hay and
corn, of sheep, horses, and cattle diminished? Are they not
exceedingly increased ? I will add no more. Let those who
affirm we are on the brink of ruin show how greatly our
agriculture is decreased since the happy days of 17591’’
3. Again: Inquire, my friends, “In what respects and in
what degree have any of our manufactures declined of late?
Perhaps there is some decrease in a few branches, of weaving
in particular. And this must be in the nature of things, while
fashions are continually changing; so that a large demand for
this or that commodity cannot be expected to continue long
But is not this decrease in some branches amply compensated
by the increase in others? Let it be more particularly inquired,
Are the capital places less employed in manufactures, than they
were in 1759? Are there fewer buildings now in use for the
carrying on of great and extensive works? Are there fewer
warehouses and magazines, and fewer machines and engines
of every kind? How easily may you be convinced, that, in
every one of these articles, far from a decrease, there is a
very considerable increase, since the year 1759 |
4. “As to land and fresh-water carriage of goods, let any
of you inquire, Are there fewer public waggons on the roads
than there were formerly? And are there fewer roads fit for
waggons to travel on? If so, our trade decreases. Are there
fewer trows or barges employed on rivers and canals than there
were heretofore? If there are, we allow the decrease of these is
a sure sign of the decrease of trade. And, on the contrary,
the vast increase of these proves a proportionable increase of
it. ‘Are the rivers and canals fewer in these degenerate
times than in the year 1759?’” See, my friends, by this plain,
demonstrative proof, how sadly our trade is decreased !
And I cannot but observe, that arguments of this general
kind are abundantly more conclusive than any which are or
can be drawn from the case of particular persons. We
always find a considerable number of these, both in London
and elsewhere, who loudly complain of the decay of trade,
and the hardness of the times. What does this mean?
That “they themselves want business.” Perhaps they want
industry too. But these particular cases are of no weight,
opposed to those general considerations.
5. You may inquire next, with regard to “salt-water carriage
of goods. Is the quantity of British shipping decreased since
the year 1759? Are there fewer ships now employed in the
coasting-trade? fewer in the Irish trade? or fewer for distant
voyages? Nay, have we fewer ship-carpenters, or fewer sail
makers at work? And do we build fewer or smaller ships
for merchants’ service than formerly?” The more particu
larly you inquire, the more clearly you will see how
immensely the nation has improved in this article.
But it is objected, “We have lost eight hundred of our
ships since the beginning of the war.” Perhaps so;
although you have no proof of this; for Lloyd's Catalogue is
no sufficient evidence. But how many have we taken?
This it is absolutely needful you should know, or you cannot
know whether we have lost or gained upon the whole. We
have taken above nine hundred. And the evidence of our
gain is at least as good as that of our loss.
“Nay, but we have also lost our Negro trade.” I would
to God it may never be found more ! that we may never
more steal and sell our brethren like beasts; never murder
them by thousands and tens of thousands ! O may this
worse than Mahometan, worse than Pagan, abomination, be
removed from us for ever ! Never was anything such a
reproach to England since it was a nation, as the having any
hand in this execrable traffic.
6. “The state of our fisheries at home and abroad forms
another important article of comparison. For as our ships of
war are our bulwarks, and our sailors are the proper guards
for defending such works, so it is of the utmost importance to
have always ready, for manning our fleets, a number of able
seamen. Now, these are most readily supplied by our fisheries.
And when were these in their most flourishing state? in
1759, or 1777? Were more British ships employed in the
fisheries on the banks of Newfoundland, or in the gulf of St.
Lawrence, or on the coasts of Labrador, then, than there are
now 7 Were there half as many? Again: Were there more
employed in the fisheries for whales, and fish to make oil?
Were there even half as many? As to the fisheries on our
own coasts, and on the coasts of Scotland and Ireland, can
any man deny that they have hugely increased during these
eighteen years? Indeed all our fisheries are now in a more
flourishing condition than ever they were before.” Allowing
then, that we have sustained some loss in Newfoundland,
what is this to the total gain? On this account, therefore, we
have no reason to talk of the “ruinous state of the nation.”
7. “As to the tendency of our taxes, having previously
observed, that the hands of the diligent and frugal are the only
hands which make a nation rich; I have then to ask, Do our
taxes in general, especially those which took place the last
year, tend to make the people diligent and frugal, or idle and
extravagant? Do they tend to promote industry, or obstruct
it? to turn bees into drones, or drones into bees? Of late
years we have made several excellent alterations in our taxes:
We have repealed that very injudicious tax which in a manner
prohibited the importing of butter, tallow, lard, and other
articles from Ireland. Hence the mutual intercourse between
the two kingdoms has prodigiously increased. Our shipping
and mavigation likewise have increased in the same proportion.
And so has the quantity of English goods and manufactures
exported thither. Does this show a decay of trade; or give
a just ground for our daily complaints and lamentations?
8. “The clear amount of the annual revenue is a matter
of fact, and capable of ocular demonstration. Now, let an
appeal be made to the proper accounts, which state the
amount of all the taxes of the year 1759; let these accounts
be compared with those of the year 1777, and you cannot
but see with your own eyes where the advantage lies; yea,
notwithstanding the loss of our tobacco-trade from Maryland
and Virginia, and notwithstanding the great failure of the
crops of sugar, as well as of cyder and perry.
9. “The last article is the national debt. And great it
undoubtedly is. Yet, comparatively speaking, it is not so
great now, as it was in 1759. For if the nation is now (as
has been clearly shown) very considerably richer, then it is
better able to bear an equal or a greater load of national
debt, than it was at that juncture.
“To illustrate this by a familiar instance: A private
trader, who has but an hundred pounds in the world, is
greatly in debt if he owes but twenty pounds; and is in
danger of stopping payment for want of cash, or of being
crushed by some wealthy rival. But if he has a thousand
pounds in stock, and owes two hundred, he is in far less
danger. And if he has ten thousand pounds stock, and owes
two thousand, he is in no danger; nay, he is a rich man.
“Not that I would encourage the running any farther in
debt. I only intend to show that our distresses, which raise
such tragical exclamations, are more imaginary than real.”
Thus far the Dean of Gloucester. And what can be more
fair and candid than these reasonings? What can be more
satisfactory to you who are of no party, but an honest inquirer
after truth? Perhaps you lately heard a strange, broken,
maimed account all on one side of the question, of debts
without any credits to balance ! And what could you learn
from this? Now you hear both sides, and thence may easily
see what is the real state of the nation. And how much
better is it, in all the preceding respects, than it was eighteen
years ago ! What becomes then of all those passionate
outcries concerning the “dreadful condition we are in,” when
it undeniably appears, to every candid inquirer, that we have
not been in so good a condition these fifty years! On how
totally insufficient grounds is the contrary supposition built !
“We have lost—near as many ships as we have taken | We
have been disturbed on the banks of Newfoundland; and we
can no longer sell our brethren like sheep, and pour out
their blood like water; therefore the nation is in a desperate
state; therefore we are on the brink of ruin l’’ And are
these the best arguments that can be found to support the
lamentable conclusion |
Now, my friends, give me leave to sum up briefly what has
been offered on the other side. And, I pray, observe the
difference; mark the firm and solid foundation whereon the
conclusion is built. The prosperous or adverse state of the
nation is to be judged of from the state of its population, its
agriculture, its manufactures, its land and fresh-water carriage
of goods, its salt-water carriage of goods, its fisheries, the
tendency of its taxes, its annual revenue, and the national debt.
But you have seen, that, in each of these particulars, considered
one by one, England is not in a worse but in a far better
state than it was eighteen years ago; so far from being on
the brink of ruin, that it is in a state of eminent prosperity.
Let none then deceive you with vain words ! Let none by
subtle reasonings, or by artful, elaborate harangues, persuade
you out of your senses. Let no sweet-tongued orator, by his
smooth periods, steal away your understanding; no thunder
ing talker fill you with vain fears of evils that have no being.
Be aware of all who (perhaps sincerely) strive to terrify you
with creatures of their own imagination. You are encom
passed with liberty, peace, and plenty: You see them on the
right hand and on the left. Let no man then cast a mist
L 2
before your eyes, and face you down that they are poverty
and slavery. Know the public as well as private blessings:
which you enjoy, and be thankful to God and man.
There is only one reason why we should fear: There is a
God that judgeth the earth. And as none can harm us if we
have Him for our friend, so none can help us if we have Him
for our enemy. Is it not wise then seriously to consider
this, Is God our friend or our enemy? But who thinks or
cares about it? Too many of us do not: God is not in all
our thoughts. I am afraid ignorance, yea, contempt, of God,
is the present characteristic of the English nation. A late
writer supposes it to be sloth and luxury; but I cannot
think so; because neither of these is peculiar to us; our
neighbours vie with us in both ; many of them are full as
slothful as us, and many of them are as luxurious. But
none can vie with us in this: There is no nation upon earth
that is cqually profane. Is there any people under heaven
that pays no more regard than we do to the Creator and
Governor of heaven and earth ? What nation (I do not say
in the Christian, but in the Mahometan or pagan, world)
uses his great and venerable name with so little ceremony?
In what country is there to be heard in so great abundance—
The horrid oath, the direful curse,
(That latest weapon of the wretch's war !)
And blasphemy, sad comrade of despair?
Comrade of despair / So it uses to be in other countries;
but in ours it is the comrade of mirth and jollity | We daily
curse and swear, and blaspheme the Most High, merely by
way of diversion, almost from the highest to the lowest.
Nobility, gentry, tradesmen, peasants, blaspheme the worthy
name whereby we are called, without provocation, without
remorse ! Sloth and luxury we allow are general among us;
but profaneness is well nigh universal. Whoever spends but
a few days in any of our large towns, will find abundant
proof, that senseless, shameless, stupid profaneness is the
true characteristic of the English nation.
Meantime we say, (in effect, if not in terms,) “Is there
knowledge in the Most High Tush, thou God carest not
for it.”
But are we sure of this? I doubt, he does: I doubt, if
this is still added to all the other instances of impiety, he will
soon say, “Shall I not visit for these things? Shall I not be
avenged on such a nation as this?” Let us be wise in time !
Let us be as wise, at least, as the inhabitants of Nineveh ;
let us make our peace with God, and then we may defy all
the men upon earth !
A nation God delights to bless,
Can all our raging foes distress,
Or hurt whom they surround?
Hid from the general scourge we are,
Nor see the bloody waste of war,
Nor hear the trumpet's sound.
O might we, Lord, the grace improve,
By labouring for the rest of love,
The soul-composing power !
Bless us with that internal peace,
And all the fruits of righteousness,
Till time shall be no more !
LoNDoN,
Feb. 20, 1778.
A.
