The Consequence Proved
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. MR. ToPLADY, a young, bold man, lately published
a pamphlet, an extract from which was soon after printed,
concluding with these words:
“The sum of all is this: One in twenty, suppose, of
mankind are elected; nineteen in twenty are reprobated.
The elect shall be saved, do what they will: The reprobate
shall be damned, do what they can.”
2. A great outcry has been raised on that account, as
though this was not a fair state of the case; and it has been
vehemently affirmed, that no such consequence follows from
the doctrine of absolute predestination.
I calmly affirm, it is a fair state of the case; this conse
quence does naturally and necessarily follow from the doctrine
of absolute predestination, as here stated and defended by
bold Mr. Augustus Toplady.
Indeed, I have not leisure to consider the matter at large:
I can only make a few strictures, and leave the young man
to be farther corrected by one that is full his match, Mr.
Thomas Olivers.
3. “When love is predicated of God, it implies, (1.) His
everlasting will, purpose, and determination to save his
people.” (Mr. Toplady’s Tract, chap. 1.) I appeal to all
men, whether it is not a natural consequence, even of this,
that “all these shall be saved, do what they will.”
You may say, “O, but they will only do what is good.”
Be it so: Yet the consequence stands.
“Election signifies that sovereign, unconditional, immu
table act of God, whereby he selected some to be eternally
saved.” Immutable, unconditional / From hence then it
undeniably follows, “these shall be saved, do what they will.”
“Predestination, as relating to the elect, is that irreversible
act of the divine will, whereby God determined to deliver a
certain number of men from hell:” Ergo, a certain number
shall infallibly be saved, do what they will. Who can deny
the consequence?
“Not one of the elect can perish, but they must all
necessarily be saved.” (Chap. 3.) Can any assert this, and
yet deny that consequence,—“therefore all the elect shall be
saved, do what they will?” unless you would say, it is the
proposition itself, rather than a consequence from it.
4. So much for the former part of the question: Let us
now consider the latter:—
“Hatred ascribed to God implies a resolution not to have
mercy on such and such men. So, “Esau have I hated;’ that
is, I did from all eternity determine not to have mercy on
him.” (Chap. 1.) In other words,—
I by my dire decree did seal
His fix'd, unalterable doom;
Consign'd his unborn soul to hell,
And damn'd him from his mother's womb.
Well, then, does it not follow, by unavoidable consequence,
that such and such men, poor hated Esau in particular,
“shall be damned, do what they can 7”
“Reprobation denotes God’s eternal preterition of some
men, and his predestination of them to destruction.” And
is it possible for them, by anything they can do, to prevent
that destruction? You say, “No.” It follows, they “shall
be damned, do what they can.”
“Predestination, as it regards the reprobate, is that immut
able act of God’s will, whereby he hath determined to leave
some men to perish.” And can they avoid it by anything
they do? You affirm, they cannot. Again, therefore, it
follows, these “shall be damned, do what they can.”
“We assert, there is a predestination of particular persons
to death, which death they shall inevitably undergo;” that
is, “they shall be damned, do what they can.”
“The non-elect were predestinated to eternal death.”
(Chap. 2.) Ergo, “they shall be damned, do what they can.”
“The condemnation of the reprobate is necessary and
inevitable.” Surely I need add no more on this head. You
see that, “The reprobate shall be damned, do what they can,”
is the whole burden of the song.
5. Take only two precious sentences more, which include
the whole question :
“We assert, that the number of the elect, and also of the
reprobate, is so fixed and determinate, that neither can be
augmented or diminished;” (chap. 4;) and “that the
decrees of election and reprobation are immutable and
irreversible.”
From each of these assertions, the whole consequence
follows, clear as the noonday sun,—Therefore, “the elect
shall be saved, do what they will; the reprobate shall be
damned, do what they can.”
6. I add a word, with regard to another branch of this
kind, charitable doctrine.
Mr. Toplady says, “God has a positive will to destroy the
reprobate for their sins.” (Chap. 1.) For their sins ! How
can that be? I positively assert, that (on this scheme) they
have no sins at all. They never had; they can have none.
For it cannot be a sin in a spark to rise, or in a stone to fall.
And the spark or the stone is not more necessarily determined
either to rise or to fall, than the man is to sin, to commit that
rape, or adultery, or murder. For “God did, before all
time, determine and direct to some particular end, every
person or thing, to which he has given, or is yet to give,
being.” God himself did “predestinate them to fill up the
measure of their iniquities;” such was his sovereign, irresist
ible decree, before the foundation of the world. To fill up
the measure of their iniquities; that is, to commit every act
which they committed. So “God decreed the Jews to be the
crucifiers of Christ, and Judas to betray him.” (Chap. 4.)
Whose fault was it then? You plainly say, It was not his
fault, but God's. For what was Judas, or ten thousand repro
bates besides? Could they resist his decree? No more than
they could pull the sun out of the firmament of heaven.
And would God punish them with everlasting destruction, for
not pulling the sun out of the firmament? He might as well
do it for this, as for their not doing what (on this supposition)
was equally impossible. “But they are punished for their
impenitency, sin, and unbelief.” Say unbelief and impeni
tency, but not sin. For “God had predestinated them to
continue in impenitency and unbelief God had positively
ordained them to continue in their blindness and hardness of
heart.” Therefore their not repenting and believing was no
more a sin, than their not pulling the sun from heaven.
7. Indeed Mr. T. himself owns, “The sins of the repro
bate were not the cause of their being passed by ; but merely
and entirely the sovereign will and determinating pleasure
of God.”
“O, but their sin was the cause of their damnation
though not of their preterition;” that is, God determined
they should live and die in their sins, that he might after
wards damn them !
Was ever anything like this? Yes, I have read something
like it: When Tiberius had determined to destroy Sejanus
and all his family, as it was unlawful to put a virgin to death,
what could be done with his daughter, a child of nine years
old? Why, the hangman was ordered first to deflour, and
then to strangle, her ! Yet even good Tiberius did not order
her to be strangled “because she had been defloured!” If
so, it had been a parallel case; it had been just what is here
affirmed of the Most High.
8. One word more: “I will obviate,” says Mr. T., “a
fallacious objection, How is reprobation reconcilable with the
doctrine of a future judgment? There needs no pains to
reconcile these two.” No pains ! Indeed there does; more
pains than all the men upon earth, or all the devils in hell,
will ever be able to take. But go on: “In the last day,
Christ will pass sentence on the non-elect, (1.) Not for
having done what they could not help; but, (2.) For their
wilful ignorance of divine things; (3.) For their obstinate
unbelief; (4.) For their omissions of moral duty; and,
(5.) For their repeated iniquities and transgressions.”
He will condemn them, (1) “Not for having done what
they could not help.” I say, Yes; for having sinned against
God to their lives’ end. But this they could not help. He
had himself decreed it; he had determined they should
continue impenitent. (2) “For their wilful ignorance of
divine things.” No; their ignorance of God, and the things
of God, was not wilful, was not originally owing to their own
will, but to the sovereign will of God; his will, not theirs,
was the primary cause of their continuing in that ignorance.
(3) “For their obstinate unbelief.” No; how can it be
termed obstinate, when they never had a possibility of
removing it? when God had absolutely decreed, before they
were born, that they should live and die therein? (4.) “For
their omissions of moral duty;” that is, for not loving God
and their neighbour, which is the sum of the moral law.
Was it then ever in their power to love God and their
neighbour? No; no more than to touch heaven with their
hand. Had not God himself unalterably decreed, that they
374, REMARKS ON
should not love either God or man? If, therefore, they are
condemned for this, they are condemned for what they never
could help. (5.) “For their repeated iniquities and trans
gressions.” And was it ever in their power to help these?
Were they not predestinated thereto before the foundation of
the world? How then can the Judge of all the earth
consign them to everlasting fire, for what was in effect his
own act and deed?
I apprehend, then, this is no fallacious objection, but a
solid and weighty one; and defy any man living, who asserts
the unconditional decree of reprobation or preterition, (just
the same in effect,) to reconcile this with the scriptural
doctrine of a future judgment. I say again, I defy any man
on earth to show, how, on this scheme, God can “judge the
world in righteousness.”
