Popery Calmly Considered
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
TO THE READER.
IN the following Tract, I propose, First, to lay down and examine the chief
doctrines of the Church of Rome: Secondly, to show the natural tendency
of a few of those doctrines; and that with all the plainness and all the
calmness I can.
SECTION I.
oF THE CHURCH, AND THE RULE of FAITH.
1. THE Papists judge it necessary to salvation, to be
subject to the Pope, as the one visible head of the Church.
But we read in Scripture, that Christ is the Head of the
Church, “from whom the whole body is fitly joined together.”
(Col. ii. 19.) The Scripture does not mention any visible
head of the Church; much less does it mention the Pope as
such; and least of all does it say, that it is necessary to
salvation to be subject to him.
2. The Papists say, The Pope is Christ's Vicar, St. Peter's
successor, and has the supreme power on earth over the whole
Church.
We answer, Christ gave no such power to St. Peter him
self. He gave no Apostle pre-eminence over the rest. Yea,
St. Paul was so far from acknowledging St. Peter's supremacy,
that he withstood him to the face, (Gal. ii. 11) and asserted
himself “not to be behind the chief of the Apostles.”
Neither is it certain, that St. Peter was Bishop of Rome;
no, nor that he ever was there.
But they say, “Is not Rome the mother, and therefore the
mistress, of all Churches?”
We answer, No. “The word of the Lord went forth from
Jerusalem.” There the Church began. She, therefore, not
the Church of Rome, is the mother of all Churches.
The Church of Rome, therefore, has no right to require
any person to believe what she teaches on her sole authority.
3. St. Paul says, “All Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction,
for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works.”
The Scripture, therefore, being delivered by men divinely
inspired, is a rule sufficient of itself: So it neither needs, nor
is capable of, any farther addition.
Yet the Papists add tradition to Scripture, and require it to
be received with equal veneration. By traditions, they mean,
“such points of faith and practice as have been delivered
down in the Church from hand to hand without writing.”
And for many of these, they have no more Scripture to show,
than the Pharisees had for their traditions.
4. The Church of Rome not only adds tradition to Scrip
ture, but several entire books; namely, Tobit and Judith,
the Book of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, the two books
of Maccabees, and a new part of Esther and of Daniel;
“which whole books,” says the Church of Rome, “whoever
rejects, let him be accursed.”
We answer, We cannot but reject them. We dare not
receive them as part of the Holy Scriptures. For none of
these books were received as such by the Jewish Church, “to
whom were committed the oracles of God:” (Rom. iii. 2:)
Neither by the ancient Christian Church, as appears from the
60th Canon of the Council of Laodicea; wherein is a catalogue
of the books of Scriptures, without any mention of these.
5. As the Church of Rome, on the one hand, adds to the
Scripture, so, on the other hand, she forbids the people to read
them. Yea, they are forbid to read so much as a summary
or historical compendium of them in their own tongue.
Nothing can be more inexcusable than this. Even under
the law, the people had the Scriptures in a tongue vulgarly
known; and they were not only permitted, but required, to
read them; yea, to be constantly conversant therein. (Deut.
vi. 6, &c.) Agreeable to this, our Lord commands to search
the Scriptures; and St. Paul directs, that his Epistle be read
in all the Churches. (1 Thess. v. 27.) Certainly this Epistle
was wrote in a tongue which all of them understood.
But they say, “If people in general were to read the
Bible, it would do them more harm than good.” Is it any
honour to the Bible to speak thus? But supposing some
did abuse it, is this any sufficient reason for forbidding others
to use it? Surely no. Even in the days of the Apostles,
there were some “unstable and ignorant men,” who wrested
both St. Paul's Epistles, and the other Scriptures, “to their
own destruction.” But did any of the Apostles, on this
account, forbid other Christians to read them? You know
they did not: They only cautioned them not to be “led
away by the error of the wicked.” And certainly the way to
prevent this is, not to keep the Scriptures from them; (for
“they were written for our learning;”) but to exhort all to
the diligent perusal of them, lest they should “err, not
knowing the Scriptures.”
6. “But seeing the Scripture may be misunderstood, how
are we to judge of the sense of it? How can we know the
sense of any scripture, but from the sense of the Church 7 °
We answer, (1.) The Church of Rome is no more the
Church in general, than the Church of England is. It is
only one particular branch of the catholic or universal
Church of Christ, which is the whole body of believers in
Christ, scattered over the whole earth. (2.) We therefore
see no reason to refer any matter in dispute to the Church
of Rome, more than any other Church; especially as we
know, neither the Bishop nor the Church of Rome is any
more infallible than ourselves. (3.) In all cases, the Church
is to be judged by the Scripture, not the Scripture by the
Church. And Scripture is the best expounder of Scripture.
The best way, therefore, to understand it, is carefully to
compare Scripture with Scripture, and thereby learn the true
meaning of it.
SECTION II.
OF REPENTANCE AND OBEDIENCE.
1. THE Church of Rome teaches, that “the deepest
repentance or contrition avails nothing without confession to
a Priest; but that, with this, attrition, or the fear of hell, is
sufficient to reconcile us to God.”
This is very dangerously wrong, and flatly contrary to Scrip
ture; for the Scripture says, “A broken and contrite heart,
thou, O God, wilt not despise.” (Psalm li. 17.) And the same
texts which make contrition sufficient without confession, show
that attrition even with it is insufficient. Now, as the former
doctrine, of the insufficiency of contrition without confession,
makes that necessary which God has not made necessary; so
the latter, of the sufficiency of attrition with confession,
makes that unnecessary which God has made necessary.
2. The Church of Rome teaches, that “good works truly
merit eternal life.”
This is flatly contrary to what our Saviour teaches: “When
ye have done all those things that are commanded you, say,
We are unprofitable servants: We have done that which was
our duty to do.” (Luke xvii. 10.) A command to do it,
grace to obey that command, “and a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory,” must for ever cut off all pretence of
merit from all human obedience.
3. That a man may truly and properly merit hell, we
grant; although he never can merit heaven. But if he does
merit hell, yet, according to the doctrine of the Church of
Rome, he need never go there. For “the Church has power
to grant him an indulgence, which remits both the fault and
the punishment.”
Some of these indulgences extend only to so many days;
some, to so many weeks; but others extend to a man’s whole
life; and this is called a plenary indulgence.
These indulgences are to be obtained by going pilgrimages,
by reciting certain prayers, or (which is abundantly the most
common way) by paying the stated price of it.
Now, can anything under heaven be imagined more horrid,
more execrable than this? Is not this a manifest prostitution of
religion to the basest purposes? Can any possible method be
contrived, to make sin more cheap and easy % Even the Popish
Council of Trent acknowledged this abuse, and condemned it
in strong terms; but they did not in any degree remove the
abuse which they acknowledged. Nay, two of the Popcs under
whom the Council sat, Pope Paul III., and Julius III., pro
ceeded in the same course with their predecessors, or rather
exceeded them; for they granted to such of the Fraternity
of the Holy Altar as visited the Church of St. Hilary of
Chartres during the six weeks of Lent, seven hundred and
seventy-five thousand seven hundred years of pardon.
4. This miserable doctrine of indulgences is founded upon
another bad doctrine, that of works of supererogation; for
the Church of Rome teaches, that there is “an overplus of
merit in the saints; and that this is a treasure committed to
the Church’s custody, to be disposed as she sees meet.”
But this doctrine is utterly irreconcilable with the follow
ing scriptures —“The sufferings of the present time are not
worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed
in us;” (Rom. viii. 18;) and “Every one of us shall give an
account of himself to God.” (Rom. xiv. 12.) For if there be
no comparison betwixt the reward and the sufferings, then
no one has merit to transfer to another; and if every one
must give an account of himself to God, then no one can be
saved by the merit of another. But suppose there were a
superabundance of merits in the saints, yet we have no need
of them, seeing there is such an infinite value in what Christ
hath done and suffered for us; seeing He alone hath “by
one offering perfected for ever them that are sanctified.”
(Heb. x. 14.)
5. But where do the souls of those go after death, who die
in a state of grace, but yet are not sufficiently purged from
sin to enter into heaven?
The Church of Rome says, “They go to purgatory, a
purging fire near hell, where they continue till they are
purged from all their sins, and so made meet for heaven.”
Nay, that those who die in a state of grace, go into a place
of torment, in order to be purged in the other world, is utterly
gontrary to Scripture. Our Lord said to the penitent thief
upon the cross, “To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise.”
Now, if a purgation in another world were necessary for any,
he that did not repent and believe till the last hour of his life
might well be supposed to need it; and consequently ought
to have been sent to purgatory, not to paradise.
6. Very near akin to that of purgatory, is the doctrine of
Limbus Patrum. For the Church of Rome teaches, that
“before the death and resurrection of Christ, the souls of
good men departed were detained in a certain place, called
Limbus Patrum, which is the uppermost part of hell.” “The
lowermost,” they say, “is the place of the damned; next
above this is purgatory; next to that, Limbus Infantum, or
the place where the souls of infants are.”
It might suffice to say, there is not one word of all this in
Scripture. But there is much against it. We read that
Elijah was taken up into heaven; (2 Kings ii. 11;) and he
and Moses “appeared in glory.” (Luke ix. 31.) And
Abraham is represented as in paradise, (Luke xvi. 22,) the
blessed abode of good men in the other world. Therefore,
none of these were in the Limbus Patrum. Consequently, if
the Bible is true, there is no such place.
SECTION III.
OF DIVINE WORSHIP.
1. THE service of the Roman Church consists of prayers
to God, angels, and saints; of Lessons, and of Confessions
of Faith.
All their service is everywhere performed in the Latin
tongue, which is nowhere vulgarly understood. Yea, it is
required; and a curse is denounced against all those who
say it ought to be performed in the vulgar tongue.
This irrational and unscriptural practice destroys the great
end of public worship. The end of this is, the honour of God
in the edification of the Church. The means to this end is,
to have the service so performed as may inform the mind and
increase devotion. But this cannot be done by that service
which is performed in an unknown tongue.
What St. Paul judged of this is clear from his own words:
“If I know not the meaning of the voice,” (of him that
speaks in a public assembly,) “he that speaketh shall be a
barbarian to me.” (1 Cor. xiv. 11.) Again: “If thou shalt
bless by the Spirit,” (by the gift of an unknown tongue,)
“how shall the unlearned say Amen?” (Verse 16.) How
can the people be profited by the Lessons, answer at the
Responses, be devout in their Prayers, confess their faith in
the Creeds, when they do not understand what is read,
prayed, and confessed? It is manifest, then, that the having
any part of divine worship in an unknown tongue is as flatly
contrary to the word of God as it is to reason.
2. From the manner of worship in the Church of Rome,
proceed we to the objects of it. Now, the Romanists worship,
besides angels, the Virgin Mary and other saints. They
teach that angels, in particular, are to be “worshipped,
invoked, and prayed to.” And they have Litanies and other
Prayers composed for that purpose.
In flat opposition to all this, the words of our Saviour are,
“Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt
thou serve.” To evade this, they say, “The worship we give
to angels is not the same kind with that which we give to
God.” Vain words ! What kind of worship is peculiar to
God, if prayer is not? Surely God alone can receive all our
prayers, and give what we pray for. We honour the angels,
as they are God’s Ministers; but we dare not worship or
pray to them; it is what they themselves refuse and abhor.
So, when St. John “fell down at the feet of the angel to
worship him, he said, See thou do it not: I am thy fellow
servant: Worship God.” (Rev. xix. 10.)
3. The Romanists also worship saints. They pray to them
as their intercessors; they confess their sins to them; they
offer incense and make vows to them. Yea, they venerate
their very images and relics.
Now, all this is directly contrary to Scripture. And, First,
the worshipping them as intercessors. For, as “there is but
one God to us, though there are gods many, and lords many;”
so, according to Scripture, there is but one Intercessor or
Mediator to us. (1 Cor. viii. 5, 6.) And suppose the angels
or saints intercede for us in heaven; yet may we no more
worship them, than, because “there are gods many on
earth,” we may worship them as we do the true God.
The Romanists allow, “There is only one Mediator of
redemption;” but say, “There are many mediators of inter
cession.” We answer, The Scripture knows no difference
between a mediator of intercession and of redemption. He
alone “who died and rose again” for us, makes intercession
for us at the right hand of God. And he alone has a right
to our prayers; nor dare we address them to any other.
4. The worship which the Romanists give to the Virgin
Mary, is beyond what they give either to angels or other
saints. In one of their public offices, they say, “Command
thy Son by the right of a mother.” They pray to her to
“loose the bands of the guilty, to bring light to the blind, to
make them mild and chaste, and to cause their hearts to
burn in love to Christ.”
Such worship as this cannot be given to any creature,
without gross, palpable idolatry. We honour the blessed
Virgin as the mother of the Holy Jesus, and as a person of
eminent piety: But we dare not give worship to her; for it
belongs to God alone.
Meantime, we cannot but wonder at the application which
the Church of Rome continually makes to her, of whose acts
on earth the Scripture so sparingly speaks. And it says
nothing of what they so pompously celebrate, her assumption
into heaven, or of her exaltation to a throne above angels or
archangels. It says nothing of her being “the mother of
grace and mercy, the Queen of the gate of heaven,” or of her
“power to destroy all heresies,” and bring “all things to all.”
5. The Romanists pay a regard to the relics of the saints
also; which is a kind of worship. By relics, they mean the
bodies of the saints, or any remains of them, or particular
things belonging or relating to them when they were alive;
as an arm or thigh, bones or ashes; or the place where, or
the things by which, they suffered. They venerate these, in
order to obtain the help of the saints. And they believe,
“by these many benefits are conferred on mankind; that by
these relics of the saints, the sick have been cured, the dead
raised, and devils cast out.”
We read of good King Hezekiah, that “he brake in pieces
the brazen serpent which Moses had made.” (2 Kings xviii.4.)
And the reason was, because the children of Israel burnt
incense to it. By looking up to this, the people bitten by the
fiery serpents had been healed. And it was preserved from
generation to generation, as a memorial of that divine opera
tion. Yet, when it was abused to idolatry, he ordered it to
be broke in pieces. And were these true relics of the saints,
and did they truly work these miracles, yet that would be no
sufficient cause for the worship that is given them. Rather,
this worship would be a good reason, according to Hezekiah’s
practice, for giving them a decent interment.
L 2
6. Let us next consider what reverence the Church of
Rome requires to be given to images and pictures. She
requires “to kiss them, to uncover the head, to fall down
before them, and use all such postures of worship as they
would do to the persons represented, if present.” And,
accordingly, “the Priest is to direct the people to them, that
they may be worshipped.” They say, indeed, that, in falling
down before the image, they “worship the saint or angel
whom it represents.” We answer, (1.) We are absolutely
forbidden in Scripture to worship saints or angels themselves.
(2.) We are expressly forbidden “to fall down and worship
any image or likeness of anything in heaven or earth,”
whomsoever it may represent. This, therefore, is flat
idolatry, directly contrary to the commandment of God.
7. Such, likewise, without all possibility of evasion, is the
worship they pay to the cross. They pray that God may
make the wood of the cross to “be the stability of faith, an
increase of good works, the redemption of souls.” They use
all expressions of outward adoration, as kissing, and falling
down before it. They pray directly to it, to “increase grace
in the ungodly, and blot out the sins of the guilty.” Yea,
they give latria to it. And this, they themselves say, “is
the sovereign worship that is due only to God.”
But indeed they have no authority of Scripture for their
distinction between latria and dulia; the former of which
they say is due to God alone, the latter that which is due to
saints. But here they have forgotten their own distinction.
For although they own latria is due only to God, yet they do
in fact give it to the cross. This then, by their own account,
is flat idolatry.
8. And so it is to represent the blessed Trinity by pictures
and images, and to worship them. Yet these are made in
every Romish country, and recommended to the people to be
worshipped; although there is nothing more expressly for
bidden in Scripture, than to make any image or representation
of God. God himself never appeared in any bodily shape.
The representation of “the Ancient of days,” mentioned in
Daniel, was a mere prophetical figure; and did no more
literally belong to God, than the eyes or ears that are
ascribed to him in Scripture.
SECTION IV.
t OF THE SACRAMENTS.
1. THE Church of Rome says, “A sacrament is a sensible
thing, instituted by God himself, as a sign and a means
of grace.
“The sacraments are seven: Baptism, confirmation, the
Lord’s supper, penance, extreme unction, orders, and marriage.
“The parts of a sacrament are, the matter, and the form,
or words of consecration. So in baptism, the matter is
water; the form, ‘I baptize thee,’” &c.
On this we remark, Peter Lombard lived about one
thousand one hundred and forty years after Christ. And he
was the first that ever determined the sacraments to be seven.
St. Austin (a greater than he) positively affirms, “that there
are but two of divine institution.”
Again: To say that a sacrament consists of matter and
form, and yet either has no form, as confirmation and extreme
unction, (neither of which is ever pretended to have any form
of words, instituted by God himself) or has neither matter
nor form, as penance or marriage, is to make them sacra
ments and no sacraments. For they do not answer that
definition of a sacrament which themselves have given.
2. However, they teach that “all these seven confer grace
ex opere operato, by the work itself, on all such as do not put
an obstruction.” Nay, it is not enough that we do not put
an obstruction. In order to our receiving grace, there is also
required previous instruction, true repentance, and a degree
of faith; and even then the grace does not spring merely ex
opere operato: It does not proceed from the mere elements,
or the words spoken; but from the blessing of God, in
consequence of his promise to such as are qualified for it.
Equally erroneous is that doctrine of the Church of Rome,
that, “in order to the validity of any sacrament, it is
absolutely necessary the person who administers it should do
it with an holy intention.” For it follows, that, wherever
there is not this intention, the sacrament is null and void.
And so there is no certainty whether the Priest, so called, be
a real Priest; for who knows the intention of him that
ordained him? And if he be not, all his ministrations are of
course null and void. But if he be, can I be sure that his
intention was holy, in administering the baptism or the
Lord’s supper? And if it was not, they are no sacraments
at all, and all our attendance on them is lost labour.
3. So much for the sacraments in general: Let us now
proceed to particulars:—
“Baptism,” say the Romanists, “may, in case of necessity,
be administered by women, yea, by Jews, infidels, or
heretics.” No; our Lord gave this commission only to the
Apostles, and their successors in the ministry.
The ceremonies which the Romanists use in baptism are
these :
Before baptism, (1.) Chrism; that is, oil mixed with water
is to be consecrated. (2.) Exorcism; that is, the Priest is to
blow in the face of the child, saying, “Go out of him,
Satan!” (3.) He crosses the forehead, eyes, breast, and
several other parts of the body. (4.) He puts exorcised salt
into his mouth, saying, “Take the salt of wisdom.” (5.) He
puts spittle in the palm of his left hand, puts the fore-finger
of his right hand into it, and anoints the child’s nose and
ears therewith, who is then brought to the water.
After baptism, First, he anoints the top of the child's head
with chrism, as a token of salvation: Secondly, he puts on
him a white garment, in token of his innocence: And,
Thirdly, he puts a lighted candle into his hand, in token of
the light of faith.
Now, what can any man of understanding say in defence
of these idle ceremonies, utterly unknown in the primitive
Church, as well as unsupported by Scripture? Do they add
dignity to the ordinance of God? Do they not rather make
it contemptible?
4. The matter of confirmation is the chrism; which is an
ointment consecrated by the Bishop. The form is the words
he uses in crossing the forehead with the chrism; namely,
“I sign thee with the sign of the cross, and confirm thee
with the chrism of salvation, in the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost.”
Then the person confirmed, setting his right foot on the
right foot of his godfather, is to have his head bound with a
clean head-band; which, after some days, is to be taken off,
and reserved till the next Ash-Wednesday, to be then burnt
to holy ashes.
The Roman Catechism says, “Sacraments cannot be
instituted by any beside God.” But it must be allowed,
Christ did not institute confirmation; therefore it is no
sacrament at all.
5. We come now to one of the grand doctrines of the
Church of Rome,—that which regards the Lord’s supper.
This, therefore, we would wish to consider with the deepest
attention. They say, “In the Lord’s supper whole Christ is
really, truly, and substantially contained; God-Man, body
and blood, bones and nerves, under the appearance of bread
and wine.”
They attempt to prove it thus: “Our Lord himself says,
‘This is my body. Therefore, upon consecration there is a
conversion of the whole substance of the bread into the
whole substance of Christ's body, and of the whole substance
of the wine into the substance of his blood; and this we term
transubstantiation.
“Yet we must not suppose that Christ is broken, when
the host, or, consecrated bread, is broken; because there is
whole and entire Christ, under the species of every particle
of bread, and under the species of every drop of wine.”
We answer: No such change of the bread into the body
of Christ can be inferred from his words, “This is my body.”
For it is not said, “This is changed into my body,” but,
“This is my body;” which, if it were to be taken literally,
would rather prove the substance of the bread to be his body.
But that they are not to be taken literally is manifest from
the words of St. Paul, who calls it bread, not only before,
but likewise after, the consecration. (1 Cor. x. 17; xi. 26–
28.) Here we see, that what was called his body, was bread
at the same time. And accordingly these elements are called
by the Fathers, “the images, the symbols, the figure, of
Christ's body and blood.”
Scripture and antiquity, then, are flatly against transub
stantiation. And so are our very senses. Now, our Lord
himself appealed to the senses of his disciples: “Handle me
and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me
have.” (Luke xxiv. 39.) Take away the testimony of our
senses, and there is no discerning a body from a spirit. But
if we believe transubstantiation, we take away the testimony
of all our senses.
And we give up our reason too: For if every particle of the
host is as much the whole body of Christ as the whole host is
before it is divided, then a whole may be divided, not into
parts, but into wholes. For divide and subdivide it over and
over, and it is whole still ! It is whole before the division,
whole in the division, whole after the division | Such
nonsense, absurdity, and self-contradiction all over is the
doctrine of transubstantiation
6. An evil practice attending this evil doctrine is, the
depriving the laity of the cup in the Lord’s supper. It is
acknowledged by all, that our Lord instituted and delivered
this sacrament in both kinds; giving the wine as well as the
bread to all that partook of it; and that it continued to be
so delivered in the Church of Rome for above a thousand
years. And yet, notwithstanding this, the Church of Rome
now forbids the people to drink of the cup ! A more insolent
and barefaced corruption cannot easily be conceived !
Another evil practice in the Church of Rome, utterly
unheard of in the ancient Church, is, that when there is
none to receive the Lord’s supper, the Priest communicates
alone. (Indeed it is not properly to communicate, when one
only receives it.) This likewise is an absolute innovation in
the Church of God.
But the greatest abuse of all in the Lord’s supper is, the
worshipping the consecrated bread. And this the Church
of Rome not only practises, but positively enjoins. These
are her words: “The same sovereign worship which is due
to God, is due to the host. Adore it; pray to it. And
whosoever holds it unlawful so to do, let him be accursed.”
The Romanists themselves grant, that if Christ is not
corporally present in the Lord’s supper, this is idolatry.
And that he is not corporally present anywhere but in
heaven, we learn from Acts i. 11; iii. 21. Thither he went,
and there he will continue, “till the time of the restitution
of all things.”
7. Consider we now what the Romanists hold, concerning
the sacrament of penance.
“The matter of the sacrament of penance is, contrition,
confession, and satisfaction; the form, “I absolve thee.’”
We object to this: You say, “The matter of a sacrament
is something sensible,” perceivable by our senses. But if so,
penance is not a sacrament. For surely contrition is not
something perceivable by the outward senses 1
Again: They say, “Confession is a particular discovery of
all mortal sins to a Priest, with all their circumstances, as far
as they can be called to mind; without which there can be
no forgiveness or salvation.”
We answer: Although it is often of use to confess our sins
to a spiritual guide, yet to make confessing to a Priest
necessary to forgiveness and salvation, is “teaching for doc
trines the commandment of men.” And to make it necessary
in all cases is to lay a dangerous snare both for the Confessor
and the confessed.
They go on : “The sentence pronounced by the Priest in
absolution, is pronounced by the Judge himself. All the sins
of the sinner are thereby pardoned, and an entrance opened
into heaven.”
We cannot allow it. We believe the absolution pronounced
by the Priest is only declarative and conditional. For judi
cially to pardon sin and absolve the sinner, is a power God
has reserved to himself.
Once more: You say, “Satisfaction is a compensation
made to God by alms, &c., for all offences committed against
him.”
We answer, (1.) It cannot be that we should satisfy God,
by any of our works. For, (2.) Nothing can make satisfaction
to Him, but the obedience and death of his Son.
8. We proceed to what they call “the sacrament of extreme
unction.” “The matter,” they say, “ of extreme unction is,
oil consecrated by the Bishop, and applied to the eyes, ears,
mouth, hands, feet, and reins of a person supposed to be near
death.” The form is: “By this holy anointing, God pardon
thee for whatever thou hast offended by the eyes, ears, mouth,
or touch.”
We reply: When the Apostles were sent forth, “they
anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them;”
(Mark vi. 13;) using this as a sign of the miraculous cures to
be wrought. And St. James accordingly directs: “Is any
sick among you? Let him call for the Elders of the Church;
let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of
the Lord. And the prayer of faith shall save the sick.” (v. 14,
15.) But what has this to do with the extreme unction of the
Church of Rome? In the first Church, this anointing was a
mere rite: In the Church of Rome, it is made a sacrament I
It was used in the first Church for the body; it is used in
the Church of Rome for the soul: It was used then for the
recovery of the sick; now, for those only that are thought
past recovery. It is easy, therefore, to see, that the Romish
extreme unction has no foundation in Scripture.
9. We are now to consider what the Church of Rome
delivers concerning ordination. “This,” says she, “is properly
a sacrament. He that denies it, let him be accursed.”
“The orders received in the Church of Rome are seven :
The Priest, the Deacon, the Subdeacon, the Acolythus, to
carry the candle; the Exorcist, to cast out devils; the Reader,
and Door-keeper.”
On this, we observe, It is not worth disputing, whether
ordination should be called a sacrament or not. Let the
word then pass: But we object to the thing; there is no
divine authority for any order under a Deacon. Much less
is there any Scriptural authority for the forms of conjuration
prescribed to the Exorcists; or for the rites prescribed in
exorcising not only men, women, and children, but likewise
houses, cattle, milk, butter, or fruits, said to be infested with
the devil.
10. The next of their sacraments, so called, is marriage;
concerning which they pronounce, “Marriage is truly and
properly a sacrament. He that denies it so to be, let him be
accursed.”
We answer, In one sense it may be so. For St. Austin
says, “Signs, when applied to religious things, are called
sacraments.” In this large sense, he calls the sign of the
cross a sacrament; and others give this name to washing the
feet. But it is not a sacrament according to the Romish
definition of the word; for it no more “confers grace,” than
washing the feet or signing with the cross.
A more dangerous error in the Church of Rome is, the for
bidding the Clergy to marry. “Those that are married may
not be admitted into orders: Those that are admitted may
not marry : And those that, being admitted, do marry, are to
be separated.”
The Apostle, on the contrary, says, “Marriage is honour
able in all;” (Heb. xiii. 4;) and accuses those who “forbid
to marry,” of teaching “doctrines of devils.” How lawful
it was for the Clergy to marry, his directions concerning it
show. (1 Tim. iv. 1, 3.) And how convenient, yea, necessary,
in many cases it is, clearly appears from the innumerable
mischiefs which have in all ages followed the prohibition of
it in the Church of Rome; which so many wise and good
men, even of her own communion, have lamented.
I have now fairly stated, and calmly considered, most of
the particular doctrines of the Church of Rome. Permit me
to add a few considerations of a more general nature.
That many members of that Church have been holy men,
and that many are so now, I firmly believe. But I do not
know, if any of them that are dead were more holy than many
Protestants who are now with God; yea, than some of our
own country, who were very lately removed to Abraham's
bosom. To instance only in one : (Whom I mention the
rather, because an account of his life is extant :) I do not
believe that many of them, of the same age, were more holy
than Thomas Walsh. And I doubt if any among them, living
now, are more holy than several Protestants now alive.
But be this as it may: However, by the tender mercies
of God, many members of the Church of Rome have been,
and are now, holy men, notwithstanding their principles;
yet I fear many of their principles have a natural tendency
to undermine holiness; greatly to hinder, if not utterly to
destroy, the essential branches of it,-to destroy the love of
God, and the love of our neighbour, with all justice, and
mercy, and truth.
I wish it were possible to lay all prejudice aside, and to
consider this calmly and impartially. I begin with the
love of God, the fountain of all that holiness without which
we cannot see the Lord. And what is it that has a more
natural tendency to destroy this than idolatry? Consequently,
every doctrine which leads to idolatry, naturally tends to
destroy it. But so does a very considerable part of the avowed
doctrine of the Church of Rome. Her doctrine touching the
worship of angels, of saints, the Virgin Mary in particular, -
touching the worship of images, of relics, of the cross, and,
above all, of the host, or consecrated wafer,—lead all who
receive them to practise idolatry, flat, palpable idolatry; the
paying that worship to the creature which is due to God alone.
Therefore they have a natural tendency to hinder, if not
utterly destroy, the love of God.
Secondly. The doctrine of the Church of Rome has a
natural tendency to hinder, if not destroy, the love of our
ueighbour. By the love of our neighbour, I mean universal
benevolence; tender good-will to all men. For in this
respect every child of man, every son of Adam, is our neigh
bour; as we may easily learn from our Lord’s history of the
good Samaritan. Now, the Church of Rome, by asserting
that all who are not of her own Church, that is, the bulk of
mankind, are in a state of utter rejection from God, despised
and hated by Him that made them; and by her bitter (I
might say, accursed) anathemas, devoting to absolute, ever
lasting destruction, all who willingly or unwillingly differ from
her in any jot or tittle; teaches all her members to look upon
them with the same eyes that she supposes God to do; to
regard them as mere fire-brands of hell, “vessels of wrath,
fitted for destruction.” And what love can you entertain for
such? No other than you can believe God to have for them.
Therefore, every anathema denounced by the Church of Rome
against all who differ from her, has a natural tendency, not
only to hinder, but utterly destroy, the love of our neighbour.
Thirdly. The same doctrine which devotes to utter destruc
tion so vast a majority of mankind, must greatly indispose us
for showing them the justice which is due to all men. For
how hard is it to be just to them we hate? to render them
their due, either in thought, word, or action? Indeed, we vio
late justice by this very thing, by not loving them as ourselves,
For we do not render unto all their due; seeing love is due
to all mankind. If we “ owe no man anything” beside, do
we not owe this, “to love one another?” And where love is
totally wanting, what other justice can be expected? Will
not a whole train of injurious tempers and passions, of wrong
words and actions, naturally follow P So plain, so undeniably
plain it is, that this doctrine of the Church of Rome, (to
instance at present in no more,) that “all but those of their
own Church are accursed,” has a natural tendency to hinder,
yea, utterly to destroy, justice.
Fourthly. Its natural tendency to destroy mercy is equally
glaring and undeniable. We need not use any reasoning to
prove this: Only cast your eyes upon matter of fact! What
terrible proofs of it do we see in the execrable crusades against
the Albigenses! in those horrible wars in the Holy Land,
where so many rivers of blood were poured out! in the many
millions that have been butchered in Europe, since the begin
ning of the Reformation; not only in the open field, but in
prisons, on the scaffold, on the gibbet, at the stake I For how
many thousand lives, barbarously taken away, has Philip the
Second to give an account to God! For how many thousand,
that infamous, perfidious butcher, Charles the Ninth of
France 1 to say nothing of our own bloody Queen Mary, not
much inferior to them I See, in Europe, in America, in the
uttermost parts of Asia, the dungeons, the racks, the various
tortures of the Inquisition, so unhappily styled, the House of
Mercy! Yea, such mercy as is in the fiends in hell ! such
mercy as the natives of Ireland, in the last century, showed
to myriads of their Protestant countrymen | Such is the
mercy which the doctrine of the Church of Rome very
naturally inspires!
Lastly. The doctrine of the Church of Rome has a natural
tendency to destroy truth from off the earth. What can
more directly tend to this, what can more incite her own
members to all manner of lying and falsehood, than that
precious doctrine of the Church of Rome, that no faith is to
be kept with heretics? Can I believe one word that a man
says, who espouses this principle? I know it has been
frequently affirmed, that the Church of Rome has renounced
this doctrine. But I ask, When or where? By what public
and authentic act, notified to all the world? This principle
has been publicly and openly avowed by a whole Council, the
ever-renowned Council of Constance: An assembly never to
be paralleled, either among Turks or Pagans, for regard to
justice, mercy, and truth ! But when and where was it as
publicly disavowed? Till this is done in the face of the sun,
this doctrine must stand before all mankind as an avowed
principle of the Church of Rome.
And will this operate only toward heretics? toward the
supposed enemies of the Church? Nay, where men have
once learned not to keep faith with heretics, they will not
long keep it towards Catholics. When they have once over
leaped the bounds of truth, and habituated themselves to
lying and dissimulation, toward one kind of men, will they
not easily learn to behave in the same manner toward all
men? So that, instead of “putting away all lying,” they
will put away all truth; and instead of having “no guile
found in their mouth,” there will be found nothing else
therein
Thus naturally do the principles of the Romanists tend to
banish truth from among themselves. And have they not an
equal tendency to cause lying and dissimulation among those
that are not of their communion, by that Romish principle,
that force is to be used in matters of religion? that if men
are not of our sentiments, of our Church, we should thus
“compel them to come in ?” Must not this, in the very
nature of things, induce all those over whom they have any
power, to dissemble if not deny those opinions, who vary ever
so little from what that Church has determined ? And if a
habit of lying and dissimulation is once formed, it will not
confine itself to matters of religion. It will assuredly spread
into common life, and tincture the whole conversation.
Again: Some of the most eminent Roman casuists (whose
books are duly licensed by the heads of the Church) lay it
down as an undoubted maxim, that, although malicious lies
are sins, yet “officious lies, that is, lies told in order to do
good, are not only innocent, but meritorious.” Now, what a
flood-gate does this open for falsehood of every kind !
Therefore this doctrine, likewise, has a natural tendency to
banish truth from the earth.
One doctrine more of the Romish Church must not here
be passed over; I mean, that of absolution by a Priest; as it
has a clear, direct tendency to destroy both justice, mercy,
and truth; yea, to drive all virtue out of the world. For if a
man (and not always a very good man) has power to forgive
sins; if he can at pleasure forgive any violation, either of
truth, or mercy, or justice; what an irresistible temptation
must this be to men of weak or corrupt minds! Will they
be scrupulous with regard to any pleasing sin, when they can
be absolved upon easy terms? And if after this any scruple
remain, is not a remedy for it provided ? Are there not
Papal indulgences to be had; yea, plenary indulgences? I
have seen one of these which was purchased at Rome not
many years ago. This single doctrine of Papal indulgences
strikes at the root of all religion. And were the Church of
Rome ever so faultless in all other respects, yet till this
power of forgiving sins, whether by priestly absolution or
Papal indulgences, is openly and absolutely disclaimed, and
till these practices are totally abolished, there can be no
security in that Church for any morality, any religion, any
justice, or mercy, or truth.
