An Address to the Clergy
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
BRETHREN AND FATHERs,
LET it not be imputed to forwardness, vanity, or pre
sumption, that one who is of little esteem in the Church
takes upon him thus to address a body of people, to many of
whom he owes the highest reverence. I owe a still higher
regard to Him who I believe requires this at my hands; to
the great Bishop of our souls; before whom both you and I
must shortly give an account of our stewardship. It is a
debt I owe to love, to real, disinterested affection, to declare
what has long been the burden of my soul. And may
the God of love enable you to read these lines in the same
spirit wherewith they were wrote It will easily appear
to an unprejudiced reader, that I do not speak from a
spirit of anger or resentment. I know well, “the wrath
of man worketh not the righteousness of God.” Much less
would I utter one word out of contempt; a spirit justly abhor
red by God and man. Neither of these can consist with that
earnest, tender love, which is the motive of my present
undertaking. In this spirit I desire to cast my bread upon
the waters; it is enough if I find it again after many days.
Meantime, you are sensible, love does not forbid, but rather
require, plainness of speech. Has it not often constrained
you, as well as me, to lay aside, not only disguise, but reserve
also; and “by manifestation of the truth to commend
ourselves to every man’s conscience in the sight of God?”
And while I endeavour to do this, let me earnestly entreat
you, for the love of God, for the love of your own soul, for
the love of the souls committed to your charge, yea, and of
the whole Church of Christ, do not bias your mind, by
thinking who it is that speaks; but impartially consider what
is spoken. And if it be false or foolish, reject it; but do not
reject “the words of truth and soberness.”
My first design was, to offer a few plain thoughts to the
Clergy of our own Church only. But upon farther reflection,
I see no cause for being so “straitened in my own bowels.”
I am a debtor to all; and therefore, though I primarily speak
to them with whom I am more immediately connected, yet I
would not be understood to exclude any, of whatsoever
denomination, whom God has called to “watch over the
souls of others, as they that must give account.”
In order to our giving this account with joy, are there not
two things which it highly imports us to consider: First,
What manner of men ought we to be? Secondly, Are we
such, or are we not?
I. And, First, if we are “overseers over the Church of
God, which he hath bought with his own blood,” what
manner of men ought we to be, in gifts as well as in grace P
1. To begin with gifts; and, (1.) With those that are
from mature. Ought not a Minister to have, First, a good
understanding, a clear apprehension, a sound judgment, and
a capacity of reasoning with some closeness? Is not this
necessary in an high degree for the work of the ministry?
Otherwise, how will he be able to understand the various
states of those under his care; or to steer them through a
thousand difficulties and dangers, to the haven where they
would be? Is it not necessary, with respect to the numerous
WOL. X. I I
enemies whom he has to encounter? Can a fool cope with
all the men that know not God, and with all the spirits of
darkness? Nay, he will neither be aware of the devices of
Satan, nor the craftiness of his children.
Secondly. Is it not highly expedient that a guide of souls
should have likewise some liveliness and readiness of
thought? Or how will he be able, when need requires, to
“answer a fool according to his folly?” How frequent is
this need ! seeing we almost everywhere meet with those
empty, yet petulant creatures, who are far “wiser in their
own eyes, than seven men that can render a reason.”
Reasoning, therefore, is not the weapon to be used with them.
You cannot deal with them thus. They scorn being
convinced; nor can they be silenced, but in their own way.
Thirdly. To a sound understanding, and a lively turn of
thought, should be joined a good memory; if it may be, ready,
that you may make whatever occurs in reading or conversation
your own; but, however, retentive, lest we be “ever learning,
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.” On
the contrary, “every scribe instructed unto the kingdom of
heaven,” every Teacher fitted for his work, “is like an house
holder who bringeth out of his treasures things new and old.”
2. And as to acquired endowments, can he take one step
aright, without first a competent share of knowledge? a
knowledge, First, of his own office; of the high trust in
which he stands, the important work to which he is called?
Is there any hope that a man should discharge his office well,
if he knows not what it is? that he should acquit himself
faithfully of a trust, the very nature whereof he does not
understand? Nay, if he knows not the work God has given
him to do, he cannot finish it.
Secondly. No less necessary is a knowledge of the Scrip
tures, which teach us how to teach others; yea, a knowledge
of all the Scriptures; seeing scripture interprets scripture;
one part fixing the sense of another. So that, whether it be
true or not, that every good textuary is a good Divine, it is
certain none can be a good Divine who is not a good
textuary. None else can be mighty in the Scriptures; able
both to instruct and to stop the mouths of gainsayers.
In order to do this accurately, ought he not to know the
literal meaning of every word, verse, and chapter; without
which there can be no firm foundation on which the spiritual
meaning can be built? Should he not likewise be able to
deduce the proper corollaries, speculative and practical, from
each text; to solve the difficulties which arise, and answer the
objections which are or may be raised against it; and to make
a suitable application of all to the consciences of his hearers?
Thirdly. But can he do this, in the most effectual manner,
without a knowledge of the original tongues? Without this,
will he not frequently be at a stand, even as to texts which
regard practice only ? But he will be under still greater
difficulties, with respect to controverted scriptures. He will
be ill able to rescue these out of the hands of any man of
learning that would pervert them: For whenever an appeal
is made to the original, his n:outh is stopped at once.
Fourthly. Is not a knowledge of profane history, likewise,
of ancient customs, of chronology and geography, though not
absolutely necessary, yet highly expedient, for him that
would throughly understand the Scriptures? since the want
even of this knowledge is but poorly supplied by reading the
comments of other men.
Fifthly. Some knowledge of the sciences also, is, to say the
least, equally expedient. Nay, may we not say, that the
knowledge of one, (whether art or science,) although now
quite unfashionable, is even necessary next, and in order to,
the knowledge of the Scripture itself? I mean logic. For
what is this, if rightly understood, but the art of good sense?
of apprehending things clearly, judging truly, and reasoning
conclusively? What is it, viewed in another light, but the
art of learning and teaching; whether by convincing or
persuading? What is there, then, in the whole compass of
science, to be desired in comparison of it?
Is not some acquaintance with what has been termed the
second part of logic, (metaphysics,) if not so necessary as this,.
yet highly expedient, (1.) In order to clear our apprehension,
(without which it is impossible either to judge correctly, or to
reason closely or conclusively,) by ranging our ideas under
general heads? And, (2.) In order to understand many
useful writers, who can very hardly be understood without it?
Should not a Minister be acquainted too with at least the
general grounds of natural philosophy? Is not this a great
help to the accurate understanding several passages of Scrip
ture? Assisted by this, he may himself comprehend, and on
proper occasions explain to others, how the invisible things of
God are seen from the creation of the world; how “the
heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament showeth
his handiwork;” till they cry out, “O Lord, how manifold
are thy works | In wisdom hast thou made them all.”
But how far can he go in this, without some knowledge of
geometry? which is likewise useful, not barely on this
account, but to give clearness of apprehension, and an habit
of thinking closely and connectedly.
It must be allowed, indeed, that some of these branches of
knowledge are not so indispensably necessary as the rest; and
therefore no thinking man will condemn the Fathers of the
Church, for having, in all ages and nations, appointed some
to the ministry, who, suppose they had the capacity, yet had
not had the opportunity of attaining them. But what excuse
is this for one who has the opportunity, and makes no use of
it? What can be urged for a person who has had an University
education, if he does not understand them all? Certainly,
supposing him to have any capacity, to have common
understanding, he is inexcusable before God and man.
Sixthly. Can any who spend several years in those seats
of learning, be excused, if they do not add to that of the
languages and sciences, the knowledge of the Fathers? the
most authentic commentators on Scripture, as being both
nearest the fountain, and eminently endued with that Spirit
by whom all Scripture was given. It will be easily perceived,
I speak chiefly of those who wrote before the Council of
Nice. But who would not likewise desire to have some
acquaintance with those that followed them? with St.
Chrysostom, Basil, Jerome, Austin; and, above all, the man
of a broken heart, Ephraim Syrus?
Seventhly. There is yet another branch of knowledge highly
necessary for a Clergyman, and that is, knowledge of the world;
a knowledge of men, of their maxims, tempers, and manners,
such as they occur in real life. Without this he will be liable
to receive much hurt, and capable of doing little good; as he
will not know, either how to deal with men according to the
vast variety of their characters, or to preserve himself from
those who almost in every place lie in wait to deceive.
How nearly allied to this is the discernment of spirits so
far as it may be acquired by diligent observation. And can
a guide of souls be without it? If he is, is he not liable to
stumble at every step?
Eighthly. Can he be without an eminent share of prudence?
that most uncommon thing which is usually called common
sense? But how shall we define it? Shall we say, with
the Schools, that it is recta ratio rerum agibilium particu
larium ?* Or is it an habitual consideration of all the
circumstances of a thing,
Quis, quid, ubi, quibus auxiliis, cur, quomodo, quando 2 +
and a facility of adapting our behaviour to the various
combinations of them? However it be defined, should it not
be studied with all care, and pursued with all earnestness of
application ? For what terrible inconveniences ensue, when
ever it is remarkably wanting !
Ninthly. Next to prudence or common sense, (if it be
not included therein,) a Clergyman ought certainly to have
some degree of good breeding; I mean address, easiness and
propriety of behaviour, wherever his lot is cast: Perhaps one
might add, he should have (though not the stateliness; for
he is “the servant of all,” yet) all the courtesy of a gentleman,
joined with the correctness of a scholar. Do we want a
pattern of this? We have one in St. Paul, even before Felix,
Festus, King Agrippa. One can scarce help thinking he
was one of the best bred men, one of the finest gentlemen in
the world. O that we likewise had the skill to “please all
men for their good unto edification l’’
In order to this, especially in our public ministrations,
would not one wish for a strong, clear, musical voice, and a
good delivery, both with regard to pronunciation and action?
I name these here, because they are far more acquirable than
has been commonly imagined. A remarkably weak and
untunable voice has by steady application become strong and
agreeable. Those who stammered almost at every word, have
learned to speak clearly and plainly. And many who were
eminently ungraceful in their pronunciation and awkward in
their gesture, have in some time, by art and labour, not only
corrected that awkwardness of action and ungracefulness of
utterance, but have become excellent in both, and in these
respects likewise the ornaments of their profession.
What may greatly encourage those who give themselves up
to the work, with regard to all these endowments, many of
* A correct conside, ation of particular things which are capable of being done.
-EDIT.
+ Who, what, where, with what helps, why, how, when.—EDIT.
which cannot be attained without considerable labour, is this:
They are assured of being assisted in all their labour by Him
who teacheth man knowledge. And who teacheth like Him?
Who, like him, giveth wisdom to the simple? How easy is
it for Him, (if we desire it, and believe that he is both able
and willing to do this,) by the powerful, though secret,
influences of his Spirit, to open and enlarge our under
standing; to strengthen all our faculties; to bring to our
remembrance whatsoever things are needful, and to fix and
sharpen our attention to them; so that we may profit above
all who depend wholly on themselves, in whatever may qualify
us for our Master’s work |
3. But all these things, however great they may be in
themselves, are little in comparison of those that follow.
For what are all other gifts, whether natural or acquired,
when compared to the grace of God? And how ought this
to animate and govern the whole intention, affection, and
practice of a Minister of Christ !
(1.) As to his intention, both in undertaking this important
office, and in executing every part of it, ought it not to be
singly this, to glorify God, and to save souls from death?
Is not this absolutely and indispensably necessary, before all
and above all things? “If his eye be single, his whole body,”
his whole soul, his whole work, “will be full of light.”
“God who commanded light to shine out of darkness,” will
shine on his heart; will direct him in all his ways, will give
him to see the travail of his soul, and be satisfied. But if
his eye, his intention be not single, if there be any mixture
of meaner motives, (how much more, if those were or are his
leading motives in undertaking or exercising this high office )
his “whole body,” his whole soul, “will be full of darkness,”
even such as issues from the bottomless pit: Let not such
a man think that he shall have any blessing from the Lord.
No; the curse of God abideth on him. Let him not expect to
enjoy any settled peace, any solid comfort in his own breast;
neither can he hope there will be any fruit of his labours, any
sinners converted to God.
(2.) As to his affections. Ought not a “steward of the
mysteries of God,” a shepherd of the souls for whom Christ
died, to be endued with an eminent measure of love to God,
and love to all his brethren? a love the same in kind, but in
degree far beyond that of ordinary Christians? Can he
otherwise answer the high character he bears, and the relation
wherein he stands? Without this, how can he go through all
the toils and difficulties which necessarily attend the faithful
execution of his office? Would it be possible for a parent to
go through the pain and fatigue of bearing and bringing up
even one child, were it not for that vehement affection, that
inexpressible sopy", which the Creator has given for that very
end? How much less will it be possible for any Pastor, any
spiritual parent, to go through the pain and labour of
“travailing in birth for,” and bringing up, many children to
the measure of the full stature of Christ, without a large
measure of that inexpressible affection which “a stranger
intermeddleth not with !”
He therefore must be utterly void of understanding, must
be a madman of the highest order, who, on any consideration
whatever, undertakes this office, while he is a stranger to this
affection. Nay, I have often wondered that any man in his
senses does not rather dig or thresh for a livelihood, than
continue therein, unless he feels at least (which is extremá
lined amare+) such an earnest concern for the glory of God,
and such a thirst after the salvation of souls, that he is ready
to do anything, to lose anything, or to suffer anything, rather
than one should perish for whom Christ died.
And is not even this degree of love to God and man utterly
inconsistent with the love of the world; with the love of
money or praise; with the very lowest degree of either
ambition or sensuality? How much less can it consist with
that poor, low, irrational, childish principle, the love of
diversions? (Surely, even a man, were he neither a Minister
nor a Christian, should “put away childish things.”) Not
only this, but the love of pleasure, and what lies still deeper
in the soul, the love of ease, flees before it.
(3.) As to his practice: “Unto the ungodly, saith God,
Why dost thou preach my laws?” What is a Minister of
Christ, a shepherd of souls, unless he is all devoted to God?
unless he abstain, with the utmost care and diligence, from
every evil word and work; from all appearance of evil; yea,
from the most innocent things, whereby any might be offended
or made weak? Is he not called, above others, to be an
example to the flock, in his private as well as public character?
* This quotation from Terence is thus translated by Colman :
“Love in its last degree.”—EDIT.
an example of all holy and heavenly tempers, filling the heart
so as to shine through the life? Consequently, is not his
whole life, if he walks worthy of his calling, one incessant
labour of love; one continued tract of praising God, and
helping man; one series of thankfulness and beneficence? Is he
not always humble, always serious, though rejoicing evermore;
mild, gentle, patient, abstinent? May you not resemble him
to a guardian angel, ministering to those “who shall be hears
of salvation?” Is he not one sent forth from God, to stand
between God and man, to guard and assist the poor, helpless
children of men, to supply them both with light and strength,
to guide them through a thousand known and unknown dan
gers, till at the appointed time he returns, with those committed
to his charge, to his and their Father who is in heaven?
O who is able to describe such a messenger of God, faith
fully executing his high office ! working together with God,
with the great Author both of the old and of the new creation |
See his Lord, the eternal Son of God, going forth on that
work of omnipotence, and creating heaven and earth by the
breath of his mouth ! See the servant whom he delighteth to
honour, fulfilling the counsel of his will, and in his name
speaking the word whereby is raised a new spiritual creation.
Empowered by him, he says to the dark, unformed void of
nature, “Let there be light;” “ and there is light. Old
things are passed away; behold, all things are become new.”
He is continually employed, in what the angels of God have
not the honour to do,-co-operating with the Redeemer of
men in “bringing many children to glory.”
Such is a true Minister of Christ; and such, beyond all
possibility of dispute, ought both you and I to be.
II. But are we such 7 What are we in the respects above
named ? It is a melancholy but necessary consideration.
It is true, many have wrote upon this subject; and some of
them admirably well: Yet few, if any, at least in our nation,
have carried their inquiry through all these particulars.
Neither have they always spoken su plain and home as the
nature of the thing required. But why did they not? Was
it because they were unwilling to give pain to those whom
they loved? Or were they hindered by fear of disobliging,
or of incurring any temporal inconvenience? Miserable
fear ! Is any temporal inconvenience whatever to be laid in
the balance with the souls of our brethren? Or were they
prevented by shame, arising from a consciousness of their
own many and great defects? Undoubtedly this might
extenuate the fault, but not altogether remove it. For is it
not a wise advice, “Be not ashamed when it concerneth thy
soul?” especially when it concerns the souls of thousands
also? In such a case may God
Set as a flint our steady face,
Harden to adamant our brow !
But is there not another hinderance? Should not compas
sion, should not tenderness, hinder us from giving pain?
Yes, from giving unnecessary pain. But what manner of
tenderness is this? It is like that of a surgeon who lets his
patient be lost because he is too compassionate to probe his
wounds. Cruel compassion | Let me give pain, so I may
save life. Let me probe, that God may heal.
1. Are we then such as we are sensible we should be,
First, with regard to natural endowments? I am afraid not.
If we were, how many stumbling-blosks would be removed
out of the way of serious Infidels? Alas, what terrible
effects do we continually see of that common though sense
less imagination, “The boy, if he is fit for nothing else, will
do well enough for a Parson 1” Hence it is, that we see (I
would to God there were no such instance in all Great Britain,
or Ireland 1) dull, heavy, blockish Ministers; men of no life,
no spirit, no readiness of thought; who are consequently the
jest of every pert fool, every lively, airy coxcomb they meet.
We see others whose memory can retain nothing; therefore
they can never be men of considerable knowledge; they can
never know much even of those things which they are most
nearly concerned to know. Alas, they are pouring the water
into a leaky vessel; and the broken cistern can hold no
water ! I do not say, with Plato, that “all human know
ledge is nothing but remembering.” Yet certain it is, that,
without remembering, we can have but a small share of
knowledge. And even those who enjoy the most retentive
memory, find great reason still to complain,
Skill comes so slow, and life so fast does fly;
We learn so little, and forget so much !
And yet we see and bewail a still greater defect in some
that are in the ministry. They want sense, they are defective
in understanding, their capacity is low and shallow, their
apprehension is muddy and confused; of consequence, they
are utterly incapable either of forming a true judgment of
things, or of reasoning justly upon anything. O how can
these who themselves know nothing aright, impart knowledge
to others? how instruct them in all the variety of duty, to
God, their neighbour, and themselves? How will they
guide them through all the mazes of error, through all the
intanglements of sin and temptation? How will they
apprize them of the devices of Satan, and guard them against
all the wisdom of the world?
It is easy to perceive, I do not speak this for their sake;
(for they are incorrigible;) but for the sake of parents, that
they may open their eyes and see, a blockhead can never
“do well enough for a Parson.” He may do well enough
for a tradesman; so well as to gain fifty or an hundred
thousand pounds. He may do well enough for a soldier;
nay, (if you pay well for it,) for a very well-dressed and well
mounted officer. He may do well enough for a sailor, and
may shine on the quarter-deck of a man-of-war. He may
do so well, in the capacity of a lawyer or physician, as to ride
in his gilt chariot. But O ! think not of his being a
Minister, unless you would bring a blot upon your family, a
scandal upon our Church, and a reproach on the gospel,
which he may murder, but cannot teach.
Are we such as we are sensible we should be, Secondly, with
regard to acquired endowments? Here the matter (suppose
we have common understanding) lies more directly within our
own power. But under this, as well as the following heads,
methinks I would not consider at all, how many or how few
are either excellent or defective. I would only desire every
person who reads this to apply it to himself. Certainly some
one in the nation is defective. Am not I the man?
Let us each seriously examine himself. Have I, (1.) Such
a knowledge of Scripture, as becomes him who undertakes so
to explain it to others, that it may be a light in all their
paths? Have I a full and clear view of the analogy of faith,
which is the clue to guide me through the whole? Am I
acquainted with the several parts of Scripture; with all parts
of the Old Testament and the New Upon the mention of
any text, do I know the context, and the parallel places?
Have I that point at least of a good Divine, the being a good
textuary? Do I know the grammatical construction of the
four Gospels; of the Acts; of the Epistles; and am I a
master of the spiritual sense (as well as the literal) of what I
read? Do I understand the scope of each book, and how
every part of it tends thereto? Have I skill to draw the
natural inferences deducible from each text? Do I know
the objections raised to them or from them by Jews, Deists,
Papists, Arians, Socinians, and all other sectaries, who more
or less corrupt or cauponize the word of God? Am I ready
to give a satisfactory answer to each of these objections?
And have I learned to apply every part of the sacred
writings, as the various states of my hearers require?
(2.) Do I understand Greek and Hebrew Otherwise, how
can I undertake, (as every Minister does,) not only to explain
books which are written therein, but to defend them against
all opponents? Am I not at the mercy of every one who
does understand, or even pretends to understand, the original?
For which way can I confute his pretence? Do I under
stand the language of the Old Testament? critically? at all?
Can I read into English one of David's Psalms; or even the
first chapter of Genesis? Do I understand the language of
the New Testament ? Am I a critical master of it? Have
I enough of it even to read into English the first chapter of
St. Luke 2 If not, how many years did I spend at school?
How many at the University? And what was I doing all
those years? Ought not shame to cover my face?
(3) Do I understand my own office? Have I deeply
considered before God the character which I bear? What is
it to be an Ambassador of Christ, an Envoy from the King
of heaven? And do I know and feel what is implied in
“watching over the souls” of men “as he that must give
account ?”
(4) Do I understand so much of profane history as tends
to confirm and illustrate the sacred? Am I acquainted with
the ancient customs of the Jews and other nations mentioned
in Scripture? Have I a competent knowledge of chrono
logy, that at least which refers to the sacred writings? And
am I so far (if no farther) skilled in geography, as to know
the situation, and give some account, of all the considerable
places mentioned therein 7
(5.) Am I a tolerable master of the sciences? Have I gone
through the very gate of them, logic? If not, I am not likely
to go much farther, when I stumble at the threshold. Do I
understand it so as to be ever the better for it? to have it
always ready for use; so as to apply every rule of it, when
occasion is, almost as naturally as I turn my hand? Do I
understand it at all? Are not even the moods and figures
above my comprehension? Do not I poorly endeavour to
cover my ignorance, by affecting to laugh at their barbarous
names P Can I even reduce an indirect mood to a direct;
an hypothetic to a categorical syllogism ? Rather, have not
my stupid indolence and laziness made me very ready to
believe, what the little wits and pretty gentlemen affirm, “that
logic is good for nothing?” It is good for this at least,
(wherever it is understood,) to make people talk less; by
showing them both what is, and what is not, to the point;
and how extremely hard it is to prove anything. Do I under
stand metaphysics; if not the depths of the Schoolmen, the
subtleties of Scotus or Aquinas, yet the first rudiments, the
general principles, of that useful science? Have I conquered
so much of it, as to clear my apprehension and range my
ideas under proper heads; so much as enables me to read
with ease and pleasure, as well as profit, Dr. Henry More's
Works, Malebranche’s “Search after Truth,” and Dr. Clarke's
“Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God?” Do
I understand natural philosophy? If I have not gone deep
therein, have I digested the general grounds of it? Have I
mastered Gravesande, Keill, Sir Isaac Newton’s Principia,
with his “Theory of Light and Colours?” In order thereto,
have I laid in some stock of mathematical knowledge? Am
I master of the mathematical A B C of Euclid's Elements?
If I have not gone thus far, if I am such a novice still, what
have I been about ever since I came from school?
(6.) Am I acquainted with the Fathers; at least with those
venerable men who lived in the earliest ages of the Church?
Have I read over and over the golden remains of Clemens
Romanus, of Ignatius and Polycarp; and have I given one
reading, at least, to the works of Justin Martyr, Tertullian,
Origen, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Cyprian 2
(7.) Have I any knowledge of the world? Have I studied
men, (as well as books,) and observed their tempers, maxims,
and manners? Have I learned to beware of men; to add
the wisdom of the serpent to the innocence of the dove?
Has God given me by nature, or have I acquired, any measure
of the discernment of spirits; or of its near ally, prudence,
enabling me on all occasions to consider all circumstances, and
to suit and vary my behaviour according to the various
combinations of them? Do I labour never to be rude or ill
mannered; not to be remarkably wanting in good-breeding?
Do I endeavour to copy after those who are eminent for
address and easiness of behaviour? Am I (though never
light or trifling, either in word or action, yet) affable and
courteous to all men? And do I omit no means which is in
my power, and consistent with my character, of “pleasing all
men” with whom I converse, “for their good to edification?”
If I am wanting even in these lowest endowments, shall I
not frequently regret the want? How often shall I move
heavily, and be far less useful than I might have been How
much more shall I suffer in my usefulness, if I have wasted
the opportunities I once had of acquainting myself with the
great lights of antiquity, the Ante-Nicene Fathers; or if I
have droned away those precious hours wherein I might have
made myself master of the sciences ! How poorly must I
many times drag on, for want of the helps which I have
vilely cast away! But is not my case still worse, if I have
loitered away the time wherein I should have perfected myself
in Greek and Hebrew 7 I might before this have been
critically acquainted with these treasuries of sacred knowledge.
But they are now hid from my eyes; they are close locked up,
and I have no key to open them. However, have I used all
possible diligence to supply that grievous defect, (so far as it
can be supplied now,) by the most accurate knowledge of
the English Scriptures? Do I meditate therein day and
night? Do I think (and consequently speak) thereof, “when
I sit in the house, and when I walk by the way; when I lie
down, and when I rise up?” By this means have I at length
attained a thorough knowledge, as of the sacred text, so of its
literal and spiritual meaning? Otherwise, how can I attempt
to instruct others therein? Without this, I am a blind guide
indeed! I am absolutely incapable of teaching my flock
what I have never learned myself; no more fit to lead souls
to God, than I am to govern the world.
2. And yet there is a higher consideration than that of
gifts; higher than any or all of these joined together; a
consideration in view of which all external and all intellectual
endowments vanish into nothing. Am I such as I ought to
be, with regard to the grace of God? The Lord God enable
me to judge aright of this !
And, (1) What was my intention in taking upon me this
office and ministry? What was it, in taking charge of this
parish, either as Minister or Curate? Was it always, and is
it now, wholly and solely to glorify God, and save souls?
Has my eye been singly fixed on this, from the beginning
hitherto? Had I never, have I not now, any mixture in my
intention; any alloy of baser metal? Had I, or have I, no
thought of worldly gain; “filthy lucre,” as the Apostle terms
it? Had I at first, have I now, no secular view no eye to
honour or preferment? to a plentiful income; or, at least, a
competency? a warm and comfortable livelihood?
Alas! my brother! “If the light that is in thee be dark
mess, how great is that darkness !” Was a comfortable
livelihood, then, your motive for entering into the ministry?
And do you avow this in the face of the sun, and without one
blush upon your cheek? I cannot compare you with Simon
Magus; you are many degrees beneath him. He offered to
give money for the gift of God, the power of conferring the
Holy Ghost. Hereby, however, he showed that he set an
higher value on the gift, than on the money which he would
have parted with for it. But you do not; you set a far higher
value on the money than on the gift; insomuch that you do
not desire, you will not accept of, the gift, unless the money
accompany it ! The Bishop said, when you was ordained,
“Receive thou the Holy Ghost.” But that was the least of
your care. Let who will receive this, so you receive the
money, the revenue of a good benefice. While you minister
the word and sacraments before God, he gives the Holy
Ghost to those who duly receive them: So that, “through
your hands,” likewise, “the Holy Ghost is,” in this sense,
“given” now. But you have little concern whether he be
or not; so little, that you will minister no longer, he shall be
given no more, either through your lips or hands, if you have
no more money for your labour. O Simon, Simon what a
saint wert thou, compared to many of the most honourable
men now in Christendom |
Let not any either ignorantly or wilfully mistake me. I
would not “muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn.” I
know the spiritual “labourer,” too, “is worthy of his
reward;” and that, if “we sow unto” our flock “spiritual
things,” it is meet that we “reap of their carnal things.” I
do not therefore blame, no, not in any degree, a Minister's
taking a yearly salary; but I blame his seeking it. The thing
blamable is the having it in his view, as the motive, or any
part of the motive, for entering into this sacred office.
Hic nigra succus loliginis, hac est
AErugomera."
If preferment, or honour, or profit was in his eye, his eye was
not single. And our Lord knew no medium between a
single and an evil eye. The eye, therefore, which is not
single is evil. It is a plain, adjudged case. He then that
has any other design in undertaking or executing the office
of a Minister than purely this, to glorify God and save souls,
his eye is not single. Of consequence, it is evil; and there
fore his “whole body” must be “full of darkness.” “The
light which is in” him “is” very “darkness;” darkness
covers his whole soul; he has no solid peace; he has no
blessing from God; and there is no fruit of his labours.
It is no wonder that they who see no harm in this, see
no harm in adding one living to another, and, if they can,
another to that; yet still wiping their mouth, and saying,
they have done no evil. In the very first step, their eye was
not single; therefore their mind was filled with darkness.
So they stumble on still in the same mire, till their feet
“stumble on the dark mountains.”
It is pleaded, indeed, that “a small living will not main
tain a large family.” Maintain / How 2 It will not clothe.
them “in purple and fine linen;” nor enable them to fare
“sumptuously every day:” But will not the living you have
now afford you and yours the plain necessaries, yea, and
conveniencies, of life? Will it not maintain you in the
frugal, Christian simplicity which becomes a Minister of
Christ? It will not maintain you in pomp and grandeur, in
elegant luxury, in fashionable sensuality. So much the
better. If your eyes were open, whatever your income was,
you would flee from these as from hell-fire.
It has been pleaded, Secondly, “By having a larger
income, I am able to do more good.” But dare you aver, in
the presence of God, that it was singly with this view, only
for this end, that you sought a larger income 2 If not, you
are still condemned before God; your eye was not single.
* This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Boscawen :
“This is fell poison's blackest juice.”-EDIT.
Do not therefore quibble and evade. This was not your
motive of acting. It was not the desire of doing more good,
whether to the souls or bodies of men; it was not the love of
God: (You know it was not; your own conscience is as a
thousand witnesses.) But it was “the love of money,” and
“the desire of other things,” which animated you in this
pursuit. If, then, the word of God is true, you are in
darkness still: It fills and covers your soul.
I might add, a larger income does not necessarily imply
a capacity of doing more spiritual good. And this is the
highest kind of good. It is good to feed the hungry, to
clothe the naked: But it is a far nobler good to “save
souls from death,” to “pluck” poor “brands out of the
burning.” And it is that to which you are peculiarly called,
and to which you have solemnly promised to “bend all your
studies and endeavours.” But you are by no means sure,
that, by adding a second living to your first, you shall be
more capable of doing good in this kind, than you would
have been had you laid out all your time, and all your
strength, on your first flock.
“However, I shall be able to do more temporal good.”
You are not sure even of this. “If riches increase, they are
increased that eat them.” Perhaps your expenses may rise
proportionably with your income. But if not, if you have a
greater ability, shall you have a greater willingness, to do
good? You have no reason in the world to believe this.
There are a thousand instances of the contrary. How many
have less will when they have more power ! Now they have
more money, they love it more; when they had little, they
did their “diligence gladly to give of that little; ” but
since they have had much, they are so far from “giving
plenteously,” that they can hardly afford to give at all.
“But by my having another living, I maintain a valuable
man, who might otherwise want the necessaries of life.” I
answer, (1.) Was this your whole and sole motive in seeking
that other living? If not, this plea will not clear you from
the charge; your eye was not single. (2.) If it was, you may
put it beyond dispute; you may prove at once the purity of
your intention:—Make that valuable man Rector of one of
your parishes, and you are clear before God and man.
But what can be pleaded for those who have two or more
flocks, and take care of none of them? who just look at them
now and then for a few days, and then remove to a convenient
distance, and say, “Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for
many years; take thine ease; eat, drink, and be merry?”
Some years ago I was asking a plain man, “Ought not
he who feeds the flock, to eat of the milk of the flock?”
He answered: “Friend, I have no objection to that. But
what is that to him who does not feed the flock? He
stands on the far side of the hedge, and feeds himself. It is
another who feeds the flock; and ought he to have the milk
of the flock? What canst thou say for him?” Truly,
nothing at all; and he will have nothing to say for himself,
when the great Shepherd shall pronounce that just sentence,
“Bind” the unprofitable servant “hand and foot, and cast
him into outer darkness.”
I have dwelt the longer on this head, because a right
intention is the first point of all, and the most necessary of
all; inasmuch as the want of this cannot be supplied by
anything else whatsoever. It is the setting out wrong; a
fault never to be amended, unless you return to the place
whence you came, and set out right. It is impossible there
fore to lay too great stress upon a single eye, a pure intention;
without which, all our sacrifice, our prayers, sermons, and
sacraments, are an abomination to the Lord.
I cannot dismiss this important article, without touching
upon one thing more. How many are directly concerned
therein, I leave to the Searcher of hearts.
You have been settled in a living or a curacy for some
time. You are now going to exchange it for another. Why
do you do this? For what reason do you prefer this before
your former living or curacy? “Why, I had but fifty
pounds a year where I was before, and now I shall have a
hundred.” And is this your real motive of acting? the true
reason why you make the exchange? “It is: And is it not
a sufficient reason?” Yes, for a Heathen ; but not for one
who calls himself a Christian.
Perhaps a more gross infatuation than this was never yet
known upon earth. There goes one who is commissioned to
be an ambassador of Christ, a shepherd of never-dying souls,
a watchman over the Israel of God, a steward of the mysteries
which “angels desire to look into.” Where is he going?
“To London, to Bristol, to Northampton.” Why does he
go thither? “To get more money.” A tolerable reason for
driving a herd of bullocks to one market rather than the
bther; though if a drover does this without any farther view,
he acts as a Heathen, not a Christian. But what a reason
for leaving the immortal souls over whom the Holy Ghost
had made you overseer ! And yet this is the motive which
not only influences in secret, but is acknowledged openly and
without a blush ! Nay, it is excused, justified, defended;
and that not by a few, here and there, who are apparently
void both of piety and shame; but by numbers of seemingly
religious men, from one end of England to the other !
(2.) Am I, Secondly, such as I ought to be, with regard
to my affections? I am taken from among, and ordained
for, men, in things pertaining to God. I stand between
God and man, by the authority of the great Mediator, in the
nearest and most endearing relation both to my Creator
and to my fellow-creatures. Have I accordingly given my
heart to God, and to my brethren for his sake? Do I love
God with all my soul and strength? and my neighbour,
every man, as myself? Does this love swallow me up, possess
me whole, constitute my supreme happiness? Does it
animate all my passions and tempers, and regulate all my
powers and faculties? Is it the spring which gives rise to
all my thoughts, and governs all my words and actions? If
it does, not unto me, but unto God be the praise ! If it does
not, “God be merciful to me a sinner !”
At least, do I feel such a concern for the glory of God,
and such a thirst after the salvation of men, that I am ready
to do any thing, however contrary to my natural inclination,
to part with anything, however agreeable to me, to suffer
anything, however grievous to flesh and blood, so I may save
one soul from hell? Is this my ruling temper at all times
and in all places? Does it make all my labour light? If
not, what a weariness is it! what a drudgery ! Had I not
far better hold the plough?
But is it possible this should be my ruling temper, if I still
love the world? No, certainly, if I “love the world, the love
of the Father is not in” me. The love of God is not in me,
if I love money, if I love pleasure, so called, or diversion.
Neither is it in me, if I am a lover of honour or praise, or of
dress, or of good eating and drinking. Nay, even indolence,
or the love of ease, is inconsistent with the love of God.
What a creature then is a covetous, an ambitious, a
'luxurious, an indolent, a diversion-loving Clergyman | Is it
any wonder that infidelity should increase, where any of
these are to be found? that many, comparing their spirit
with their profession, should blaspheme that worthy name
whereby they are called? But “woe be unto him by whom
the offence cometh ! It were good for that man if he had
never been born.” It were good for him now, rather than
he should continue to turn the lame out of the way, “that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into
the depth of the sea!”
(3.) May not you who are of a better spirit consider,
Thirdly, Am I such as I ought to be with regard to my
practice? Am I, in my private life, wholly devoted to God?
Am I intent upon this one thing,-to do in every point
“not my own will, but the will of Him that sent me?”
Do I carefully and resolutely abstain from every evil word
and work? “from all appearance of evil?” from all indifferent
things, which might lay a stumbling-block in the way of the
weak? Am I zealous of good works? As I have time, do I
do good to all men? and that in every kind, and in as high
a degree as I am capable?
How do I behave in the public work whereunto I am
called,—in my pastoral character? Am I “a pattern” to
my “flock, in word, in behaviour, in love, in spirit, in faith,
in purity?” Is my “word,” my daily conversation, “always
in grace,” always “meet to minister grace to the hearers?”
Is my behaviour suitable to the dignity of my calling?
Do I walk as Christ also walked ? Does the love of God
and man not only fill my heart, but shine through my whole
conversation? Is the spirit, the temper which appears in all
my words and actions, such as allows me to say with humble
boldness, Herein “be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ?”
Do all who have spiritual discernment take knowledge (judging
of the tree by its fruits) that “the life which I now live, I live
by faith in the Son of God;” and that in all “simplicity and
godly sincerity I have my conversation in the world?” Am I
exemplarily pure from all worldly desire, from all vile and
vain affectious? Is my life one continued labour of love, one
tract of praising God and helping man? Do I in everything
see “Him who is invisible?” And “beholding with open
face the glory of the Lord,” am I “changed into the same
image from glory to glory, by the Spirit of the Lord?”
Brethren, is not this our calling, even as we are Christians;
but more eminently as we are Ministers of Christ? And
why (I will not say, do we fall short, but why) are we satisfied
with falling so short of it? Is there any necessity laid upon
us, of sinking so infinitely below our calling? Who hath
required this at our hands? Certainly, not He by whose
authority we minister. Is not his will the same with regard
to us, as with regard to his first Ambassadors? Is not his
love, and is not his power, still the same, as they were in the
ancient days? Know we not, that Jesus Christ “is the same
yesterday, to-day, and for ever?” Why then may not you
be as “burning and as shining lights,” as those that shone
seventeen hundred years ago? Do you desire to partake of
the same burning love, of the same shining holiness? Surely
you do. You cannot but be sensible it is the greatest blessing
which can be bestowed on any child of man. Do you design
it; aim at it; “press on to” this “mark of the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus?” Do you constantly
and earnestly pray for it? Then, as the Lord liveth, ye
shall attain. Only let us pray on, and “tarry at Jerusalem,
till we be endued with power from on high.” Let us
continue in all the ordinances of God, particularly in medi
tating on his word, “in denying ourselves, and taking up
our cross daily,” and, “as we have time, doing good to all
men; ” and then assuredly “the great Shepherd” of us and
our flocks will “make us perfect in every good work to do
his will, and work in us all that is well pleasing in his
sight!” This is the desire and prayer of
Your Brother and Servant,
in our common Lord,
JOHN WESLEY.
LoNDoN, February 6, 1756.
