Letter on Preaching Christ
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
LoNDoN, December 20, 1751.
MY DEAR FRIEND,
THE point you speak of in your letter of September 21
is of a very important nature. I have had many serious
thoughts concerning it, particularly for some months last
past; therefore, I was not willing to speak hastily or slightly
of it, but rather delayed till I could consider it thoroughly.
I mean by preaching the gospel, preaching the love of God
to sinners, preaching the life, death, resurrection, and inter
cession of Christ, with all the blessings which, in consequence
thereof, are freely given to true believers.
By preaching the law, I mean, explaining and enforcing
the commands of Christ, briefly comprised in the Sermon on
the Mount.
Now, it is certain, preaching the gospel to penitent sinners
“begets faith; ” that it “sustains and increases spiritual
life in true believers.”
Nay, sometimes it “teaches and guides” them that believe;
yea, and “convinces them that believe not.”
So far all are agreed. But what is the stated means of
feeding and comforting believers? What is the means, as of
begetting spiritual life where it is not, so of sustaining and
increasing it where it is?f
Here they divide. Some think, preaching the law only;
others, preaching the gospel only. I think, neither the one
nor the other; but duly mixing both, in every place, if not
in every sermon.
I think, the right method of preaching is this: At our first
beginning to preach at any place, after a general declaration
of the love of God to sinners, and his willingness that they
should be saved, to preach the law, in the strongest, the
closest, the most searching manner possible; only intermix
ing the gospel here and there, and showing it, as it were,
afar off.
After more and more persons are convinced of sin, we
may mix more and more of the gospel, in order to “beget
faith,” to raise into spiritual life those whom the law hath
slain; but this is not to be done too hastily neither. There
fore, it is not expedient wholly to omit the law; not only
because we may well suppose that many of our hearers are
still unconvinced; but because otherwise there is danger,
that many who are convinced will heal their own wounds
slightly; therefore, it is only in private converse with a
thoroughly convinced sinner, that we should preach nothing
but the gospel.
If, indeed, we could suppose a whole congregation to be
thus convinced, we should need to preach only the gospel:
And the same we might do, if our whole congregation were
supposed to be newly justified. But when these grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of Christ, a wise builder would c
preach the law to them again; only taking particular care to"
place every part of it in a gospel light, as not only a com
mand, but a privilege also, as a branch of the glorious liberty
of the sons of God. He would take equal care to remind
them, that this is not the cause, but the fruit, of their
acceptance with God; that other cause, “other foundation
can no man lay, than that which is laid, even Jesus Christ;”
that we are still forgiven and accepted, only for the sake of
what he hath done and suffered for us; and that all true
obedience springs from love to him, grounded on his first
loving us. He would labour, therefore, in preaching any
part of the law, to keep the love of Christ continually before
their eyes; that thence they might draw fresh life, vigour,
and strength, to run the way of his commandments.
Thus would he preach the law even to those who were
pressing on to the mark. But to those who were careless,
or drawing back, he would preach it in another manner,
nearly as he did before they were convinced of sin. To
those, meanwhile, who were earnest, but feeble-minded, he
would preach the gospel chiefly; yet variously intermixing
more or less of the law, according to their various
necessities.
By preaching the law in the manner above described, he
would teach them how to walk in Him whom they had
received. Yea, and the same means (the main point
wherein, it seems, your mistake lies) would both sustain and
increase their spiritual life. For the commands are food, as
well as the promises; food equally wholesome, equally
substantial. These, also, duly applied, not only direct, but
likewise nourish and strengthen, the soul.
Of this you appear not to have the least conception;
therefore, I will endeavour to explain it. I ask, then, Do
not all the children of God experience, that when God gives
them to see deeper into his blessed law, whenever he gives a
new degree of light, he gives, likewise, a new degree of
strength ? Now I see, he that loves me, bids me do this;
and now I feel I can do it, through Christ strengthening
Ine.
Thus light and strength are given by the same means, and
frequently in the same moment; although sometimes there
is a space between. For instance: I hear the command,
“Let your communication be always in grace, meet to
..minister grace to the hearers.” God gives me more light
into this command. I see the exceeding height and depth
of it. At the same time I see (by the same light from
above) how far I have fallen short. I am ashamed; I am
humbled before God. I earnestly desire to keep it better;
I pray to him that hath loved me for more strength, and
I have the petition I ask of him. Thus the law not only
convicts the unbeliever, and enlightens the believing soul,
but also conveys food to a believer; sustains and increases
his spiritual life and strength.
And if it increases his spiritual life and strength, it cannot
but increase his comfort also. For, doubtless, the more we
are alive to God, the more we shall rejoice in him; the
greater measure of his strength we receive, the greater will
be our consolation also.
And all this, I conceive, is clearly declared in one single
passage of Scripture:
“The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; the
testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple; the
statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; the
commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.
More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine
gold; sweeter also than honey, and the honey-comb.” They
are both food and medicine; they both refresh, strengthen,
and mourish the soul.
Not that I would advise to preach the law without the
gospel, any more than the gospel without the law.
Undoubtedly, both should be preached in their turns; yea,
both at once, or both in one: All the conditional promises
are instances of this. They are law and gospel mixed
together.
According to this model, I should advise every Preacher
continually to preach the law; the law grafted upon,
tempered by, and animated with, the spirit of the gospel. I
advise him to declare, explain, and enforce every command
of God; but, meantime, to declare, in every sermon, (and
the more explicitly the better) that the first and great
command to a Christian is, “Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ;” that Christ is all in all, our “wisdom, righteous
ness, sanctification, and redemption;” that all life, love,
strength, are from him alone, and all freely given to us
through faith. And it will ever be found, that the law thus
preached both enlightens and strengthens the soul; that it
both nourishes and teaches; that it is the guide, “food,
medicine, and stay,” of the believing soul.
Thus all the Apostles built up believers; witness all the
Epistles of St. Paul, James, Peter, and John. And upon
this plan all the Methodists first set out. In this manner,
not only my brother and I, but Mr. Maxfield, Nelson,
James Jones, Westell, and Reeves, all preached at the
beginning.
By this preaching it pleased God to work those mighty
effects in London, Bristol, Kingswood, Yorkshire, and New
castle. By means of this, twenty-nine persons received
remission of sins in one day at Bristol only; most of them,
while I was opening and enforcing, in this manner, our
Lord’s Sermon upon the Mount.
In this manner John Downes, John Bennet, John
Haughton, and all the other Methodists, preached, till
James Wheatly came among them, who never was clear,
perhaps not sound, in the faith. According to his under
standing was his preaching; an unconnected rhapsody of
unmeaning words, like Sir John Suckling's—
Verses, smooth and scft as cream,
In which was neither depth nor stream.
Yet (to the utter reproach of the Methodist congregations)
this man became a most popular Preacher. He was admired
more and more wherever he went, till he went over the
second time into Ireland, and conversed more intimately
than before with some of the Moravian Preachers.
The consequence was, that he leaned more and more both
to their doctrine and manner of preaching. At first, several
of our Preachers complained of this; but, in the space of a
few months, (so incredible is the force of soft words,) he, by
slow and imperceptible degrees, brought almost all the
Preachers then in the kingdom to think and speak like
himself.
These, returning to England, spread the contagion to
some others of their brethren. But still the far greater part
of the Methodist Preachers thought and spoke as they had
done from the beginning.
This is the plain fact. As to the fruit of this new manner
of preaching, (entirely new to the Methodists) speaking much
of the promises, little of the commands; (even to unbelievers,
and still less to believers;) you think it has done great
good; I think it has done great harm.
I think it has done great harm to the Preachers; not only
to James Wheatly himself, but to those who have learned of
him,-David Trathen, Thomas Webb, Robert Swindells, and
John Maddern: I fear to others also; all of whom are but
shadows of what they were; most of them have exalted
themselves above measure, as if they only “preached Christ,
preached the gospel.” And as highly as they have exalted
themselves, so deeply have they despised their brethren ;
calling them “legal Preachers, legal wretches;” and (by a
cant name) “Doctors,” or “Doctors of Divinity.” They
have not a little despised their Ministers also, for “counte
nancing the Doctors,” as they termed them. They have
made their faults (real or supposed) common topics of con
versation; hereby cherishing in themselves the very spirit of
Ham; yea, of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.
I think it has likewise done great harm to their hearers;
diffusing among them their own prejudice against the other
Preachers; against their Ministers, me in particular, (of
which you have been an undeniable instance,) against the
scriptural, Methodist manner of preaching Christ, so that
they could no longer bear sound doctrine; they could no
*- - -–
longer hear the plain old truth with profit or pleasure, nay,
hardly with patience.
After hearing such Preachers for a time, you yourself
(need we further witnesses?) could find in my preaching
no food for your soul; nothing to strengthen you in the
way; no inward experience of a believer; it was all
barren and dry; that is, you had no taste for mine or
John Nelson's preaching; it neither refreshed nor nourished
you.
Why, this is the very thing I assert: That the gospel
Preachers, so called, corrupt their hearers; they vitiate their
taste, so that they cannot relish sound doctrine; and spoil
their appetite, so that they cannot turn it into nourishment;
they, as it were, feed them with sweetmeats, till the genuine
wine of the kingdom seems quite insipid to them. They
give them cordial upon cordial, which make them all life and
spirit for the present; but, meantime, their appetite is
destroyed, so that they can neither retain nor digest the pure
milk of the word.
Hence it is, that (according to the constant observation I
have made, in all parts both of England and Ireland) Preachers
of this kind (though quite the contrary appears at first)
spread death, not life, among their hearers. As soon as that
flow of spirits goes off, they are without life, without power,
without any strength or vigour of soul; and it is extremely
difficult to recover them, because they still cry out, “Cordials!
Cordials l’’ of which they have had too much already, and
have no taste for the food which is convenient for them.
Nay, they have an utter aversion to it, and that confirmed by .
principle, having been taught to call it husks, if not poison :
How much more to those bitters which are previously needful
to restore their decayed appetite |
This was the very case when I went last into the north.
For some time before my coming, John Downes had scarce
been able to preach at all; the three others in the round
were such as styled themselves Gospel Preachers. When I
came to review the societies, with great expectation of finding
a vast increase, I found most of them lessened by one-third;
one entirely broken up. That of Newcastle itself was less
by a hundred members than when I visited it before. And
of those that remained, the far greater number in every
place were cold, weary, heartless, dead. Such were the
492 ThoughTS ON
blessed effects of this gospel preaching 1 of this new method
of preaching Christ!
On the other hand, when, in my return, I took an account
of the societies in Yorkshire, chiefly under the care of John
Nelson, one of the old way, in whose preaching you could
find no life, no food, I found them all alive, strong, and
vigorous of soul, believing, loving, and praising God their
Saviour; and increased in number from eighteen or nineteen
hundred, to upwards of three thousand. These had been
continually fed with that wholesome food which you could
neither relish nor digest. From the beginning they had
been taught both the law and the gospel. “God loves you;
therefore, love and obey him. Christ died for you; therefore,
die to sin. Christ is risen; therefore, rise in the image of
God. Christ liveth evermore; therefore, live to God, till
you live with him in glory.”
So we preached; and so you believed. This is the
scriptural way, the Methodist way, the true way. God grant
we may never turn therefrom, to the right hand or to the
left ||
I am,
My dear friend,
Your ever affectionate brother,
JOHN WESLEY.
