Prayers for Children
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
PREFACE.
MY DEAR CHILD,
A LovER of your soul has here drawn up a few Prayers,
in order to assist you in that great duty. Be sure that you
do not omit, at least morning and evening, to present your
self upon your knees before God. You have mercies to pray
for, and blessings to praise God for. But take care that you
do not mock God, drawing near with your lips, while your
heart is far from him. God sees you, and knows your
thoughts; therefore, see that you not only speak with
your lips, but pray with your heart. And that you may not
ask in vain, see that you forsake sin, and make it your
endeavour to do what God has shown you ought; because
God says, “The prayers of the wicked are an abomination
unto the Lord.” Ask then of God for the blessings you
want, in the name, and for the sake, of Jesus Christ; and
God will hear and answer you, and do more for you than
you can either ask or think.
JOHN WESLEY.
S 2
LORD’S DAY MORNING.
O ALMIGHTY God, Maker of all mankind, in whom we live,
and move, and have our being, who makest the outgoings of the
morning and the evening to rejoice, suffer me now to approach
thy divine Majesty with all reverence and godly fear. I desire
to adore thy sacred name, who hast in thy goodness brought
me in safety to behold the beginning of a new day and another
Sabbath. I bless thee, who hast in love to my soul, and for
the glory of thy name, set apart this day for holy uses, to
engage me in thy service, wherein consists my honour and
happiness. This is thy day: O Lord, enable me to rejoice and
be glad in it. May I ever remember to keep it holy, not doing
my own works, nor finding my own pleasure, nor speaking
my own words; but so delight in thee, that thou mayest give
me my heart's desire. Bless to me thy word, O my heavenly
Father, and all the means of grace, that I may not use them
in vain or to my own hurt, but for the instructing my mind,
reforming my life, and the saving my soul. Save me from
all hardness of heart and contempt of thy word; increase my
love to it, and enable me to hear it meekly, and to receive it
with pure affection, and to bring forth fruit unto good living.
Open my understanding to receive thy truth in the love
thereof. Set it so powerfully upon my heart, and root it so
deep in my soul, that the fruits thereof may be seen in my
life, to thy glory and praise. May I always so hear, read,
mark, learn, and inwardly digest thy word, that it may be a
savour of life to my soul. O let me not offer vain oblations
unto the Lord, drawing nigh with my lips, while my heart is
far from thee. But do thou enable me to worship thee with
holy worship, with joy and delight, with profit and pleasure.
Fill me with a comfortable sense of thy presence, that I may
serve thee with reverence and godly fear, to the comfort of
my soul and the glory of thy name. O Lord God, do thou
clothe thy Priests with rightcousness, and let thy saints rejoice
and sing. Break the bread of life to all our souls, that we may
eat and live for ever. O Lord, hear my prayers, and let my
cry come unto thee. Do more and better for me than I can
either desire or deserve, for the sake of my blessed Saviour.
and Redeemer, Jesus Christ; to whom, with thee and the Holy
Ghost, be all praise and glory, now and for ever. Amen.
“Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.
Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses
as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into
temptation; but deliver us from evil: For thine is the king
dom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.”
LORD’S DAY EVENING.
MERCIFUL God, permit me to pay thee, now, my evening
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, for all the blessings and
favours to my body and soul, so freely bestowed, and so long
continued unto me. Thou hast dealt graciously with me, O
Lord God, and hast been exceedingly good and kind to me,
beyond all that I had reason to expect, or am able to express.
I bless thee, O Lord, for every help which I enjoy to the
promoting my present and eternal good. I desire to ascribe
all praise and glory to thee, to whom alone it is due. O
Lord, I bless thee that thy house is open to me, the bread of
life offered me, the word of salvation preached, and thy Spirit
striving with me. O suffer me not to receive thy grace in
vain, nor let thy word be lost upon me. Do thou apply it to
my heart, and fix it in my memory, that it may prove a
blessing to my soul. In mercy, O Lord, pass by all things
which in thy pure and holy eyes have been amiss this day
past; pardon my neglects, and the guilt of my misdoings.
And as I have heard how to walk and to please thee, O my
£od, help me to walk more worthy of the Lord unto all well
pleasing, that I may be built up in thy true fear and love,
and in the right knowledge and faith of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Be thou pleased to second every word of instruction that I
have received with the power of thy grace and Holy Spirit;
and above all, O blessed God, do thou give me a heart filled
with thy love, and lifted up in thy praise, and devoted to thy
honour and glory all the days of my life. Take me, O Lord
God, my Saviour, into thy gracious care and protection.
Preserve me from all dangers in the night season. Let me
lay down and sleep in thy arms, and when the trumpet shall
sound, and at last call me from the sleep of death, let me be
caught up into the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and
so for ever be with the Lord. All these mercies, O my God,
I most humbly ask, for the alone sake of Jesus Christ, my
Redeemer. Amen. “Our Father,” &c.
MONDAY MORNING.
O LoRD God Almighty, Father of angels and men, I
praise and bless thy holy name for all thy goodness and
loving-kindness to me and all mankind. I bless thee for my
creation, preservation, and all the blessings of this life; but
above all, for thy great love in the redemption of the world
by our Lord Jesus Christ. I bless thee for preserving me in
the night past, and bringing me safe to the beginning of a
new day. Defend me in the same with thy mighty power,
and grant that this day I fall into no sin, neither run into
any kind of danger; but let all my doings be so ordered by
thy governance, that I may do always that which is righteous
in thy sight, through Jesus Christ my Redeemer. Grant
me such grace, that I may be able to withstand the tempta
tions of the world, the flesh, and the devil, and with a pure
heart and mind to follow the steps of my gracious Redeemer.
Keep me, I beseech thee, O Lord, from all things hurtful to
my soul or body, and grant me thy pardon and peace, that,
being cleansed from all my sins, I may serve thee with a
quiet mind, bring forth plenteously the fruit of good works,
and continue in the same unto my life’s end, through Jesus.
Christ, my Saviour and Redeemer. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
MONDAY EVENING.
ALMIGHTY God, who art the gracious Preserver of all man
kind, I desire now to offer unto thee my praise and thanks
givings, for all the blessings thou hast this day bestowed upon
me. I confess, O my God, that I am unworthy of the least
of all thy mercies; for I have gone astray like a lost sheep.
I have followed too much the devices and desires of my own
heart. I have offended against thy holy laws. I have left
undone those things which I ought to have done, and have
done those things which I ought not to have done; and there
is no health in me. But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon me,
a miserable offender. Spare me, O Lord, who now confess my
faults unto thee. Enable me to bewail my manifold sins and
offences, which I have from time to time most grievously
committed, by thought, word, and deed, against thy divine
Majesty. Have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, most
merciful Father; for my Saviour Jesus Christ's sake, forgive
me all that is past, and grant me thy grace, that I may ever
hereafter serve and please thee, in newness of life, to the
honour and glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ my Lord
and Saviour. Take me under thy gracious care and keeping
this night; save and defend me from all dangers. Grant
unto my body rest in my bed, and unto my soul rest in
thyself; and be thou my God and my guide, my hope and my
help, my joy and my comfort, now and for evermore, through
Jesus Christ my Redeemer. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
TUESDAY MORNING.
O THoU Father of all mercies, and God of all goodness, I
praise and bless thy name for thy mercies and favours unto
me in the night past, and for bringing me safe to behold the
light of a new day. Send down thy heavenly grace into my
soul, that I may be enabled to worship thee and serve thee as
I ought to do. Enable me to believe in thee, to fear thee,
and to love thee with all my heart, and mind, and soul, and
strength; that I may honour thy holy name and word, and
serve thee truly, this, and all the days of my life. Give me
thy grace, that I may love all mankind as myself, and do unto
all, as I would they should do unto me. Enable me to love
and honour my parents, obey my superiors, and submit to all
my teachers. Suffer me not to hurt any body by word or
deed. Make me just and honest in all my dealings. Let me
not bear any malice or hatred in my heart. Keep my hands
from picking and stealing, my tongue from evil speaking,
lying, and slandering; keep my body in temperance, soberness,
and chastity; that I may not covet any person's goods, but
learn and labour to get my own living, and to do my duty in
the state of life wherein it shall please thee to place me.
Direct me so to pass through things temporal, that I may
not finally lose the things which are eternal, but at last be
received into thy presence, where is fulness of joy, and be
seated at thy right hand, where are pleasures for evermore,
through Jesus Christ my Saviour. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
TUESDAY EVENING.
O Lord God, the gracious Giver of all good things, I praise
and adore thee for thy goodness, which has been so plentiful
towards me an unworthy child of man. Thou hast in thy
mercy, not only preserved me this day from all dangers, but
bestowed upon me all things needful, for which I desire
entirely to praise thy fatherly goodness, and with angels and
sarchangels, and all the company of heaven, to laud and
magnify thy holy name. Bless, then, the Lord, O my soul,
and all that is within me, praise his holy name; for the Lord
is gracious, and his mercy is everlasting towards them that
fear him. And now, Lord, I most humbly implore thy fatherly
goodness to forgive me whatever has this day, in my heart or
life, offended the eyes of thy glory. O Lamb of God, Son of
the Father, that takest away the sins of the world, receive my
prayer. Prevent me, O Lord, in all my doings for the time
to come, and further me with thy continual help, that, in all
my thoughts, words, and works, I may continually glorify
thy holy name. Grant me thy grace, that I may follow thy
blessed saints in all righteousness and holy living, that I may
at last come to be a partaker with them of glory everlasting.
Do thou enable me, gracious Lord, to adorn thy gospel in all
holy conversation, and to do whatever I do to the glory of
thy name. Cleanse the thoughts of my heart, by the inspira
tion of thy Holy Spirit, that I may perfectly love thee, and
worthily magnify thy holy name. Let thy fatherly hand be
ever over me, and thy Holy Spirit be ever with me; and do
thou so lead me in the knowledge and obedience of thy word,
that, in the end, I may obtain everlasting life, through Jesus
Christ my Lord. And now, O Lord, as the night is come
upon me, and as I am ready to betake myself to rest, I desire
to commit myself to thy protection, who neither slumberest
nor sleepest, but hast still a watchful eye over me: O watch
over me for good, that none of the evils I deserve may fall
upon me. Preserve me from all terrors and dangers in the
night. Remove my sin out of thy sight, and show me the
light of thy countenance, and refresh me with the sense of
thy favour, through Jesus Christ my Redeemer; to whom,
with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all honour and praise for
ever and ever. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
WEDNESDAY MORNING.
O LoBD God Almighty, Fountain of all goodness, and
Father of all mercies, I desire again to bow my knee before
thy holy Majesty, humbly beseeching thee to accept my
praise and thanksgivings for thy mercies to me in the night
season. I laid me down and slept, and rose up again in
safety; for it was thou only, O Lord, that sustainedst me.
And now, O my soul, return unto thy rest. Look upon
me, O Lord, in thy rich mercy, and, for thy dear Son’s sake,
be gracious unto my soul. Lighten my darkness, I beseech
thee, O Lord, and let the dayspring from on high visit me.
Enable me to cast away all the works of darkness, and to put
upon me the armour of light, that I may be able to renounce
the world, the flesh, and the devil; to keep thy holy will and
commandments, and to walk in the same all the days of my
life. Give me, O Lord, wisdom to know the things that
belong to my peace, before I go hence, and am no more
seen. Graft in my heart the love of thy name, increase in
me true religion, and mourish me with all goodness. Give
me the spirit to think and do always such things as be
rightful. Teach me to ask and seek only such things as
shall please thee and profit my soul. Give me such a
measure of thy grace, that I may run the way of thy
commandments, obtain thy gracious promises, and be made
a partaker of thy heavenly treasures. Pour down upon me
the abundance of thy mercy. Give me more than I can
either desire or deserve. O give me the increase of faith,
hope, and love; and keep me ever by thy help from all
things hurtful, and lead me to all things useful. Let thy
grace always prevent and follow me, that I may be
continually given to all good works, and may always glorify
my Father which is in heaven. These, and every other
blessing, for me, and for thy whole Church, I humbly beg in
the name, and for the sake of the merits, of Jesus Christ my
Redeemer; to whom, with thee and the Holy Ghost, &c.
“Our Father,” &c.
WEDNESDAY EVENING.
O GoD, the Creator and Preserver of all mankind, I most
humbly beseech thee now to accept my sincere praise and
thanksgiving for all the blessings and mercies that I have
enjoyed this day. It is thou, O Lord, alone, who hast
preserved me from dangers; and from thy gracious bounty
have I received all things needful to promote my present and
eternal happiness. Not unto me, O Lord, not unto me, but
unto thy name, be the praise. O Lord, I am unworthy,
through my manifold sins, to offer thee any sacrifice; yet, as
thy property is to have mercy and to forgive, I beseech thee
to accept this my bounden duty; not dealing with me
according to my deserving, but after thy mercy, and the
merits of thy dear Son Jesus Christ. I confess unto thee, O
my God, that I am tied and bound with the chain of my
sins; yet, let the pitifulness of thy great mercy loose me. I
have no power of myself to help myself; O do thou keep me
by thy grace, both outwardly in my body, and inwardly in my
soul, that I may be enabled to present both -body and soul a
holy and pleasing sacrifice unto thee, through my Redeemer,
Jesus Christ. Grant mc, O my God, grace, that I may love
what thou hast commanded, and earnestly desire what thou
hast promised. Enable me, amidst the many changes of this
world, to fix my heart constantly upon things above. May
I, both in heart and mind, constantly thither ascend, whither
my Saviour, Jesus Christ, is gone before, to prepare a place
for me. Bring me up, O Lord, in thy fear and love. Keep
me under the protection of thy good providence. Hide me
under the shadow of thy wings; keep me from the evils of
this world, and land me safe at last on that blissful shore,
where all is quietness and assurance for ever. .
Into thy hands, O my God, I this night commend my soul
and body. Give thy angels charge over me, and grant me
such rest and sleep as may fit me for the duties of the
following day. And, O my God, do thou prepare me for my
last sleep in death, my departure out of this mortal state;
that, before I go hence, I may finish the work thou hast
given me to do, and at last finish my course with joy through
Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
THURSDAY MORNING.
O THoU eternal Fountain of all wisdom, whom I cannot
see or know but by the means of thy own light, vouchsafe to
manifest thyself to my soul, and teach me to know aright
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast.
sent. O blessed Sun of Righteousness, arise upon me with
healing in thy wings, to scatter all the clouds of folly and
ignorance that overspread my soul. Open my eyes to see
the wondrous things thy love has wrought. Suffer me not
to remain in darkness concerning anything that is needful for
me to know in order to my present peace and my eternal
glory. O Lord, incline mine ears to wisdom, and my heart.
to understanding, that I may follow on to know the Lord,
and increase in the knowledge and love of God. Give me, O.
Lord, that highest learning, to know thee; and that best.
wisdom, to know myself. Command a blessing on my studies.
and endeavours; and bless me, and help me, Lord, in my
learning all such things as shall stand me in stead, and do
me good. Let my soul and body, and all their powers, be
under thy conduct, and employed to thy glory. Show me
thy ways, O Lord, and lead me into truth; and whatever I
am ignorant of, unto me let it be given to know the mysteries.
of thy kingdom; and let me count all things but dung and
dross for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my
Lord; to whom, with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all
honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen. Vouchsafe, O.
Lord, to keep me this day from all sin. Bless my going out.
and coming in, now and for evermore. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
THURSDAY EVENING.
O MY heavenly Father, who tookest me out of my mother's.
womb, who wast my hope when Ihanged yet upon my mother's
breast, I have been preserved by thee ever since I was born;
Ogo not from me in this my youth, but send out thy light and
thy truth, that they may lead me, and bring me to thy holy
hill, and to thy dwelling-place. Teach me thy way, O Lord,
and enable me to walk in thy truth. O knit my heart unto.
thee, that I may fear thy name; and give me understanding
in the way of godliness. Lord, I am young, and cannot dis
cern between good and evil: O let me not go out of the way
of thy commandments. Learn me true understanding and
knowledge. Teach me to do the thing that pleaseth thee;
for thou art my God. Let thy loving Spirit lead me forth into
all the paths of righteousness. Let my study day and night
be in thy word, that I may become wise unto salvation. Make
thy word a light unto my feet, and a lamp to my path: Guide
me here with thy counsel, and after that receive me into
glory. Withdraw not thou,thy mercy from me, O my God;
but let thy loving-kindness and thy truth always preserve me.
Give thy blessing to me, and with thy favourable kindness
defend me, as with a shield. Show me the path of life, and
enable me to walk therein, till I come into thy presence, where
is fulness of joy, and to thy right hand, where are pleasures
for evermore. As thou hast been pleased to preserve me this
day, and hast bestowed upon me all things needful, I desire
to bless thy name for the same. Take care of me this night,
'O Lord, and visit me with thy mercies. Preserve me, O
Lord, from everything hurtful, and let thy merciful arms for
ever surround me, through Jesus Christ my Saviour. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
FRIDAY MORNING.
O Lord my God, I am taught by thy word, that I am by
mature born in sin and a child of wrath, and that except I am
born again I cannot see the kingdom of God. O Lord, do
thou teach me the meaning of the new birth, that I, a child
of wrath, may become a child of grace. Lord, take away the
veil from my heart, that I may know my sinful nature. Make
the remembrance of my sins grievous unto me, and the burden
of them intolerable. Lead me then to the fountain opened
for sin and uncleanness, that I may there wash and be
-cleansed. Suffer me not to rest till I find redemption in thy
blood, even the forgiveness of all my sins. It has pleased
thee, O Lord, to hide these things from the wise and prudent,
and to reveal them unto babes. Reveal then, O Lord, thy
love in my soul. Let me taste and see how good and gracious
thou art. Suffer a child to come unto thee, and forbid me
not. I am unworthy; but receive me as thou didst the
little children of old into thy gracious arms, and adopt me
thine for ever. Shed abroad in my heart thy love, and filk
me with all peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. Let every
thought, word, and deed, be henceforth to the glory of thy
great name through Jesus Christ, and at last grant me an
abundant entrance into thy everlasting kingdom, through
Jesus Christ my Lord and Saviour. Amen.
be thou with me, O Lord, this day, to bless and keep,
guide and govern me, and let me be thine, and only thine,
for ever. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
FRIDAY EVENING.
O THou ever blessed God, the Author and Giver of life, I
desire with all humility to draw near unto thy gracious majesty,
to offer up unto thee my evening sacrifice of prayer and praise.
Thou alone, O God, art worthy to be praised, and to be had
in everlasting remembrance. Glory be to thee O most
adorable Lord God. Glory be to thy name for all thy mercies
and goodness bestowed on me thy most unworthy servant, in
the day that is now past. Give me a due sense of all thy
mercies, that my heart may be unfeignedly thankful, and grant
me thy grace, that I may show forth thy praise not only with
my lips but in my life. Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy
great goodness. According to the multitude of thy mercies,
do away mine offences. Wash me thoroughly from my
wickedness, and cleanse me from all my sins. Turn thy face
from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds. Create in me a
clean heart, O my God, and renew a right spirit within me.
Cast me not away from thy presence, neither withdraw thy
loving-kindness from me. “Spare me, O Lord, whom thou
hast redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry
with me for ever.” For the glory of thy name, turn from me
those evils that I have most righteously deserved, and enable
me to walk before thee henceforth in holiness and righteous
mess to thy praise and glory. Let thy mercy and goodness
follow me all the days of my life, and be thou my guide unto
death, and my portion for ever. Give me thy grace, that I
may duly consider my latter end and the fewness of my days,
that I may seriously apply my heart unto wisdom, and work
out my salvation with fear and trembling, before the night of
death cometh upon me, wherein no man can work. Enable
me so to live, that I may not only be looking but also longing
for my Saviour's appearing; that when he shall come, I may
also appear with him in glory. And now, O Lord my God,
I beseech thee, take me under thy protection this night, and
preserve me from all evil. I will lay me down in peace and
take my rest; for it is thou, Lord, only that makest me
dwell in safety. In thee have I trusted, let me never be
confounded. These and all other mercies I humbly beg in
the name of my Mediator Jesus Christ. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
SATURDAY MORNING.
ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, I bless thee, that of thy
infinite goodness thou hast preserved me this night past, and
brought me in safety to this morning. Withdraw not, I
humbly beseech thee, thy protection from me, but take me
under the care of thy providence this day. Watch over me
with the eyes of thy mercy, direct my soul and body according
to the rule of thy will, that I may pass this and all my days
to thy glory. O Lord, I am but a child, and know not how
to go out or come in ; and I am in the midst of a sinful
world. Give therefore unto thy servant an understanding
heart, that I may know and choose the good, and abhor and
shun that which is evil. According to thy mercy, think upon
me, O Lord, for thy goodness. Make me to remember thee
in the days of my youth. O learn me true wisdom, and let
the law of thy mouth be dearer to me than thousands of gold
and silver, and let my whole delight be therein. O let me be
devoted to thee from my childhood. Keep out of my heart
all love of the world, of riches, or any other created thing,
and fill it with the love of God. Thou knowest how many
and powerful are the enemies of my soul, that seek to destroy
it, the flesh and the devil. O Lord, help; O Lord, save; O
Lord, deliver me from them. Give me grace to renounce
them all, and to keep thy holy will and commandments all
the days of my life. Show me and make me what I must be
before I can inherit thy kingdom. Teach me the truth as it
is in Jesus. Save me from my own will, and let thine be
done in me and by me. O make me thy child by adoption
and grace. Renew me daily with thy Holy Spirit, and guide
me in all my ways, till thou hast perfected me for thy
heavenly kingdom. Make me dutiful to my parents, affec
tionate to my relations, obedient to my superiors, and loving
towards all mankind. And grant that as I grow in stature,
I may grow in wisdom and in thy favour, till thou shalt take
me to thine everlasting kingdom, there to dwell with thee
for ever and ever, through Jesus Christ my Saviour and
Redeemer. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
SATURDAY EVENING.
IDEsiRE to offer unto thee, O Lord, my evening sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving for all thy mercies bestowed upon me.
I bless thee for my creation, preservation, and, above all, for
my redemption by our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. I
'bless thee for bringing me safely to the conclusion of this day,
and humbly implore the pardon of all the sins I have been
guilty of, whether in thought, word, or deed. Have mercy
upon me, O God, and do thou free me from all the sins I have
committed, and deliver me from the punishment I have
deserved. Othou blessed Guide of my youth, give me thy
grace to seek after thee in my early years, that thou mayest
not be unmindful of me in the time of age. Keep me from
the evil of the world, and carry me safe through it to thy
kingdom. Take care of me, and provide for me, and dispose
of me in the world, as shall be most for thy glory and my
good. Leave me not to myself, in the hands of my own
counsel, but let me be taught of God. Take thou, O Lord,
the gracious charge, and guidance, and government of me,
and fix in my heart thy fear and love, and direct all my ways
to please not myself but thee. O redeem me from the power
of my sins by thy grace, and from the punishment of them
by thy blood, and by both bring me to thy glory. I desire,
O my God, to give up myself wholly to thee. I would be
thine, and only thine, for ever. O my God, my Saviour,
turn not away thy face from a poor child that seeks thee.
Give me to know that I am nothing, and can do nothing, of
myself; and that if ever I am thine, I must be wholly
indebted to thee for it. Let me be entirely devoted unto.
thee, and do thou make me obedient and faithful unto the
end. Make me to remember thee in my bed, and think
upon thee when I am waking; thou hast preserved me from
the dangers of the day past, thou hast been my support ever
since I was born. Under the shadow of thy wings let me
pass this might in comfort and peace. Keep me both in.
body and soul, and give me such rest as my body has need
of And grant, O Lord, that when I lay down my body in
the grave, my soul may rise to life immortal, through the
merits and intercession of thy dear Son, my Saviour, Jesus
Christ. Amen. “Our Father,” &c.
A Prayer for Relations, Friends, &c., to be used after Morning
and Evening Prayer.
VouchsAFE, O Lord, to bless my father and mother, and
all my relations, with the fear of thy name. Bless them in
their souls and bodies; perfect them in every good word and
work, and be thou their guide unto death. Bless my friends,
forgive my enemies; and grant unto all mankind the know
ledge and love of thee. Have mercy upon all who are
afflicted in mind, body, or estate. Give them patience under
their sufferings, and a happy issue out of all their afflictions;
and receive them and me at last into thy blessed kingdom,
for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.
Grace before Meat.
O Lord, I beseech thee, give thy blessing with what thy
mercy has here provided me with, that whether I eat or
drink, or whatsoever I do, I may do all to thy glory and
praise, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.
After Meals.
O LoRD my God, I bless thy holy name for this mercy,
which I have now received from thy bounty and goodness.
Feed now my soul with thy grace, that I may make it my
meat and drink to do thy gracious will, through Jesus Christ
my Saviour. Amen.
A.
