A Short Address to the Inhabitants of Ireland
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 9 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. THERE has lately appeared (as you cannot be ignorant)
a set of men preaching up and down in several parts of this
kingdom, who for ten or twelve years have been known in
England by the title of Methodists. The vulgar in Ireland
term them Swaddlers;—a name first given them in Dublin
from one of them preaching on those words: “Ye shall find
the young child wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a
manger.”
2. Extremely various have been the reports concerning
them. Some persons have spoken favourably: But the gene
rality of men treat them in a different manner,-with utter
contempt, if not detestation; and relate abundance of things
in order to prove that they are not fit to live upon the earth.
3. A question, then, which you may maturally ask, is this:
“In what manner ought a man of religion, a man of reason,
a lover of mankind, and a lover of his country, to act on this
occasion?”
4. Before we can properly answer this, it should be inquired,
concerning the persons in question, what they are; what
they teach; and what are the effects which are generally
observed to attend their teaching.
5. It should first be inquired, what they are. And in order
to a speedy determination of this, we may set aside whatever
will admit of any dispute; as, whether they are good men or
bad, rich or poor, fools, madmen, and enthusiasts, or sober,
rational men. Now, waving all this, one point is indisputa
ble: It is allowed on all hands, they are men who spend all
their time and strength in teaching those doctrines, the nature
and consequences whereof are described in the following pages.
6. The doctrines they constantly teach are these : That
religion does not consist in negatives only,–in not taking
the name of God in vain, in not robbing or murdering our
neighbour, in bare abstaining from evil of any or every kind;
but is a real, positive thing : That it does not consist in
externals only,–in attending the church and sacrament,
(although all these things they approve and recommend,) in
using all the means of grace, or in works of charity, (com
monly so called,) superadded to works of piety; but that it
is, properly and strictly, a principle within, seated in the
inmost soul, and thence manifesting itself by these outward
fruits, on all suitable occasions.
7. They insist, that nothing deserves the name of religion,
but a virtuous heart, producing a virtuous life: A complica
tion of justice, mercy, and truth, of every right and amiable
temper, beaming forth from the deepest recesses of the mind,
in a series of wise and generous actions.
Compositum jus, /asque animo, sanctosque recessus
Mentis, et incoctum generoso pectus honesto."
8. These are their constant doctrines. It is true, they occa
sionally touch on abundance of other things. Thus they fre
quently maintain, that thereisan inseparable connexion between
virtue and happiness; that none but a virtuous (or, as they
usually express it, a religious) man can behappy; and that every
man is happy in the same proportion as he is truly religious;
seeing a contented mind,(according to them,) acheerful, thank
* This quotation from Persius is thus translated by Drummond:
“ - Let me present a mind,
Which civil and religious duties bind;
A guileless heart, which no dark secrets knows,
But with the generous love of virtue glows.”—EDIT.
ful, joyous acquiescence in every disposal of that Sovereign
Wisdom who governs both heaven and earth, if it be not an
essential branch of religion, is, at least, a necessary consequence
of it. On all proper occasions they strongly recommend, on the
one hand, the most intense love of our country; on the other, the
firmest loyalty to our Prince, abstracted from allviews.of private
interest. They likewise take every opportunity of enforcing the
absolute necessity of sobriety and temperance; of unwearied
industry in the works of our calling; of moral honesty in all its
branches; and, particularly, in the discharge of all relative
duties, without which, they say, religion is vain. But all these
they recommend on that one single ground,—the love of God
and of all mankind; declaring them to be of no avail, if they do
not spring from this love, as wellasterminate and centre therein.
9. Whoever is at the pains of hearing these Preachers, or of
reading what they have wrote, with any degree of attention and
impartiality, must perceive that these are their doctrines. And
it is equally easy to discern what the effects of their preaching
have been. These doctrines they spread wherever they come.
They convince many in every place, that religion does not con
sist (as they imagined once) either in negatives or externals, in
barely doing no harm or even doing good; but in the tempers
of the heart, in right dispositions of mind towards God and man,
producing all right words and actions.
10. And these dispositions of mind are, more or less, the
continual consequence of their preaching: (That is, if we may
know the tree by its fruit, which is doubtless the most rational
way of judging.) The lives of many who constantly attend
it show, that God has wrought a real change in their heart;
and that the grand principle of love to God and man already
begins to take root therein.
11. Hence those who were before of quite the opposite temper,
are now generous, disinterested lovers of their country; and
faithful, loyal subjects to their Prince, His sacred Majesty King
George: They are now sober and temperate in all things, and
punctually honest in all their dealings: They are strict in every
relative duty, and laborious and diligent in their callings, not
withstanding the continual discouragement they receive from
many who still cry out, “Ye are idle, ye are idle; therefore ye
say, Let us go and serve the Lord.” They are content in every
state, whether of plenty or want, and thankful to God and man.
These are plain, glaring, undeniable facts, whereof, if any Magis
trate will be at the trouble to take them, numerous affidavits
may be made, in Dublin, Cork, Limerick, and many other places.
But if these things are so, it is easy to conceive in what man
ner every man of religion, every man of reason, every lover of
mankind, every lover of his country, ought to act on this
occasion.
12. For, First, ought not every man of religion, with all the
earnestness of his soul, to praise God, who, after so long a night
of ignorance and error had overspread our country, has poured
light on so many of those that sat in darkness and the shadow
of death? has shown such numbers even of the lowest and most
brutish of men, wherein true religion lies; has taught them both
to lay therightfoundation, and to build the whole fabricthereon;
has convinced them, “Other foundation can no man lay than
that which is laid, even Jesus Christ; ” and, “The end of the
commandment is love,” of the whole commandment or law of
Christ; love, the life, the soul, the spirit of religion, the river
that makes glad the city of God, the living water continually
springing up into everlasting life?
13. Admit that they do not exactly judge right as to some of
the appendages of religion; that you have a clearer and juster
conception than they of several things pertaining to the beauty
of holiness; yet ought you not to bless God for giving these
outcasts of men to see at least the essence of it? nay, to be
living witnesses of the substance of religion, though they may
still mistake as to some of the circumstances of it.
14. Ought not every man of reason (whether he assents, or
no, to that system of opinions commonly called Christianity)
sincerely and heartily to rejoice in the advancement of solid,
rational virtue P in the propagation, not of this or that set of
opinions, but of genuine pure morality? of disinterested bene
volence, of tender affections, to the whole of human race?
Ought you not to be glad, that there are any instruments
found, till others appear who are more equal to the task,
whose one employment it is (from whatever motive) to diffuse
generous honesty thoughout the land?
- 15. Allow that, in doing this, they have some particularities of
opinion, (for humanum est errare et nescire,”) or some little,
odd customs, which you do not conceive to be grounded upon
• It is the lot of humanity to be ignorant of many things, and liable to
error.-EDIT.
strict-reason, yet so long as neither those customs nor those
opinions prevent the advancement of that great end, ought you
not, as areasonableman, to rejoice in theincrease of solid virtue?
especially when you consider, that they do not impose their
own opinions on other men; that (whatever they are) they think
and let think, and condemn no man barely for his opinion; nei
ther blame you for not regarding those little prudential rules
which many observe by their own full and free consent.
16. Ought not every lover of mankind to have something
more than a common regard for those who both labour and
suffer reproach, in order to promote that love in every place; and
to remove every method of speaking or acting, every temper,
contrary to love? Ought not you who are truly moral men, (a
lovely and venerable character,) to have some value for those
who spend and are spent to advance genuine morality? who
spare no pains, if by any means they may induce any of their
countrymen, in any part of the nation, to practise justice, mercy,
and truth, in all their intercourse with each other? to behave
in every circumstance and relation according to those eternal
rules, invariably observing the royal law, “Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself;” and, “Whatsoever ye would that men
should do unto you, even so do unto them.”
17. If you are a lover of mankind, must you not sympathize
with those who suffer evil in various kinds, for this very thing,
because they do good to mankind, looking for no reward on this
side heaven? As to the idle tale of their laying up treasures on
earth, it neither agrees with fact nor reason. Not with fact; for
it is notorious, that those who before piqued themselveson owing
no man anything, are now indebted in larger sums, than,
humanly speaking, they can ever pay. Not with reason; for
if riches had been their aim, they would have sought out the
rich, not the poor; not the tinners in Cornwall, the colliers of
Kingswood, the keelmen in Newcastle-upon-Tyne. At the
same time, they showed they were not afraid or ashamed to
appear before the greatest or wisest of men: Witness their
appearing in the most public manner, both at Dublin, Bristol,
Oxford, and London.
18. Ought not every lover of his country, not only not to
oppose, but to assist with all the power and interest he has,
those who continually, and not without success, recommend the
love of our country, and, what is so closely connected therewith,
duty and loyalty to the best of Princes? Ought you not to
forward, so far as ever your influence will go, sobriety and tem
perance among your countrymen? What can be more for the
interest of this poor nation, and for the good of all, whether rich
or poor? You do well to promote that excellent design of
spreading the linen manufacture among us. None can doubt
but this is admirably well calculated for the good of the whole
kingdom: But are not temperance and honesty still more con
ducive to the good of this and of every kingdom? Nay, and
how directly conducive are these virtues to that very end,—the
flourishing of our manufactures !
19. And what can conduce more to the general good of all
the inhabitants of this land, than industry joined to content? to
peace with God, peace with yourselves, peace with one another?
O how needful in this, above all lands! For, what a stranger
has it been in our coasts | Ye men of Ireland, help! Come
all, as one man, all men of religion and reason, all lovers of
God and of mankind, all lovers of your country. O suffer not
yourselves to be thus grossly abused, thus miserably imposed
upon, any longer | Open your eyes; look around and judge
for yourselves; see plain and undeniable facts; be convinced
by the force of truth and love, that the work is indeed of God.
Rejoice in the good of your country, in peace and good-will
continually advanced among men. Beware you do not oppose,
or speak or think evil of, what God hath done in the earth.
Rather, each in the station wherein he is placed, join hearts
and hands in the work, till holiness and happiness cover our
land as the waters cover the sea.
JOHN WESLEY.
