Some Account of the Late Dr. Dodd
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. I HAVE been frequently desired to give some account
of the conversations I had with Dr. Dodd. I could have
done this more accurately some years ago, when they were
fresh in my memory.” However, I will now set down what
I can recollect. And it may enable many who love to think
for themselves to form an impartial judgment of one that has
been so variously represented.
2. I had no knowledge of Dr. Dodd till he told that
excellent woman, Mrs. Lefevre, that he was going to publish
something against Mr. Wesley. She advised him to send it
to me first. He did so, and was so far at least satisfied with
my answer, that his treatise against Christian perfection
never saw the light. This was about thirty years ago. And
here our intercourse ended; which indeed was very slight,
as I had never seen him, either in private or public.
3. When he was imprisoned, he sent to me, desiring to see
me. But I was not willing to go, supposing he only wanted
me to intercede for him with great men; which I judged would
be lost labour. He sent a second time, but I did not go. The
gentleman who brought the third message told me plainly,
“Sir, I will not go without you.” I then went with him to
Wood-Street Compter, where the Doctor then was. The
Keeper (an extremely well-behaved man) told me, “Sir, of all
* Dr. Dodd was executed for forgery, June 27th, 1777; and this account was
published in July, 1783,-EDIT.
the prisoners that have been in this place, I have not seen
such a one as Dr. Dodd. I could trust him in any part of
the house. Nay, he has gained the affection of even these
wretches, my turnkeys.” When I came into his room, and
sat down by his bed-side, (for he had then a fever,) we were
both of us silent for some time; till he began, “Sir, I have
long desired to see you; but I little thought our first inter
view would be in such a place as this.” I replied, “Sir, I
am persuaded God saw this was the best, if not the only, way
of bringing you to himself; and I trust it will have that happy
effect.” He said earnestly, “God grant it may ! God grant
it may !” We conversed about an hour; but I was agree
ably disappointed. He spoke of nothing but his own soul,
and appeared to regard nothing in comparison of it. So
that I went away far better satisfied than I came.
4. A few days after, I saw him again: the day before he
was removed to Newgate, in order to his trial, which was to
be the day following. I then stayed but about half an hour.
I found him in the same temper as before, affected as one in
such circumstances ought to be; but withal, calm and com
posed. I asked, “Sir, do not you find it difficult to preserve
your recollection, amidst all these lawyers and witnesses?”
He answered, “It is difficult; but I have one sure hold,
‘Lord, not as I will, but as thou wilt.’”
5. Being obliged to take a long journey, I did not see him
again till after he had lost the hope of life; the sentence
which had been referred to the twelve Judges having been
confirmed by them. He was now in Newgate. Entering
into that house of woe, I was utterly surprised: It was as
quiet and still as a College in the University. It seemed as
if even the felons were unwilling to disturb him. We con
versed about an hour; but had not one word about any but
spiritual things. I found his mind still quiet and composed;
sorrowing, but not without hope. And I could not but observe,
that all these times he never blamed any one but himself.
He did not appear to have the least touch of resentment to
any man, receiving everything as at the hand of God.
6. On Wednesday (two days before his death) I paid him
one visit more. As we were talking, Mrs. Dodd came in; but
when she came near him, she sunk down. He catched her in
his arms, and carried her to a chair; but had such a command
over himself, that his eyes only spoke, though without tears,
being afraid of adding to her distress. I now told him, “Sir,
I think you do not ask enough, or expect enough, from God,
your Saviour. The present blessing you may expect from
him is, to be filled with all joy, as well as peace in believing.”
“O Sir,” said he, “it is not for such a sinner as me to expect
any joy in this world. The utmost I can desire is peace; and,
through the mercy of God, that I have.” We then spent a
little time in prayer, and I solemnly commended him to God.
7. On Friday morning all the prisoners were gathered
together, when he came down into the court. He seemed
entirely composed. But when he observed most of them lifting
up their hands, praying for him, blessing him, and weeping
aloud, he was melted down, burst into tears too, and prayed
God to bless them all. When he came out of the gate, an
innumerable multitude were waiting, many of whom seemed
ready to insult him. But the moment they saw him, their
hearts were changed, and they began to bless him and pray
for him too. A Clergyman, (Mr. P.,) being desirous to see
the last of him, pressed on, though with much difficulty and
danger, and kept near him quite to the place of execution.
One of his fellow-prisoners seemed to be in utter despair. Dr.
Dodd, forgetting himself, laboured to comfort him; and
strongly applied the promises. After some time spent in
prayer, he pulled his cap over his eyes; and, sinking down,
seemed to die in a moment. I make no doubt, but in that
moment the angels were ready to carry him into Abraham’s
bosom. JOHN WESLEY.
