A Farther Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion, Part III
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Year: 1745
Author: John Wesley
---
I. 1. Now, what can an impartial person think concerning
the present state of religion in England? Is there a nation
under the sun which is so deeply fallen from the very first prin
ciples of all religion? Where is the country in which is found
so utter a disregard to even heathen morality; such a thorough
contempt of justice and truth, and all that should be dear and
honourable to rational creatures?
What species of vice can possibly be named, even of those
that nature itself abhors, of which we have not had, for many
years, a plentiful and still-increasing harvest? What sin
remains either in Rome or Constantinople, which we have not
imported long ago, (if it was not of our native growth,) and
improved upon ever since? Such a complication of villanies of
every kind, considered with all their aggravations; such a
scorn of whatever bears the face of virtue; such injustice,
fraud, and falsehood; above all, such perjury, and such a
method of law, we may defy the whole world to produce.
What multitudes are found throughout our land, who do not
even profess any religion at all ! And what numbers of those
who profess much, confute their profession by their practice
yea, and perhaps by their exorbitant pride, vanity, covetousness,
rapaciousness or oppression, cause the very name of religion to
stink in the nostrils of many (otherwise) reasonable men I
2. “However, we have many thousands still of truly virtuous
and religious men.” Wherein does their religion consist? in
righteousness and true holiness; in love stronger than death;
fervent gratitude to God, and tender affection to all his crea
tures? Is their religion the religion of the heart; a renewal of
soul in the image of God? Do they resemble Him they worship?
Are they free from pride, from vanity, from malice and envy;
from ambition and avarice; from passion and lust; from every
uneasy and unlovely temper? Alas, I fear neither they (the
greater part at least) nor you know what this religion means;
or have any more notion of it, than the peasant that holds the
plough of the religion of a Gymnosophist.
It is well if the genuine religion of Christ has any more alli
ance with what you call religion, than with the Turkish pil
grimages to Mecca, or the Popish worship of our Lady of
Loretto. Have not you substituted, in the place of the reli
gion of the heart, something (I do not say equally sinful, but)
equally vain, and foreign to the worshipping of God “in spirit
and in truth?” What else can be said even of prayer, (public
or private,) in the manner wherein you generally perform it?
as a thing of course, running round and round in the same dull
track, without either the knowledge or love of God, without one
heavenly temper, either attained or improved ! O what
mockery of God is this!
And yet even this religion, which can do you no good, may
do you much harm. Nay, it is plain it does; it daily increases
your pride, as you measure your goodness by the number and
length of your performances. It gives you a deep contempt of
those who do not come up to the full tale of your virtues. It
inspires men with a zeal which is the very fire of hell, furious,
bitter, implacable, unmerciful; often to a degree that extin
guishes all compassion, all good nature and humanity, Inso
much that the execrable fierceness of spirit, which is the
natural fruit of such a religion, hath many times, in spite of
all ties, divine and human, broke out into open violence, into
rapine, murder, sedition, rebellion, civil war, to the desolation
of whole cities and countries.
Tantum haec religio potuit suadere malorum !"
3. Now, if there be a God, and one that is not a mere idle
* So much mischief this religion does !
spectator of the things that are done upon earth, but a re
warder of men and nations according to their works, what can
the event of these things be? It was reasonable to believe that
he would have risen long ago and maintained his own cause,
either by sending the famine or pestilence among us, or by
pouring out his fury in blood. And many wise and holy men
have frequently declared that they daily expected this; that
they daily looked for the patience of God to give place, and
judgment to rejoice over mercy.
4. Just at this time, when we wanted little of “filling up the
measure of our iniquities,” two or three Clergymen of the
Church of England began vehemently to “call sinners to re
pentance.” In two or three years they had sounded the alarm
to the utmost borders of the land. Many thousands gathered
together to hear them; and in every place where they came,
many began to show such a concern for religion as they never
had done before. A stronger impression was made on their
minds, of the importance of things eternal, and they had more
earnest desires of serving God than they had ever had from their
earliest childhood. Thus did God begin to draw them toward
himself, with the cords of love, with the bands of a man.
Many of these were in a short time deeply convinced of the
number and heinousness of their sins. They were also made
throughly sensible of those tempers which are justly hateful
to God and man, and of their utter ignorance of God, and entire
inability, either to know, love, or serve him. At the same time,
they saw in the strongest light the insignificancy of their out
side religion; nay, and often confessed it before God, as the
most abominable hypocrisy. Thus did they sink deeper and
deeper into that repentance, which must ever precede faith in
the Son of God.
And from hence sprung “fruits meet for repentance.” The
drunkard commenced sober and temperate; the whoremonger
abstained from adultery and fornication; the unjust from
oppression and wrong. He that had been accustomed to curse
and swear for many years, now swore no more. The sluggard
began to work with his hands, that he might eat his own
bread. The miser learned to deal his bread to the hungry, and
to cover the naked with a garment. Indeed, the whole form
of their life was changed: They had “left off doing evil, and
learned to do well.”
5. But this was not all. Over and above this outward change,
they hegan to experience inward religion. “The love of God
was shed abroad in their hearts,” which they continue to enjoy
to this day. They “love him, because he first loved us,” and
withheld not from us his Son, his only Son. And this love
constrains them to love all mankind, all the children of the
Father of heaven and earth; and inspires them with every holy
and heavenly temper, the whole mind that was in Christ.
Hence it is that they are now uniform in their behaviour, un
blamable in all manner of conversation. And in whatsoever
state they are, they have learned therewith to be content; in
somuch that now they can “in every thing give thanks.” They
more than patiently acquiesce, they rejoice and are exceeding
qlad, in all God’s dispensations toward them. For as long
as they love God, (and that love no man taketh from them,)
they are always happy in God. Thus they calmly travel on
through life, being never weary nor faint in their minds, never
repining, murmuring, or dissatisfied, casting all their care upon
God, till the hour comes that they should drop this covering of
earth, and return unto the great Father of spirits. Then, espe
cially, it is that they “rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of
glory.” You who credit it not, come and see. See these living
and dying Christians.
Happy while on earth they breathe;
Mightier joys ordain'd to know,
Trampling on siu, hell, and death,
To the third heaven they go!
Now, if these things are so, what reasonable man can deny
(supposing the Scriptures to be true) that God is now visiting
this nation, in a far other manner than we had cause to ex
pect? Instead of pouring out his fierce displeasure upon us, he
hath made us yet another tender of mercy: So that even when
sin did most abound, grace hath much more abounded.
6. Yea, “the grace of God, which bringeth salvation,” pre
sent salvation from inward and outward sin, hath abounded of
late years in such a degree, as neither we nor our fathers had
known. How extensive is the change which has been wrought
on the minds and lives of the people! Know ye not that the
sound has gone forth into all the land; that there is scarce a city
or considerable town to be found, where some have not been
roused out of the sleep of death, and constrained to cry out, in
the bitterness of their soul, “What must I do to be saved ?”
that this religious concern has spread to every age and sex;
to most orders and degrees of men? to abundance of those,
in particular, who, in time past, were accounted monsters of
wickedness, “drinking in iniquity like water,” and commit
ting all “uncleanness with greediness.”
7. In what age has such a work been wrought, considering
the swiftness as well as the extent of it? When have such
numbers of sinners in so short a time been recovered from
the error of their ways? When hath religion, I will not say
since the Reformation, but since the time of Constantine the
Great, made so large a progress in any nation, within so
small a space? I believe, hardly can either ancient or
modern history supply us with a parallel instance.
8. Let understanding men observe also the depth of the
work, so extensively and swiftly wrought. It is not a slight
or superficial thing; but multitudes of men have been so
thoroughly “convinced of sin,” that their “bones were smit
ten asunder, as it were with a sword dividing the very joints
and marrow.” Many of these have been shortly after so filled
with “peace and joy in believing,” that, whether they were in
the body or out of the body, they could scarcely tell. And in
the power of this faith they have trampled under foot what
ever the world accounts either terrible or desirable; having
evidenced, in the severest trials, so fervent a love to God, so
invariable and tender a goodwill to mankind, particularly to
their enemies, and such a measure of all the fruits of holi
ness, as were not unworthy the apostolic age. Now, so deep
a repentance, so firm a faith, so fervent love and unblemished
holiness, wrought in so many persons, within so short a time,
the world has not seen for many ages.
9. No less remarkable is the purity of the religion which
has extended itself so deeply and swiftly. I speak particu
larly with regard to the doctrines held by those among whom
it is so extended. Those of the Church of England, at least,
must acknowledge this. For where is there a body of people
in the realm, who, number for number, so closely adhere to
what our Church delivers as pure doctrine? Where are those
who have approved and do approve themselves more orthodox,
more sound in their opinions? Is there a Socinian or Arian
among them all? Nay, were you to recite the whole cata
logue of heresies enumerated by Bishop Pearson, it might be
asked, Who can lay any one of these to their charge?
Nor is their religion more pure from heresy than it is from
superstition. In former times, wherever an unusual concern
for the things of God hath appeared, on the one hand, strange
and erroneous opinions continually sprung up with it; on the
other, a zeal for things which were no part of religion, as though
they had been essential branches of it. And many have laid
as great, if not greater, stress on trifles, as on the weightier
matters of the law. But it has not been so in the present case.
No stress has been laid on anything, as though it were neces
sary to salvation, but what is undeniably contained in the word
of God. And of the things contained therein, the stress laid on
each has been in proportion to the nearness of its relation to
what is there laid down as the sum of all, the love of God and
our neighbour. So pure from superstition, so throughly scrip
tural, is that religion which has lately spread in this nation |
10. It is likewise rational as well as scriptural; it is as
pure from enthusiasm as from superstition. It is true, the
contrary has been continually affirmed: But to affirm is one
thing, to prove is another. Who will prove that it is enthusi
asm to love God, even though we love him with all our heart?
to rejoice in the sense of his love to us? to praise him, even
with all our strength? Who is able to make good this charge
against the love of all mankind? or, laying rhetorical flour
ishes aside, to come close to the question, and demonstrate
that it is enthusiasm, in every state we are in, therewith to be
content? I do but just touch on the general heads. Ye men
of reason, give me a man who, setting raillery and ill names
apart, will maintain this by dint of argument. If not, own
this religion is the thing you seek; sober, manly, rational,
divine; however exposed to the censure of those who are
accustomed to revile what they understand not.
11. It may be farther observed, the religion of those we now
speak of is entirely clear from bigotry. (Perhaps this might
have been ranked with superstition, of which it seems to
be only a particular species.) They are in nowise bigoted to
opinions. They do indeed hold right opinions; but they are
peculiarly cautious not to rest the weight of Christianity
there. They have no such overgrown fondness for any opi
nions, as to think those alone will make them Christians, or
to confine their affection or esteem to those who agree with
them therein. There is nothing they are more fearful of
!
than this, lest it should steal upon them unawares. Nor are
they bigoted to any particular branch even of practical reli
gion. They desire indeed to be exact in every jot and tittle,
in the very smallest points of Christian practice. But they
are not attached to one point more than another: they aim
at uniform, universal obedience. They contend for nothing
trifling, as if it was important; for nothing indifferent, as if
it were necessary; for nothing circumstantial, as if it were
essential to Christianity; but for every thing in its own order.
12. Above all, let it be observed, that this religion has no
mixture of vice or unholiness. It gives no man of any rank
or profession the least license to sin. It makes no allowance
to any person for ungodliness of any kind. Not that all who
follow after have attained this, either are already perfect. But
however that be, they plead for no sin, either inward or out
ward. They condemn every kind and degree thereof, in
themselves as well as in other men. Indeed, most in them
selves; it being their constant care to bring those words
home to their own case, “Whosoever shall keep the whole
law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all.”
13. Yet there is not found among them that bitter zeal in
points either of small or of great importance, that spirit of
persecution, which has so often accompanied the spirit of
reformation. It is an idle conceit, that the spirit of persecu
tion is among the Papists only . It is wheresoever the devil,
that old murderer, works; and he still “worketh in ” all “the
children of disobedience.” Of consequence, all the children
of disobedience will, on a thousand different pretences, and
in a thousand different ways, so far as God permits, persecute
the children of God. But what is still more to be lamented
is, that the children of God themselves have so often used
the same weapons, and persecuted others, when the power
was in their own hands.
Can we wholly excuse those venerable men, our great Re
formers themselves, from this charge? I fear not, if we impar
tially read over any history of the Reformation. What wonder
is it then, that, when the tables were turned, Bishop Bonner
or Gardiner should make reprisals; that they should measure
to others (indeed good measure, shaken together) what had
before been measured to them? Nor is it strange, when we
consider the single case of Joan Bocher, that God should suffer
those (otherwise) holy men, Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop
Ridley, and Bishop Latimer, to drink of the same cup with her.
14. But can you find any tincture of this in the case before
us? Do not all who have lately known the love of God, know
“what spirit they are of; ” and that the Son of man is not
come to destroy men's lives, but to save them? Do they
approve of the using any kind or degree of violence, on any
account or pretence whatsoever, in matters of religion? Do
they not hold the right every man has to judge for himself, to
be sacred and inviolable? Do they allow any method of
bringing even those who are farthest out of the way, who are
in the grossest errors, to the knowledge of the truth, except
the methods of reason and persuasion; of love, patience, gen
tleness, long-suffering? Is there anything in their practice
which is inconsistent with this their constant profession? Do
they in fact hinder their own relations or dependents from
worshipping God according to their own conscience? When
they believe them to be in error, do they use force of any
kind, in order to bring them out of it? Let the instances, if
there are such, be produced. But if no such are to be found,
then let all reasonable men, who believe the Bible, own that a
work of God is wrought in our land; and such a work (if we
survey in one view the extent of it, the swiftness with which
it has spread, the depth of that religion which was so swiftly
diffused, and its purity from all corrupt mixtures) as, it must
be acknowledged, cannot easily be paralleled, in all these con
current circumstances, by any thing that is found in the Eng
lish annals, since Christianity was first planted in this island.
II. 1. And yet those who “can discern the face of the sky,
cannot discern the signs of the times.” Yet those who are
esteemed wise men do not know that God is now reviving his
work upon earth. Indeed, concerning some of these, the rea
son is plain: They know not, because they think not of it.
Their thoughts are otherwise employed; their minds are taken
up with things of quite a different nature: Or, perhaps, they
may think of it a little now and then, when they have nothing
else to do; but not seriously or deeply; not with any closeness
or attention of thought. They are too much in haste, to
weigh the facts whereof we speak, and to draw the just inference
therefrom : Nor is the conviction which they may sometimes
feel, suffered to sink into their hearts; but things that have
a larger share in their affections soon destroy the very traces
of it.
2. True it is, that there are some who think more deeply,
who are accustomed to consider things from the foundation, and
to lay circumstances together, that they may judge of nothing
before they have full evidence; and yet even some of these appear
to be in doubt concerning the present work. Now, supposing it
to be a work of God, how can this be accounted for, -that they
who so diligently inquire concerning it, do not know the time of
their visitation? Perhaps because of the deeply rooted prejudice
which they brought with them to the inquiry; and which, still
hanging on their minds, makes it scarce possible for them to
form an impartial judgment. Perhaps, even a slight preposses
sion might occasion their stumbling on some of those rocks cf
offence, which, by the wise permission of God, always did ard
always will attend any revival of his work. Nay, it may be,
their very caution was carried to excess. They would not
judge before they had such evidence as the mature of the thing
would not admit, or, at least, God did not see fit to give.
3. All this is very easy to conceive. But it may at first
appear surprising, to find men of renown, men supposed to
be endowed with knowledge, and with abilities of every kind,
flatly, openly, percmptorily denying, that there has been any
unusual work of God at all ! Yea, a late eminent writer
gocs farther yet; accounts it an instance of downright enthu
siasm, to imagine that there is any extraordinary work now
wrought upon the earth. (Observations, Part III.)
It avails not to say, “No ; he docs not deny this, but he
denies it to be the work of God.” This is palpably trifling;
for the work under consideration is of such a nature, (namely,
the conversion of men from all manner of sins, to holiness of
lieart and life,) that if it be at any time wrought at all, it must
be the work of God; seeing it is God alone, and not any child
of man, who is able to “destroy the works of the devil.”
Yet neither is this difficult to be accounted for, if we consider
things more closely; for the same prejudice which keeps some
in doubt, may easily be conceived so to influence others, as to
make them wholly deny the work of God. And this it may do
in several ways: It may either bring them to question the facts
related, and hinder their endeavouring to be more fully
informed; or prevent their drawing such inferences from those
facts, as they would otherwise see to be plain and undeniable.
Yea, and it will give tenfold weight to the offences which
must come, so as to over-balance all evidence whatsoever.
4. This also may account for the behaviour of those who,
not content to suspend their judgment, or to deny the work of
God, go farther still, even to the length of contradicting and
blaspheming. Nay, some of these have expressed a deeper
abhorrence, and shown astronger enmity against this, than they
were ever known to do against Popery, infidelity, or any heresy
whatsoever. Some have persecuted the instruments whom it
pleased God to use herein, only not to the death; and others
have treated in the same manner all those whom they termed
their followers. A few instances of this it may be proper to
mention, out of very many which might be recited.
5. On the 20th of June, 1743, a great multitude of people
gathered together, chiefly from Walsal, Darlaston, and Bilston,
in Wednesbury church-yard, Staffordshire. They went from
thence (when by sounding a horn they had gathered their
whole company together) to Mr. Eaton’s house, in the middle
of the town, who was at that time Constable. He went to
the door with his Constable's staff, and began reading the
Act of Parliament against riots; but the stones flew so thick
about his head, that he was forced to leave off reading and
retire. They broke all his windows, the door of his house, and
a large clock in pieces. They went then to above fourscore
houses, in many of which there were not three panes of glass left.
6. On June 20, 1743, John Baker, at the head of a large
mob, came to the house of Jonas Turner, at West-Bromwich,
near Wednesbury, and asked him, whether he would keep from
these men that went preaching about, and go to the church.
He answered, “I do go to the church; but I never see any
of you there.” Presently one Dan. Oniens, with a great club,
broke great part of the window at one blow. Others laid hold
of him, and dragged him about sixty yards before he could get
loose from them. Afterwards they broke all his windows, and
threw into the house abundance of stones, to break his goods.
About four in the afternoon they came to the house of widow
Turner of West-Bromwich. They threw in bricks and stones so
fast, that she was forced to open the door and run out among
them. One of her daughters cried out, “My mother will be
killed !” On which, they fell to throwing stones at her. She
ran into a neighbour's house; but before she could shut the
door, they broke the bottom off with a brick-end. They fol
lowed her other daughter with stones, and one with a great
stake. She ran into another house, much frightened, expect
ing to be murdered. The widow asked, “How can you come
and abuse us thus?” On which, one came with a large
club, and swore, if she spoke another word, he would knock
her on the head, and bury her in the ditch. Then he went
and broke all the glass that was left. The same they did to
many of the neighbouring houses.
7. On the 19th of June, James Yeoman, of Walsal, saw
Mary Bird in her father's house at Wednesbury, and swore,
“By G—, you are there now; but we will kill you to-mor
row.” Accordingly, he came with a mob the next day; and
after they had broken all the windows, he took up a stone,
and said, “Now, by God, I will kill you.” He threw it, and
struck her on the side of the head. The blood gushed out,
and she dropped down immediately.
Another of them took Mr. Hands, of Wednesbury, by the
throat, swore he would be the death of him, gave him a great
swing round, and threw him upon the ground. As soon as he
.rose, one Equal Baker gave him a blow on the eye, and knocked
him down again. In about half an hour, the mob came to his
house, and broke all the windows, except about twenty panes.
The kitchen windows they cleared, lead, bars, and all, broke
the window-posts, and threw them into the house. The shop
was shut up; (he being an apothecary;) but they quickly
broke it open, broke all the pots and bottles in pieces, and
destroyed all his medicines. They broke also the shelves and
drawers in the shop to pieces, and many of his household goods.
8. On January 13, 1743–4, the mob rose again at Darlas
ton, broke all the windows of all who followed “this way,”
(except two or three who bought themselves off) broke open
several houses, and took what they liked, the people belong
ing to them being fled for their lives.
About the same time the Rev. Mr. E came to Darlas
ton; and meeting some others at Thomas Forshcw’s, they
drew up a writing; and Nicholas Winspur, the crier of the
town, gave public notice, That all the people of the society
must come to Mr. Forshew’s, and sign it, or else their houses
would be pulled down immediately. It was to this effect,
That they would never read, or sing, or pray together, or
hear these Parsons, any more.
Several signed this through fear. They made every one
who did, lay down a penny,—“to make the mob drink.”
9. About Candlemas, the wife of Joshua Constable, of Dar
laston, was going to Wednesbury, when a mob met her in
the road, threw her down several times, and abused her in a
manner too horrible to write. A warrant was procured for
some of these; but one of them only was carried before Mr.
G , who came back and told his companions, the Justice
said that they might go home about their business. On this
the mob rose again, came to Joshua’s house, and destroyed all
the necessary goods therein. They likewise broke and spoiled
all his shop tools, threw the tiles off the roof of the house, and
pulled down one room, the joist of which they carried away
with them. All his gun-locks they took away; they tore in
pieces all his wife’s linen, cut the bed and bedstead, so that
it was good for nothing; and tore her Bible and Common
Prayer Book all to pieces. She and her husband retired to
another house; but one telling the mob they were there, they
swore they would tear it down immediately, if the man let
them stay any longer: So they went out in the frost and
snow, not knowing where to lay their head.
10. On Tuesday, January 31, 1743–4, Henry Old came to
John Griffith's house, saying, if he did not leave following
“this way,” he had a hundred men at his command, who
should come and pull his house down. Soon after he
brought some with him; but the neighbours gave him
money, and sent him away for that time.
Monday, February 6, between seven and eight at night,
came part of the same company. Hearing them afar off, John
and his wife fastened the door, and left the house. Some of
the neighbours going in soon after, found them destroying all
they could: Two chairs and several bundles of linen were laid
upon the fire. After they had destroyed what they could, they
loaded themselves with clothes and meat, and went their way.
The same day public notice was given at Walsal, by a
paper fixed up there, That all who designed to assist in
breaking the windows, and plundering the houses, of the
Methodists at Wednesbury, should be ready at ten o’clock,
the next morning, on the Church-hill.
11. The next morning, February 7, (being Shrove-Tuesday,)
about half an hour after ten, great numbers of men were
gathered together on the Church-hill. Thence they marched
down, some armed with swords, some with clubs, and some with
axes. They first fell upon Benjamin Watson’s house, and broke
many of the tiles, and all the windows. Next they came to Mr.
Addinbrook’s, broke a fine clock, with many of his goods, and
stole all the things they could carry away. The next house
was Jane Smith’s, whose windows they broke, with what little
goods she had. The next was Mr. Bird's, where they destroyed
every thing they found, except what they carried away; cutting
the beds in pieces, as they did all the beds which they could
anywhere find. Thence they went to Mr. Edge's house: He
was ill of a fever; so, for a sum of money, they passed it over.
The next house was Mr. Hands's. They broke all his counter,
boxes, and drawers, and all (except some bedsteads) that axe
or hammer could break. They spilt all his drugs and chemical
medicines, and stole every thing they could carry, even all his
and his wife's wearing apparel beside what they had on.
12. Mr. Eaton's house was next. They broke all his win
dows, and all his inside doors in pieces, cut the lead off his house,
destroyed or stole whatever they could lay their hands on.
Some gentlemen offered to stop them, if he would sign a paper,
implying that he would never hear those Parsons more. But
he told them, he had felt already what a wounded conscience
was; and, by the grace of God, he would wound his conscience
no more.
After they had done at Mr. Eaton's, they plundered several
other houses in Wednesbury and West-Bromwich. It is scarce
possible to describe the outrages they committed; only they
left them they plundered alive.
While they were plundering John Turner's house, he waded
through the brook, to try if he could save some of his goods,
which one David Garington was carrying away: Upon which
Garington told him, it would be the same here as it was in
Ireland; for there would be a massacre very quickly; and he
wished it was now.
13. About eleven o’clock, Sarah, the wife of John Sheldon,
being told the mob was coming to her house, went and met them
at the gate. She asked John Baker, their captain, what they were
come for. He answered, if she would have nothing more to do
with these people, not a pennyworth of her goods should be hurt.
She made no reply. Then they broke the door open, and began
breaking and plundering the goods. One coming out with a
fire-shovel, she begged him not to take it away. He swore, if
she spoke another word, he would beat her brains out.
John Sheldon was this while helping Thomas Parkes to hide
his goods, though he knew by the noise they were breaking his
own to pieces. Between two and three he came to his house
with William Sitch. William asked Sarah how she did, saying,
for his part, he took joyfully the spoiling of his goods. She an
swered, that, seeing so much wickedness, she could not rejoice;
but she blessed God she could bear it patiently, and found not
the least anger in her. John Sheldon seeing the spoil they had
made, smiled and said, “Here is strange work.” His wife told
him, if she had complied with their terms, not one pennyworth
would have been hurt. He replied, that if she had complied to
deny the truth, and he had found his goods whole on that
account, he should never have been easy as long as he lived;
but he blessed God that she had rather chosen to suffer wrong.
I believe every reasonable man will allow, that nothing can
possibly excuse these proceedings; seeing they are open, bare
faced violations both of justice and mercy, and of all laws divine
and human.
III. l. I suppose no Protestant will undertake to defend such
proceedings, even toward the vilest miscreants. But abundance
of excuses have been made, if not for opposing it thus, yet for
denying this work to be of God, and for not acknowledging the
time of our visitation.
Some allege that the doctrines of these men are false, errone
ous, and enthusiastic; that they are new, and unheard of till of
late; that they are Quakerism, fanaticism, Popery.
This whole pretence has been already cut up by the roots;
t having been shown at large, that every branch of this doc
trine is the plain doctrine of Scripture, interpreted by our own
Church. Therefore it cannot be either false or erroneous,
provided the Scripture be true. Neither can it be enthu
siastic, unless the same epithet belongs to our Articles,
Homilies, and Liturgy. Nor yet can these doctrines be
termed new; no newer, at least, than the reign of Queen
Elizabeth; not even with regard to the way of expression, or
the manner wherein they are proposed. And as to the sub
stance, they are more ancient still; as ancient, not only as the
gospel, as the times of Isaiah, or David, or Moses, but as
the first revelation of God to man. If, therefore, they
were unheard of till of late, in any that is termed a Christian
country, the greater guilt is on those who, as ambassadors of
Christ, ought to publish them day by day.
Fanaticism, if it means anything at all, means the same with
enthusiasm, or religious madness, from which (as was observed
before) these doctrines are distant as far as the east from the
west. However, it is a convenient word to be thrown out upon
anything we do not like; because scarce one reader in a thou
sand has any idea of what it means. If any part of this doc
trine is held by the Quakers, there is the more reason to rejoice.
I would to God they held it all, though the doctrine itself
would be neither better nor worse for this.
Popery in the mouth of many men means just nothing; or,
at most, something very horrid and bad. But Popery, pro
perly speaking, is the distinguishing doctrines of the Church
of Rome. They are summed up in the Twelve Articles which
the Council of Trent added to the Nicene Creed. Now, who
can find the least connexion between any of these, and the
doctrines whereof we are speaking?
2. Others allege, “Their doctrine is too strict; they make
the way to heaven too narrow.” And this is in truth the origi
nal objection, (as it was almost the only one for some time,)
and is secretly at the bottom of a thousand more, which appear
in various forms. But do they make the way to heaven any
narrower than our Lord and his Apostles made it? Is their
doctrine stricter than that of the Bible? Consider only a few
plain texts: “Thou shalt love the Gord thy 1:d with all thy
heart, and with all thy mind, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength.” “For every idle word which men shall
speak, they shall give an account in the day of judgment.”
“Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the
glory of God.” If their doctrine is stricter than this, they are
to blame; but you know in your conscience, it is not. And
who can be one jot less strict, without corrupting the word
of God? Can any steward of the mysteries of God be found
faithful, if he change any part of that sacred depositum ? No.
He can abate nothing, he can soften nothing; he is constrained
to declare to all men, “I may not bring down the Scripture to
your taste. You must come up to it, or perish for ever.”
3. This is the real ground of that other popular cry concern
ing “the uncharitableness of these men.” Uncharitable, are
they? In what respect? Do they not feed the hungry, and
clothe the naked? “No ; that is not the thing : They are not
wanting in this: But they are so uncharitable in judging !
They think none can be saved but those of their own way. They
damn all the world beside themselves.”
What do you mean? “They think none can be saved but
those of their own way.” Most surely they do. For as there
is but one heaven, so there is but one way to it, even the way
of faith in Christ, (for we speak not of opinions or outward
modes of worship,) the way of love to God and man, the high
way of holiness. And is it uncharitable to think or say that
none can be saved but those who walk in this way? Was He
then uncharitable who declared, “He that believeth not shall
be damned?” or he that said, “Follow holiness, without which
no man shall see the Lord?” and again: “Though I bestow
all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to
be burned,” yet, “if I have not ayatnv, charity,” love, all this
“profiteth me nothing.”
“But they damn all,” you say, “beside themselves.” Damn
all ! What kind of word is this? They damn no man. None is
able to damn any man, but the Lord aud Judge of all. What
you probably mean by that strange expression is, they declare
that God condemns all beside those who believe in Jesus
Christ, and love him and keep his commandments. And so
must you also, or you sin against God, and your neighbour,
and your own soul. But is there any uncharitableness in this,
in warning sinners to flee from the wrath to come On the
contrary, not to warn a poor, blind, stupid wretch that he is
hanging over the mouth of hell, would be so inexcusable a
want of charity, as would bring his blood upon our own head.
4. But there is no room for dispute, touching these doctrines
in general, seeing our Lord gives you so plain a rule, by which
you may easily and infallibly know whether they be of God:
“The tree is known by its fruit: Either therefore make the tree
good, and its fruit good; or else make the tree corrupt, and its
fruit corrupt.” (Matt. xii. 33.) Now, what fruit does the tree
before us bring forth? Look and see; believe your own eyes and
ears. Sinners leave their sins: The servants of the devil become
the servants of God. Is this good or evil fruit; that vice loses
ground, and virtue, practical religion, gains? Odispute no more!
Know the tree by its fruit. Bow, and own the finger of God.
OF REASON AND RELIGION, 217*
5. But many who own these doctrines to be of God, yet
cannot be reconciled to the instruments he hath made use of.
A very common exception taken against these is, and was
from the beginning, that “they are so young: ” Therefore,
(abundance of men have readily inferred,) this work cannot
be of God.
Perhaps they are not so young as you conceive. Mr.
Whitefield is now upwards of thirty; my brother is thirty
seven years of age; I have lived above forty-two years; and
a gentleman in Cornwall, for whom I often preach, has the
merit of having lived threescore and seventeen years.
But, supposing the antecedent true, what a consequence is
this! What shadow of Scripture have you to support it?
Doth not God “send by whom he will send?” And who
shall say to him, “What doest thou?” “These are too
young; send elder men.” What shadow of reason? Is it
not possible that a person of thirty or forty may have as true
a judgment in the things of God, and as great a blessing
attending his preaching, as one of fifty or fourscore?
I wish you would explain yourself a little on this head:—
Scire velin, verbo, pretium quotus arroget annus * *
How old do you require a man to be, before God should have
leave to speak by his mouth ? O my brethren, who could
have believed any serious man would once have named such
an argument as this; seeing both Scripture and reason teach,
that God herein “giveth account to none of his ways l”
But he worketh by whomsoever he will work; he showeth
mercy by whom he will show mercy.
6. “But there are only a few young heads.” I cannot but
observe here what great pains have been taken, what diligence
shown, to make and to keep them few. What arts have not
been used to keep back those, of the Clergy in particular,
who have been clearly convinced, from time to time, that they
ought to join hearts and hands in the work? On this occasion
it has been accounted meritorious to “say all manner of evil
of us falsely;” to promise them whatever their hearts
desired, if they would refrain from these men; and, on the other
hand, to threaten them with heavy things if ever they went
among them more. So that how fully soever they were con
vinced, they could not act according to their conviction, unless
* How old must a book be before it is good for anything?
|
they could give up at once all thought of preferment either in
Church or State; nay, all hope of even a Fellowship, or poor
Scholarship, in either University. Many also have been
threatened, that if they went on in this way, what little they
had should be taken from them. And many have, on this
very account, been disowned by their dearest friends and
nearest relations: So that there was no possibility the num
ber of these labourers should ever be increased at all, unless
by those who could break through all these ties, who desired
nothing in the present world, who counted neither their for
tunes, nor friends, nor lives, dear unto themselves, so they
might only keep “a conscience void of offence toward God
and toward men.”
7. But what do you infer from their fewness? that, be
cause they are few, therefore God cannot work by them?
Upon what scripture do you ground this? I thought it was
the same to Him, to save by many or by few. Upon what rea
son ? Why cannot God save ten thousand souls by one man,
as well as by ten thousand? How little, how inconsiderable
a circumstance is number before God! Nay, is there not
reason to believe that whensoever God is pleased to work a
great deliverance, spiritual or temporal, he may first say, as
of old, “The people are too many for me to give the Midi
anites into their hands?” May he not purposely choose few as
well as inconsiderable instruments, for the greater manifesta
tion of his own glory? Very few, I grant, are the instru
ments now employed; yet a great work is wrought already.
And the fewer they are by whom this large harvest hath
hitherto been gathered in, the more evident must it appear to
unprejudiced minds that the work is not of man, but of God.
8. “But they are not only few, but unlearned also.” This
is a grievous offence, and is by many csteemed a sufficient
excuse for not acknowledging the work to be of God.
The ground of this offence is partly true. Some of those
who now preach are unlearned. They neither understand
the ancient languages, nor any of the branches of philosophy.
And yet this objection might have been spared by many of
those who have frequently made it; because they are un
learned too, though accounted otherwise. They have not
themselves the very thing they require in others.
Men in general are under a great mistake with regard to
OF REASON AND RELIGION.- 219
what is called the learned world. They do not know, they
cannot easily imagine, how little learning there is among
them. I do not speak of abstruse learning; but of what all
Divines, at least, of any note, are supposed to have, namely,
the knowledge of the tongues, at least, Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew, and of the common arts and sciences.
How few men of learning, so called, understand Hebrew ;
cven so far as to read a plain chapter in Genesis ! Nay, how
few understand Greek! Make an easy experiment. Desire
that grave man, who is urging this objection, only to tell you
the English of the first paragraph that occurs in one of Plato's
Dialogues. I am afraid we may go farther still. How few
understand Latin Give one of them an Epistle of Tully,
and see how readily he will explain it without his dictionary.
If he can hobble through that, it is odds but a Georgic in
Virgil, or a Satire of Persius, sets him fast.
And with regard to the arts and sciences; how few under
stand so much as the general principles of logic l Can one in
ten of the Clergy, (O grief of heart!) or of the Masters of Arts
in either University, when an argument is brought, tell you
even the mood and figure wherein it is proposed; or complete
an enthy meme * Perhaps you do not so much as understand
the term;—supply the premiss which is wanting, in order to
make it a full categorical syllogism. Can one in ten of them
demonstrate a Problem or theorem in Euclid's Elements, or
define the common terms used in Metaphysics, or intelligibly
explain the first principles of it? Why then will they pretend
to that learning which they are conscious to themselves they
have not? nay, and censure others who have it not, and do not
pretend to it? Where are sincerity and candour fled?
It will easily be observed, that I do not depreciate learning
of any kind. The knowledge of the languages is a valuable
talent; so is the knowledge of the arts and sciences. Both
the one and the other may be employed to the glory of God
and the good of men. But yet I ask, Where hath God
declared in his word, that he cannot, or will not, make use of
men that have it not? Has Moses or any of the Prophets
affirmed this? or our Lord, or any of his Apostles? You are
sensible all these are against you: You know the Apostles
themselves, all except St. Paul, were avópes atypa/puatot cat
w8total, “common, unphilosophical, unlettered men.”
9. “What! Then you make yourselves like the Apostles.”
Because this silly objection has so often been urged, I will for
once spend a few words upon it, though it does not deserve that
honour. Why, must not every man, whether Clergyman or
layman, be in some respects like the Apostles, or go to hell?
Can any man be saved if he be not holy, like the Apostles; a
follower of them, as they were of Christ? And ought not every
Preacher of the gospel to be in a peculiar manner like the
Apostles, both in holy tempers, in examplariness of life, and in
his indefatigable labours for the good of souls? Wo unto every
ambassador of Christ, who is not like the Apostles in this! in
holiness, in making full proof of his ministry, in spending and
being spent for Christ! We cannot, and therefore we need not,
be like them in working outward miracles; but we may, and
ought, in working together with God for the salvation of men.
And the same God who was always ready to help their infirmi
ties, is ready to help ours also. He who made them “workmen
that needed not to be ashamed,” will teach us also “rightly
to divide the word of truth.” In this respect likewise, in
respect of his “having help from God,” for the work where
unto he is called, every Preacher of the gospel is like the
Apostles: Otherwise, he is of all men most miserable.
10. And I am bold to affirm, that these unlettered men have
help from God for that great work,-the saving souls from
death; seeing he hath enabled, and doth enable them still, to
“turn many to righteousness.” Thus hath he “destroyed the
wisdom of the wise, and brought to nought the understanding of
the prudent.” When they imagined they had effectually shut
the door, and locked up every passage whereby any help could
come to two or three Preachers, weak in body as well as soul,
who they might reasonably believe would, humanly speaking,
wear themselves out in a short time;—when they had gained
their point by securing, as they supposed, all the men of learn
ing in the nation, “He that sitteth in heaven laughed them to
scorn,” and came upon them by a way they thought not of.
“Out of the stones he raised up ’’ those who should beget
“children to Abraham.” We had no more foresight of this than
you: Nay, we had the deepest prejudices against it; until we
could not but own that God gave “wisdom from above ’’ to
these unlearned and ignorant men, so that the work of the Lord
prospered intheir hand, and sinners were daily converted to God.
Indeed, in the one thing which they profess to know, they are
not ignorant men. I trust there is not one of them who is not
able to go through such an examination, in substantial, prac
tical, experimental Divinity, as few of our candidates for holy
orders, even in the University, (I speak it with sorrow and
shame, and in tender love,) are able to do. But, O! what man
ner of examination do most of those candidates go through! and
what proof are the tesimonials commonly brought, (as solemn as
the form is wherein they run,) either of their piety or know
ledge to whom are entrusted those sheep which God hath
purchased with his own blood |
11. “But they are laymen. You seem to be sensible your
self of the strength of this objection. For as many as you have
answered, I observe you have never once so much as touched
on this.”
I have not. Yet it was not distrust of my cause, but tender
ness to you, which occasioned my silence. I had something to
advance on this head also; but I was afraid you could not bear
it. I was conscious to myself that, some years since, to touch
this point, was to touch the apple of my eye: And this makes
me almost unwilling to speak now, lest I should shock the
prejudices I cannot remove.
Suffer me, however, just to intimate to you some things
which I would leave to your farther consideration: The Scribes
of old, who were the ordinary Preachers among the Jews, were
not Priests; they were not better than laymen. Yea, many
of them were incapable of the priesthood, being of the tribe of
Simeon, not of Levi.
Hence, probably, it was that the Jews themselves never urged
it as an objection to our Lord’s preaching, (even those who did
not acknowledge or believe that he was sent of God in an
extraordinary character) that he was no Priest after the order
of Aaron: Nor, indeed, could be; seeing he was of the tribe
of Judah.
Nor does it appear that any objected this to the Apostles:
So far from it, that at Antioch, in Pisidia, we find the rulers of
the synagogue sending unto Paul and Barnabas, strangers just
come into the city, “saying, Men and brethren, if ye have any
word of exhortation for the people, say on.” (Acts xiii. 15.)
If we consider these things, we shall be the less surprised at
what occurs in the eighth chapter of the Acts: “At that time
there was a great persccution against the Church; and they
were all scattered abroad” (that is, all the Church, all the
believers in Jesus) “throughout the regions of Judea and
Samaria.” (Verse 1.) “Therefore, they that were scattered
abroad went everywhere preaching the word.” (Verse 4.)
Now, what shadow of reason have we to say, or think, that
all these were ordained before they preached?
12. If we come to later times: Was Mr. Calvin ordained ?
Was he either Priest or Deacon? And were not most of those
whom it pleased God to employ in promoting the Reforma
tion abroad, laymen also ? Could that great work have been
promoted at all in many places, if laymen had not preached ?
And yet how seldom do the very Papists urge this as an objec
tion against the Reformation l Nay, as rigorous as they are in
things of this kind, they themselves appoint, even in some of
their strictest Orders, that “if any lay-brother believes himself
called of God to preach as a Missionary, the Superior of the
Order, being informed thereof, shall immediately send
him away.”
In all Protestant Churches it is still more evident that ordi
nation is not held a necessary pre-requisite of preaching; for
in Sweden, in Germany, in Holland, and, I believe, in every
Reformed Church in Europe, it is not only permitted but
required, that before any one is ordained, (before he is admitted
even into Deacon’s Orders, wherever the distinction between
Priests and Deacons is retained,) he should publicly preach a
year or more ad probandum facultatem. And for this practice
they believe they have the authority of an express command of
God: “Let these first be proved; then let them use the office
of a Deacon, being found blameless.” (1 Tim. iii. 10.)
13. “In England, however, there is nothing of this kind; no
layman permitted to speak in public.” No! Can you be igno
rant, that in an hundred churches they do it continually? In
how many (particularly in the west of England) does the parish
clerk read one of the Lessons? (In some he reads the whole
Service of the Church, perhaps cv.cry Lord’s day.) And do not
other laymen constantly do the same thing, yea, in our very
cathedrals? which, being under the more immediate inspection
of the Bishops, should be patterns to all other churches.
Perhaps it will be said, “But this is not preaching.” Yes,
but it is essentially such. For what is it to preach, but praedi
care verbum Dei; “to publish the word of God?” And this
laymen do all over England; particularly under the eye of
every Bishop in the nation.
Nay, is it not done in the Universities themselves? Who
ordained that singing-man at Christ-Church; who is likewise
utterly unqualified for the work, murdering every Lesson he
reads? not even endeavouring to read it as the word of God,
but rather as an old song! Such a layman as this, meddling
at all with the word of God, I grant, is a scandal to the
English nation.
To go a step farther: Do not the fundamental constitutions
of the University of Oxford, the statutes, even as revised by
Archbishop Laud, require every Bachelor of Arts, nine in ten
of whom are laymen, to read three public lectures in moral
philosophy, on whatever subject he chooses? My subject, I
well remember, was, “the love of God.” Now, what was
this but preaching?-
Nay, may not a man be a Doctor of Divinity even in
Oxford, though he never was ordained at all ? The instance
of Dr. Atwell, (late) Rector of Exeter College, is fresh in
cvery one's memory.
These are a few of the considcrations that may readily
occur to any thinking man on this head. But I do not rest the
cause on these. I believe it may be defended a shorter way.
14. It pleased God, by two or three Ministers of the Church
of England, to call many sinners to repentance; who, in
several parts, were undeniably turned from a course of sin,
to a course of holiness.
The Ministers of the places where this was done ought to
have received those Ministers with open arms; and to have
taken them who had just begun to serve God into their pecu
liar care; watching over them in tender love, lest they should
fall back into the snare of the devil.
Instead of this, the greater part spoke of those Ministers
as if the devil, not God, had sent them. Some repelled them
from the Lord’s table; others stirred up the people against
them, representing them, even in their public discourses, as
fellows not fit to live; Papists, heretics, traitors; conspirators
against their King and country.
And how did they watch over the sinners lately reformed?
Even as a leopard watcheth over his prey. They drove some
of them also from the Lord’s table; to which till now they had
no desire to approach. They preached all manner of evil
concerning them, openly cursing them in the name of the
Lord. They turned many out of their work; persuaded others
to do so too, and harassed them all manner of ways.
The event was, that some were wearied out, and so turned
back to their vomit again. And then these good Pastors gloried
over them, and endeavoured to shake others by their example.
15. When the Ministers by whom God had helped them
before came again to those places, great part of their work
was to begin again; (if it could be begun again;) but the
relapsers were often so hardened in sin, that no impression
could be made upon them.
What could they do in a case of so extreme necessity, where
many souls lay at stake 2
No Clergyman would assist at all. The expedient that
remained was, to find some one among themselves, who was
upright of heart, and of sound judgment in the things of God;
and to desire him to meet the rest as often as he could, in
order to confirm them, as he was able, in the ways of God,
either by reading to them, or by prayer, or by exhortation.
God immediately gave a blessing hereto. In several places,
by means of these plain men, not only those who had already
begun to run well were hindered from drawing back to per
dition; but other sinners also, from time to time, were con
verted from the error of their ways.
This plain account of the whole proceeding I take to be the
best defence of it. I know no scripture which forbids making
use of such help, in a case of such necessity. And I praise
God who has given even this help to those poor sheep, when
“their own shepherds pitied them not.”
“But does not the Scripture say, ‘No man taketh this
honour to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron?’”
Nor do these. The honour here mentioned is the Priesthood.
But they no more take upon them to be Priests than to be
Kings. They take not upon them to administer the sacra
ments, -an honour peculiar to the Priests of God. Only,
according to their power, they exhort their brethren to con
tinue in the grace of God.
“But for these laymen to exhort at all is a violation of all
order.”
What is this order of which you speak? Will it serve instead
of the knowledge and love of God? Will this order rescue
those from the snare of the devil, who are now taken captive
at his will? Will it keep them who are escaped a little way,
from turning back into Egypt? If not, how should I answer
it to God, if, rather than violate I know not what order, I
should sacrifice thousands of souls thereto? I dare not do it.
It is at the peril of my own soul.
Indeed, if by order were meant true Christian discipline,
whereby all the living members of Christ are knit together in
one, and all that are putrid and dead immediately cut off from
the body; this order I reverence, for it is of God. But where
is it to be found? in what diocese, in what town or parish,
within England or Wales? Are you Rector of a parish? Then
let us go no farther. Does this order obtain there? Nothing
less. Your parishioners are a rope of sand. As few (if any)
of them are alive to God; so they have no connexion with each
other, unless such as might be among Turks or Heathens.
Neither have you any power to cut off from that body, were it
alive, the dead and putrid members. Perhaps you have no
desire; but all are jumbled together without any care or
concern of yours.
It is plain, then, that what order is to be found is not among
you who so loudly contend for it, but among that very people
whom you continually blame for their violation and contempt
of it. The little flock you condemn is united together in one
body, by one Spirit; so that “if one member suffers, all the
members suffer with it; if one be honoured, all rejoice with
it.” Nor does any dead member long remain; but as soon as
the hope of recovering it is past, it is cut off.
Now, suppose we were willing to relinquish our charge, and
to give up this flock into your hands, would you observe the
same order as we do now with them and the other souls under
your care? You dare not; because you have respect of persons.
You fear the faces of men. You cannot; because you have not
overcome the world. You are not above the desire of earthly
things. And it is impossible you should ever have any true
order, or exercise any Christian discipline, till you are wholly
crucified to the world, till you desire nothing more but God.
Consider this matter, I entreat you, a little farther. Herc
are thirty thousand persons” (perhaps somewhat more) of whom
* In the year 1772.-EDIT.
I take care, watching over their souls as he that must give
account. In order hereto it lies upon me, (so I judge,) at the
peril of my own salvation, to know, not only their names, but
their outward and inward states, their difficulties and dangers.
Otherwise, how can I know either how to guide them aright,
or to commend them to God in prayer? Now, if I am willing
tomake these over to you, will you watch over them in the same
manner? Will you take the same care (or as much more as
you please) of each soul as I have hitherto done? Not such
curam animarum” as you have taken these ten years in your
own parish. Poor empty name ! Has not your parish been,
in fact, as much a sinecure to you as your prebend ? O what
an account have you to give to the Great Shepherd and
Bishop of souls !
18. There is one more excuse for denying this work of God,
taken from the instruments employed therein; that is, “that
they are wicked men.” And a thousand stories have been
handed about to prove it.
But you may observe, their wickedness was not heard of till
after they “went about doing good.” Their reputation for
honesty was till then unblemished. But it was impossible it
should continue so, when they were publicly employed in “tes
tifying of the world, that its deeds were evil.” It could not be
but the Scriptures should be fulfilled: “The servant is not
above his Master. If they have called thc Master of the house
Beelzebub, how much more them of his household !”
Yet I cannot but remind considerate men, in how remarkable
a manner the wisdom of God has for many years guarded against
this pretence, with respect to my brother and me in particular.
Scarce any two men in Great Britain, of our rank, have been
so held out, as it were, to all the world; especially of those who
from their childhood had always loved and studiously sought
retirement. And I had procured what I sought; I was quite
safe, as I supposed, in a little country town, when I was required
to return to Oxford, without delay, to take the charge of some
young gentlemen, by Dr. Morley, the only man then in England
to whom I could deny nothing. From that time both my bro
ther and I (utterly against our will) came to be more and more
observed and known, till we were more spoken of, than perhaps
* “A cure of souls.”—EDIT.
two so inconsiderable persons ever were before in the nation.
To make us more public still, as honest madmen at least, by a
strange concurrence of providences, overturning all our preced
ing resolutions, we were hurried away to America. However, at
our return from thence, we were resolved to retire out of the
world at once; being sated with noise, hurry, and fatigue, and
seeking nothing but to be at rest. Indeed, for a long season,
the greatest pleasure I had desired on this side eternity was,
Tacitum sylvas inter reptare salubres,
Quaerentem quicquid dignum sapiente bonoque."
And we had attained our desire. We wanted nothing. We
looked for nothing more in this world when we were dragged
out again, by earnest importunity, to preach at one place, and
another, and another, and so carried on, we knew not how,
without any design but the general one of saving souls, into
a situation, which, had it been named to us at first, would
have appeared far worse than death.
19. What a surprising apparatus of Providence was here !
And what stronger demonstrations could have been given, of
men’s acting from a zeal for God, whether it were “according
to knowledge” or no? What persons could, in the nature of
things, have been (antecedently) less liable to exception, with
regard to their moral character, at least, than those the all-wise
God hath now employed? Indeed I cannot devise what manner
of men could have been more unexceptionable on all accounts.
Had God endued us with greater natural or acquired abilities,
that verything might have been turned into an objection. Had
we becn remarkably defective, it would have been matter of
objection on the other hand. Had we been Dissenters of any
kind, or even Low-Church men, (so called,) it would have been
a great stumbling-block in the way of those who are zealous for
the Church. And yet had we continued in the impetuosity of
our High-Church zeal, neither should we have been willing to
converse with Dissenters, nor they to receive any good at our
hands. Some objections were kept out of the way, by our
known contempt of money and preferment; and others, by that
rigorous strictness of life which we exacted, not of others, but
ourselves only. Insomuch, that, twelve or fourteen years ago,
* Creeping silent through the sylvan shades,
Exploring what is wise and good in man.
the censure of one who had narrowly observed us (me in parti
cular) went no farther than this:—
Does John beyond his strength persist to go,
To his frail carcase literally foe 3
Careless of health, as if in haste to die,
And lavish time to insure eternity
So that, upon the whole, I see not what God could have done
more in this respect which he hath not done; or what instru
ments he could have employed in such a work, who would have
been less liable to exception.
20. Neither can I conceive how it was possible to do that
work, the doing of which, we are still under the strongest con
viction, is bound upon us at the peril of our own souls, in a less
exceptionable manner. We have, by the grace of God, behaved,
not only with meekness, but with all tenderness toward all men;
with all the tenderness which we conceived it was possible to
use, without betraying their souls. And from the very first
it has been our special care, to deal tenderly with our brethren,
the Ciergy. We have not willingly provoked them at any
time; neither any single Clergyman. We have not sought
occasion to publish their faults; we have not used a thousand
occasions that offered. When we were constrained to speak
something, we spake as little as we believed we could, without
offending God; and that little, though in plain and strong
words, yet as mildly and lovingly as we were able. And in
the same course we have steadily persevered, (as well as in
earnestly advising others to tread in our steps,) even though
we saw that, with regard to them, by all this we profited
nothing; though we knew we were still continually represented
as implacable enemies to the Clergy, as railers against them,
as slanderers of them, as seeking all opportunities to blacken
and asperse them. When a Clergyman himself has vehemently
accused me of doing this, I bless God he could not provoke
me to do it. I still “kept my mouth as it were with a bridle,”
and committed my cause to a higher-hand.
21. The truth is, you impute that hatred to us, which is in
your own breast. (I speak not this of all the Clergy; God for
bid! But let it fall on whom it concerns.) You, it is certain,
have shown the utmost hatred to us, and in every possible way;
unless you were actually to beat us, (of which also we are not
without precedent,) or to shoot us through the head. And if
you could prevail upon others to do this, I suppose you would
think you did God service. I do not speak without ground. I
have heard with my own ears such sermons, (in Staffordshire
particularly,) that I should not have wondered if, as soon as we
came out of the church, the people had stoned me with stones.
And it was a natural consequence of what that poor Minister
had lately heard at the Bishop’s visitation; as it was one great
cause of the miserable riots and outrages which soon followed.
It is this, my brethren, it is your own preaching, and not
ours, which sets the people against you. The very same per
sons who are diverted with those sermons, cannot but despise
you for them in their hearts; even those who on your autho
rity believe most of the assertions which you adv nce. What
then must they think of you, who know the greatest part of
what you assert to be utterly false? They may pity and pray
for you; but they can esteem you no other than false wit
nesses against God and your brethren.
22. “But what need is there,” say even some of a milder
spirit, “ of this preaching in fields and streets? Are there
not churches enough to preach in ?” No, my friend, there
are not; not for us to preach in. You forget; we are not
suffered to preach there, else we should prefer them to any
places whatever. “Well, there are Ministers enough with
out you.” Ministers enough, and churches enough ! for what?
to reclaim all the sinners within the four seas? If there
were, they would all be reclaimed. But they are not re
claimed: Therefore, it is evident that there are not churches
enough. And one plain reason why, notwithstanding all these
churches, they are no nearer being reclaimed, is this, -they
never come into a church, perhaps not once in a twelve
month, perhaps not for many years together. Will you say,
(as I have known some tender-hearted Christians,) “Then it
is their own fault; let them die, and be damned ?” I grant it
is their own fault; and so it was my fault and yours when we
went astray like sheep that were lost. Yet the Shepherd of
souls sought after us, and went after us into the wildcriness.
And “oughtest not thou to have compassion on thy fellow
servants, as he had pity on thee?” Ought not we also “to
seek,” as far as in us lies, “and to save, that which is lost?”
Behold the amazing love of God to the outcasts of men
His tender condescension to their folly! They would regard
nothing done in the usual way. All this was lost upon them.
The ordinary preaching of the word of God, they would not
even deign to hear. So the devil made sure of these careless
ones; for who should pluck them out of his hand? Then God
was moved to jealousy, and went out of the usual way to save
the souls which he had made. Then, over and above what was
ordinarily spoken in his name in all the houses of God in the
land, he commanded a voice to cry in the wilderness, “Pre
pare ye the way of the Lord. The time is fulfilled. The king
dom of heaven is at hand. Repent ye, and believe the gospel.”
23. Consider coolly, if it was not highly expedient that
something of this kind should be. How expedient, were it
only on the account of those poor sinners against their own
souls who, to all human appearance, were utterly inaccessible
every other way ! And what numbers of these are still to be
found, even in or near our most populous cities ! What mul
titudes of them were, some years since, both in Kingswood,
and the Fells about Newcastle! who, week after week, spent
the Lord’s day, either in the alc-house, or in idle diversions,
and never troubled themselves about going to church, or to
any public worship at all. Now, would you really have
desired that these poor wretches should have sinned on till
they dropped into hell? Surely you would not. But by
what other means was it possible they should have been
plucked out of the fire? Had the Minister of the parish
preached like an angel, it had profited them nothing; for
they heard him not. But when one came and said, “Yonder
is a man preaching on the top of the mountain,” they ran in
droves to hear what he would say; and God spoke to their
hearts. It is hard to conceive anything else which could
have reached them. Had it not been for field-preaching, the
uncommonness of which was the very circumstance that
recommended it, they must have run on in the error of their
way, and perished in their blood.
24. But suppose field-preaching to be, in a case of this kind,
ever so expedient or even necessary, yet who will contest with
us for this province? May we not enjoy this quiet and unmo
lested ? Unmolested, I mean, by any competitors: For who is
there among you, brethren, that is willing (examine your own
hearts) even to save souls from death at this price? Would
not you let a thousand souls perish, rather than you would be
the instruments of rescuing them thus? I do not speak now
with regard to conscience, but to the inconveniences that must
OF REASON AND It ELIGION, 23]
accompany it. Can you sustain them, if you would 9 Can
you bear the summer sun to beat upon your naked head?
Can you suffer the wintry rain or wind, from whatever
quarter it blows? Are you able to stand in the open air
without any covering or defence when God casteth abroad his
snow like wool, or scattereth his hoar-frost like ashcs? And
yet these are some of the smallest inconveniences which ac
company field-preaching. Far beyond all these, are the contra
diction of sinners, the scoffs both of the great vulgar and the
small; contempt and reproach of every kind; often more than
verbal affronts, stupid, brutal violence, sometimes to the hazard
of health, or limbs, or life. Brethren, do you envy us this
honour? What, I pray, would buy you to be a field-preacher?
Or what, think you, could induce any man of common sense
to continue therein one year, unless he had a full conviction
in himself that it was the will of God concerning him ?
Upon this conviction it is (were we to submit to these
things on any other motive whatsoever, it would furnish you
with a better proof of our distraction than any that has yet
been found) that we now do, for the good of poor souls, what
you cannot, will not, dare not do: And we desire not that
you should. But this one thing we may reasonably desire of
you,—Do not increase the difficulties, which are already so
great, that, without the mighty power of God, we must sink
under them. Do not assist in trampling down a little hand
ful of men, who, for the present, stand in the gap between
ten thousand poor wretches and destruction, till you find
some others to take their places.
25. Highly needful it is that some should do this, lest
those poor souls be lost without remedy: And it should re
joice the hearts of all who desire the kingdom of God should
come, that so many of them have been snatched already from
the mouth of the lion, by an uncommon, though not unlaw
ful, way. This circumstance, therefore, is no just excuse for
not acknowledging the work of God; especially, if we con
sider, that whenever it has pleased God to work any great
work upon the earth, even from the earliest times, he hath
stepped more or less out of the common way;—whether to
excite the attention of a greater number of people than might
otherwise have regarded it; or to separate the proud and
haughty of heart, from those of an humble, childlike spirit; the
former of whom he foresaw, trusting in their own wisdom, would
fall on that stone and be broken; while the latter, inquiring with
simplicity, would soon know of the work, that it was of God.
26. “Nay,” say some, “but God is a God of wisdom: And
it is his work to give understanding. Whereas this man is
one of them, and he is a fool. You see the fruits of their
preaching.” No, my friend, you do not. That is your mis
take. A fool very possibly he may be. So it appears by his
talking, perhaps writing too. But this is none of the fruits of
our preaching. He was a fool before ever he heard us. We
found and are likely to leave him so. Therefore his folly is
not to be imputed to us, even if it continue to the day of his
death. As we were not the cause, so we undertake not the
cure, of disorders of this kind. No fair man, therefore, can
excuse himself thus, from acknowledging the work of God.
Perhaps you will say, “He is not a natural fool, neither; but
he is so ignorant. He knows not the first principles of religion.”
It is very possible. But have patience with him, and he will
know them by and by; yea, if he be in earnest to save his
soul, far sooner than you can conceive. And, in the mean time,
neither is this an objection of any weight. Many, when they
begin to hear us, may, without any fault of ours, be utter
strangers to the whole of religion. But this is no incurable
disease. Yet a little while, and they may be wise unto salvation.
Is the ignorance you complain of among this people (you
who object to the people more than to their teachers) of ano
ther kind? Do not they “know how in meekness to reprove
or instruct those that oppose themselves?” I believe what
you say: All of them do not; they have not put on gentle
ness and longsuffering. I wish they had : Pray for them
that they may ; that they may be mild and patient toward all
men. But what, if they are not? Sure, you do not make
this an argument that God hath not sent us! Our Lord
came, and we come, “not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance; ” passionate sinners, (such as these whereof you
complain,) as well as those of every other kind. Nor can it
be expected they should be wholly delivered from their sin as
soon as they begin to hear his word.
27. A greater stumbling-block than this is laid before you,
by those that “say and do not.” Such, I take it for granted,
will be among us, although we purge them out as fast as we
can; persons that talk much of religion, that commend the
Preachers, perhaps are diligent in hearing them; it may be,
read all their books, and sing their hymns; and yet no change
is wrought in their hearts. Were they of old time as lions in
their houses? They are the same still. Were they (in low
life) slothful or intemperate? Were they tricking or dishonest,
over-reaching or oppressive Or did they use to borrow and
not pay? The Ethiopian hath not changed his skin. Were
they (in high life) delicate, tender, self-indulgent? Were they
nice in furniture or apparel? Were they fond of trifles, or of
their own dear persons? The leopard hath not changed her
spots. Yet their being with us for a time proves no more
than that we have not the miraculous discernment of spirits.
Others you may find, in whom there was a real change. But
it was only for a season. They are now turned back, and are
two-fold more the children of hell than before. Yet neither is
this any manner of proof that the former work was not of God.
No, not though these apostates should, with the utmost confi
dence, say all manner of evil against us. I expect they should.
For every other injury hath been forgiven, and will be to the
end of the world. But hardly shall any one forgive the intoler
able injury of almost persuading him to be a Christian. When
these men, therefore, who were with us, but went out from
among us, assert things that may cause your ears to tingle, if
you consider either the Scripture or the nature of man it will
not stagger you at all : Much less will it excuse you for not
acknowledging the work in general to be of God.
28. But to all this it may possibly be replied, “When you
bring your credentials with you, when youprove by miracles what
you assert, then we will acknowledge that God hath sent you.”
What is it you would have us prove by miracles? that the
doctrines we preach are true? This is not the way to prove
that. (As our first Reformers replied to those of the Church of
Rome, who, you may probably remember, were continually
urging them with this very demand.) We prove the doctrineswe
preach by Scripture and reason, and, if need be, by antiquity.
What else is it then we are to prove by miracles?
Is it, (1.) That A. B. was for many years without God in
the world, a common swearer, a drunkard, a Sabbath-breaker?
Or, (2.) That he is not so now?
Or, (3.) That he continued so till he heard us preach, and
from that time was another man?
Not so. The proper way to prove these facts is by the testi
mony of competent witnesses; and these witnesses are ready,
whenever required, to give full evidence of them.
Or, would you have us prove by miracles,
(4.) That this was not done by our own power or holiness?
that God only is able to raise the dead, those who are dead
in trespasses and sins? Nay, if you “hear not Moses and
the Prophets” and Apostles, on this head, neither would you
believe, “though one rose from the dead.”
It is therefore utterly unreasonable and absurd to require
or expect the proof of miracles, in questions of such a kind as
are always decided by proofs of quite another nature.
29. “But you relate them yourself.” I relate just what I
saw, from time to time: And this is true, that some of those
circumstances seem to go beyond the ordinary course of
nature. But I do not peremptorily determine, whether they
were supernatural or no; much less do I rest upon them
either the proof of other facts, or of the doctrines which I
preach. I prove these in the ordinary way; the one by
testimony, the other by Scripture and reason.
“But if you can work miracles when you please, is not this
the surest way of proving them? This would put the matter
out of dispute at once, and supersede all other proof.”
You seem to lie under an entire mistake, both as to the
nature and use of miracles. It may reasonably be questioned,
whether there ever was that man living upon earth, except
the man Christ Jesus, that could work miracles when he
pleased. God only, when he pleased, exerted that power, and
by whomsoever it pleased him.
But if a man could work miracles when he pleased, yet there
is no Scripture authority, nor even example, for doing it in
order to satisfy such a demand as this. I do not read that
either our Lord, or any of his Apostles, wrought any miracle on
such an occasion. Nay, how sharply does our Lord rebuke
those who made a demand of this kind ' When “certain of
the Scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying, Master, we
would see a sign from thee;” (observe, this was their method of
answering the strong reasons whereby he had just proved the
works in question to be of God!) “he answered and said to
them, An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign;
but there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the Pro
phet Jonas.” (Matt. xii. 38, 39.) “An evil and adulterous
generation l’” else they would not have needed such a kind
of proof. Had they been willing to do his will, they would,
without this, have known that the doctrine was of God.
Miracles, therefore, are quite needless in such a case. Nor
are they so conclusive a proof as you imagine. If a man could
and did work them in defence of any doctrine, yet this would
not supersede other proof; for there may be tepata \revôovs,
“lying wonders,” miracles wrought in support of falsehood.
Still, therefore, his doctrine would remain to be proved from
the proper topics of Scripture and reason: And these even
without miracles are sufficient; but miracles without these are
not. Accordingly, our Saviour and all his Apostles, in the
midst of their greatest miracles, never failed to prove every
doctrine they taught by clear Scripture and cogent reason.
30. I presume, by this time you may perceive the gross
absurdity of demanding miracles in the present case; seeing
one of the propositions in question, (over and above our gene
ral doctrines) viz., “That sinners are reformed,” can only be
proved by testimony; and the other, “This cannot be done
but by the power of God,” necds no proof, being self-evident.
“Why, I did once myself rejoice to hear,” says a grave citi
zen, with an air of great importance, “that so many sinners
were reformed, till I found they were only turned from one
wickedness to another; that they were turned from cursing or
swearing, or drunkenness, into a mo less damnable sin, that of
schism.”
Do you know what you say? You have, I am afraid, a con
fused huddle of ideas in your head; and I doubt you have not
capacity to clear them up yourself, nor coolness enough to
receive help from others.
However, I will try. What is schism? Have you any deter
minate idea of it? I ask the rather, because I have found, by
repeated experiments, that a common English tradesman
receives no more light when he hears or reads, “This is
schism,” than if he heard or read,—
Bombalio, stridor, clangor, taratantara, murmur.
Honest neighbour, do not be angry. Lay down your ham
mer, and let us talk a little on this head.
You say, we are in the damnable sin of schism, and therefore
in as bad a state as adulterers or murderers.
I ask once more, What do you mean by schism? “Schism !
schism why, it is separating from the Church.” Ay, so it is.
And yet every separating from the Church to which we once
belonged is not schism; else you will make all the English to
be schismatics, by separating from the Church of Rome. “But
we had just cause.” So doubtless we had; whereas schism is a
causeless separation from the Church of Christ. So far so good.
But you have many steps to take before you can make good that
conclusion, that a separation from a particular national Church,
such as the Church of England is, whether with sufficient cause
or without, comes under the scriptural notion of schism.
However, taking this for granted, will you aver in cool blood,
that all who die in such a separation, that is, every one who dies
a Quaker, a Baptist, an Independent, or a Presbyterian, is as
infallibly damned as if he died in the act of murder or adultery?
Surely you start at the thought ! It makes even nature recoil.
How then can you reconcile it to the love that “hopeth all
things?”
31. But whatever state they are in, who causelessly separate
from the Church of England, it affects not those of whom we
are speaking; for they do not separate from it at all.
You may easily be convinced of this, if you will only weigh
the particulars following:
(1) A great part of these went to no church at all before
they heard us preach. They no more pretended to belong to
the Church of England, than to the Church of Muscovy. If,
therefore, they went to no church now, they would be no farther
from the Church than they were before.
(2.) Those who did sometimes go to church before, go three
times as often now. These, therefore, do not separate from the
Church. Nay, they are united to it more closely than before.
(3.) Those who never went to church at all before, do go now,
at all opportunities. Will common sense allow any one to say,
that these are separated from the Church?
(4.) The main question is, Are they turned from doing the
works of the devil, to do the works of God? Do they now live
soberly, righteously, and godly, in the present world? If they
do, if they live according to the directions of the Church, believe
her doctrines, and join in her ordinances; with what face can
you say, that these men separate from the Church of England?
32. But in what state are they whom the Clergy and Gentry
(and perhaps you for one) have successfully laboured to preserve
from this damnable sin of schism, whom you have kept from
hearing these men, and separating from the Church?
Is not the drunkard that was, a drunkard still? Inquire of
his poor wife and family. Is not the common swearer still hor
ribly crying to God for damnation upon his soul? Is not the
sinner in every other kind, exactly the same man still? Not
better at least, if he be not worse, than he was ten years ago.
Now, consider, (1.) Does the Church of England gain either
honour, or strength, or blessing, by such wretches as these
calling themselves her members? by ten thousand drunkards,
or whoremongers, or common swearers? Nay, ought she not
immediately to spew them out, to renounce all fellowship with
them? Would she not be far better without them than with
them? Let any man of reason judge.
(2.) Is the drunkard's calling himself of the Church of Eng
land, of any more use to him than to the Church? Will this
save him from hell, if he die in his sin? Will it not rather
increase his damnation?
(3.) Is not a drunkard of any other Church just as good as
a drunkard of the Church of England? Yea, is not a drunken
Papist as much in the favour of God as a drunken Protestant?
(4.) Is not a cursing, swearing Turk, (if there be such an
one to be found) full as acceptable to God, as a cursing,
swearing Christian?
Nay, (5.) If there be any advantage, does it not lie on the
side of the former? Is he not the less inexcusable of the two,
as sinning against less light?
O why will you sink these poor souls deeper into perdition
than they are sunk already? Why will you prophesy unto them,
“Peace, peace,” when there is no peace? Why, if you do it not
yourself, (whether you cannot, or will not, God knoweth,) should
you hinder us from “guiding them into the way of peace?”
33. Will you endeavour to excuse yourself by saying, “There
are not many who are the better for your preaching; and these
by and by will be as bad as ever; as such and such an one is
already?”
I would to God I could set this in a just light! But I can
not: All language fails.
God begins a glorious work in our land. You set yourself
against it with all your might, to prevent its beginning where
it does not yet appear, and to destroy it wherever it does. In
part you prevail. You keep many from hearing the word that is
able to save their souls. Others who had heard it, you induce
to turn back from God, and to list under the devil’s banner
again. Then you make the success of your own wickedness
an excuse for not acknowledging the work of God! You urge,
that not many sinners were reformed; and that some of those
are now as bad as ever !
Whose fault is this? Is it ours, or your own 2 Why have
not thousands more been reformed ? Yea, for every one who
is now turned to God, why are there not ten thousand 7
Because you and your associates laboured so heartily in the
cause of hell; because you and they spared no pains, either to
prevent or to destroy the work of God! By using all the
power and wisdom you had, you hindered thousands from
hearing the gospel which they might have found to be the
power of God unto salvation. Their blood is upon your heads.
By inventing, or countenancing, or retailing lies, some refined,
some gross and palpable, you hindered others from profiting by
what they did hear. You are answerable to God for these
souls also. Many who began to taste the good word, and run
the way of God’s commandments, you, by various methods,
prevailed on to hear it no more: So they soon drew back to
perdition. But know, that, for every one of these also, God
will require an account of you in the day of judgment.
34. And yet, in spite of all the malice, and wisdom, and
strength, not only of men, but of “principalities and powers,”
of the “rulers of the darkness of this world,” of the “wicked
spirits in high places,” there are thousands found who are
turned from “dumb idols to serve the living and true God.”
What a harvest then might we have seen before now, if all who
say they are “on the Lord’s side,” had come, as in all reason
they ought, “to the help of the Lord against the mighty!”
Yea, had they only not opposed the work of God, had they
only refrained from his messengers, might not the trumpet of
God have been heard long since in every corner of our land;
and thousands of sinners in every county been brought to
“fear God and honour the King?”
Judge of what immense service we might have been, even in
this single point, both to our King and country. All who hear
and regard the word we preach, “honour the King” for God's
sake. They “render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's,”
as well as “unto God the things that are God’s.” They have no
conception of piety without loyalty; knowing “the powers that
be are ordained of God.” I pray God to strengthen all that
are of this mind, how many soever they be | But might there
not have been at this day a hundred thousand in England, thus
minded, more than are now? Yea verily, even by our ministry,
had not they who should have strengthened us, weakened our
hands.
35. Surely you are not wise! What advantages do you throw
away ! What opportunities do you lose ! Such as, another day,
you may earnestly seek, and, nevertheless, may not find them.
For if it please God to remove us, whom will you find to
supply our place? We are in all things “your servants for
Jesus’s sake; ” though the more we love you, the less we are
loved. Let us be employed, not in the highest, but in the
meanest, and not in the easiest, but the hottest, service. Base
and plenty we leave to those that want them. Let us go on
in toil, in weariness, in painfulness, in cold or hunger, so we
may but testify the gospel of the grace of God. The rich, the
honourable, the great, we are thoroughly willing (if it be the
will of our Lord) to leave to you. Only let us alone with the
poor, the vulgar, the base, the outcasts of men. Take also to
yourselves the saints of the world: But suffer us “to call sinners
to repentance; ” cven the most vile, the most ignorant, the
most abandoned, the most fierce and savage of whom we can
hear. To these we will go forth in the manne of our Lord, de
siring nothing, receiving nothing of any man, (save the bread
we eat, while we are under his roof) and lot it be scen whether
God hath sent us. Only let not your hands, who fear the Lord,
be upon us. Why should we be stricken of you any more?
IV. 1. Surely ye are without excuse, all who do not yet
know the day of your visitation the day wherein the great
God, who hath been forgotten among us days without number,
is arising at once to be avenged of his adversaries, and to
visit and redeem his people. Are not his judgments and
mercies both abroad? and still will ye not learn righteousness?
Is not the Lord passing by? Doth not a great and strong
wind already begin “to rend the mountains and to break in
pieces the rocks before the Lord?” Is not the earthquake
also felt already? and a fire hath begun to burn in his anger.
Who knoweth what will be the end thereof.” But at the
same time, he is speaking to many in “a still, small voice.”
He that hath ears to hear, let him hear, lest he be suddenly
destroyed, and that without remedy :
2. What excuse can possibly be made for those who are
regardless of such a season as this? who are, at such a crisis,
stupid, senseless, unapprehensive? caring for none of these
things; who do not give themselves the pains to think about
them, but are still easy and unconcerned ? What! can there
ever be a point on which it more behoves you to think; and
that with the coolest and deepest attention? As long as the
heaven and the earth remain, can there be anything of so vast
importance, as God’s last call to a guilty land, just perishing
in its iniquity?
You, with those round about you, deserved long ago to have
“drank the dregs of the cup of trembling; ” yea, to have been
“punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power.” But he hath
not dealt with you according to your sins, neither rewarded
you after your iniquities. And once more he is mixing
mercy with judgment. Once more he is crying aloud, “Turn
ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house
of Israel?” And will you not deign to give him the hearing?
If you are not careful to answer him in this matter, do not
still shut your eyes, and stop your ears, and harden your
stubborn heart. O beware, lest God laugh at your calamity,
and mock when your fear cometh !
3. Will you plead that you have other concerns to mind;
that other business engages your thoughts? It does so indeed?
But this is your foolishness; this is the very thing that leaves
you without excuse. For what business can beof equal moment:
The mariner may have many concerns to mind, and many
businesses to engage his thoughts; but not when the ship is
sinking. In such a circumstance (it is your own) you have but
one thing to think of,-save the ship and your own life together!
And the higher post you are in, the more deeply intent should
you be on this one point. Is this a time for diversions; for
eating and drinking, and rising up to play? Keep the ship.
above water. Let all else go, and mind this one thing !
4. Perhaps you will say, “So I do: I do mind this one thing,
—how to save the sinking nation. And therefore now I must
think of arms and provisions. I have no time now to think of
religion.” This is exactly as if the mariner should say, “Now
I must think of my guns and stores. I have no time now to
think of the hold.” Why, man, you must think of this, or perish.
It is there the leak is sprung. Stop that, or you and all
your stores will go together to the bottom of the sea.
Is not this your very case? Then, whatever you do, stop
the leak; else you go to the bottom I do not speak against
your stores: They are good in their kind; and it may be well
they are laid in. But all your stores will not save the sink
ing ship, unless you can stop the leak. Unless you can some
way keep out these floods of ungodliness, that are still con
tinually pouring in, you must soon be swallowed up in the
great deep, in the abyss of God’s judgments. This, this is
the destruction of the English nation. It is vice, bursting in
on every side, that is just ready to sink us into slavery first,
and then into the nethermost hell. “Who is a wise man, and
endued with knowledge among you?” Let him think of this.
Think of this, all that love your country, or that care for
your own souls. If now especially you do not think of this
one thing, you have no excuse before God or man.
5. Little more excuse have you who are still in doubt con
cerning this day of your visitation. For you have all the proof
that you can reasonably expect or desire, all that the nature of
the thing requires. That in many places, abundance of noto
rious sinners are totally reformed, is declared by a thousand eye
and ear witnesses both of their present and past behaviour.
And you are sensible, the proof of such a point as this must,
in the nature of things, rest upon testimony. And that God
alone is able to work such areformation, you know all the Scrip
tures testify. What would you have more? What pretence
can you have for doubting any longer? You have not the least
room to expect or desire any other or any stronger evidence.
I trust you are not of those who fortify themselves against
conviction; who are resolved they will never believe this.
They ask, “Who are these men?” We tell them plainly;
but they credit us not. Another and another of their own
friends is convinced, and tells them the same thing. But
their answer is ready, “Are you turned Methodist too?” So
their testimony likewise goes for nothing. Now, how is
it possible these should ever be convinced? for they will
believe none but those who speak on one side.
6. Do you delay fixing your judgment till you see a work
of God, without any stumbling-block attending it? That
never was yet, nor ever will. “It must needs be that
offences will come.” And scarce ever was there such a work
of God before, with so few as have attended this.
When the Reformation began, what mountainous offences
lay in the way of even the sincere members of the Church of
Rome! They saw such failings in those great men, Luther
and Calvin Their vehement tenaciousness of their own
opinions; their bitterness toward all who differed from them;
their impatience of contradiction, and utter want of forbear
ance, even with their own brethren.
But the grand stumbling-block of all was their open,
avowed separation from the Church; their rejecting so many
of the doctrines and practices, which the others accounted
the most sacred; and their continual invectives against the
Church they separated from, so much sharper than Michael’s
reproof of Satan.
Were there fewer stumbling-blocks attending the Reform
ation in England? Surely no: For what was Henry the
Eighth ? Consider either his character, his motives to the
work, or his manner of pursuing it! And even King
Edward’s ministry we cannot clear of persecuting in their
turns, yea, and burning heretics. The main stumbling-block
also still remained, viz., open separation from the Church.
7. Full as many were the offences that lay in the way of
even the sincere members of the Church of England, when the
people called Quakers first professed that they were sent of
God to reform the land. Whether they were or no is beside
our question; it suffices for the present purpose to observe,
that over and above their open, avowed, total separation from
the Church, and their vehement invectives against many of her
doctrines, and the whole frame of her discipline, they spent
their main strength in disputing about opinions and externals,
rather than in preaching faith, mercy, and the love of God.
In these respects the case was nearly the same when the Bap
tists first appeared in England. They immediately commenced
a warm dispute, not concerning the vitals of Christianity, but
concerning the manner and time of administering one of the
external ordinances of it. And as their opinion hereof totally
differed from that of all the other members of the Church of
England, so they soon openly declared their separation from
it, not without sharp censures of those that continued therein.
8. The same occasion of offence was, in a smaller degree,
given by the Presbyterians and Independents; for they also
spent great part of their time and strength in opposing the
commonly-received opinions concerning some of the circum
stantials of religion; and, for the sake of these, separated
from the Church.
But I do not include that venerable man, Mr. Philip Henry,
nor any that were of his spirit, in this number. I know they
abhorred contending about externals. Neither did they sepa
rate themselves from the Church. They continued therein till
they were driven out, whether they would or no. I cannot but
tenderly sympathize with these; and the more, because this is
in part our own case. Warm men spare no pains, at this very
day, to drive us out of the Church. They cry out to the peo
ple, wherever one of us comes, “A mad dog, a mad dog !” if
haply we might fly for our lives, as many have done before us.
And sure it is, we should have complied with their desire, we
should merely for peace and quietness have left the Church
long before now, but that we could not in conscience do it.
And it is on this single motive, it is for conscience sake, that
we still continue therein; and shall continue, (God being our
helper) unless they by violence thrust us out.
9. But to return : What are the stumbling-blocks in the
present case, compared to those in any of the preceding?
We do not dispute concerning any of the externals or cir
cumstantials of religion. There is no room; for we agree with
you therein. We approve of, and adhere to, them all; all that
we learned together when we were children, in our Catechism
and Common-Prayer Book. We were born and bred up in your
own Church, and desire to die therein. We always were, and
are now, zealous for the Church; only not with a blind, angry
zeal. We hold, and ever have done, the same opinions which
you and we received from our forefathers. But we do not lay
the main stress of our religion on any opinions, right or wrong;
neither do we ever begin, or willingly join in, any dispute con
cerning them. The weight of all religion, we apprehend, rests
on holiness of heart and life. And consequently, wherever we
come, we press this with all our might. How wide then is
the difference between our case and the case of any of those
that are above mentioned ! They avowedly separated from the
Church: We utterly disavow any such design. They severely,
and almost continually, inveighed against the doctrines and dis
cipline of the Church they left: We approve both the doctrincs
and discipline of our Church, and inveigh only against ungod
liness and unrighteousness. They spent great part of their time
and strength in contending about externals and circumstan
tials: We agree with you in both; so that having no room to
spend any time in such vain contention, we have our desire of
spending and being spent, in promoting plain, practical reli
gion. How many stumbling-blocks are removed out of your
way! Why do not you acknowledge the work of God?
10. If you say, “Because you hold opinions which I cannot
believe are true:” I answer, Believe them true or false; I will
not quarrel with you about any opinion. Only see that your
heart be right toward God, that you know and love the Lord
Jesus Christ; that you love your neighbour, and walk as your
Master walked; and I desire no more. I am sick of opinions:
I am weary to bear them. My soul loathcs this frothy food.
Give me solid and substantial religion; give me an humble,
gentle lover of God and man; a man full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy; a man laying
himself out in the work of faith, the patience of hope, the
labour of love. Let my soul be with these Christians, whereso
cver they are, and whatsoever opinion they are of “Whoso
ever” thus “doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven,
the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.”
11. Inexcusably infatuated must you be, if you can even
doubt whether the propagation of this religion be of God!
Only more inexcusable are those unhappy men who oppose,
contradict, and blaspheme it.
How long will you stop your ears against Him that still
crieth, “Why persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to kick
against the pricks;” for a man to “contend with his Maker.”
How long will you despise the well-known advice of a great and
learned man?—“Refrain from these men, and let them alone.
If this work be of man, it will come to nought. But if it be of
God, ye cannot overthrow it.” And why should you “be
found even to fight against God?” If a man fight with God,
shall he prevail? “Canst thou thunder with a voice like
him?” Make haste! Fall down Humble thyself before
him, lest he put forth his hand, and thou perish !
12. How long will you fight under the banner of the great
enemy of God and man? You are now in his service; you are
“taking part with the devil” against God. Even supposing
there were no other proof, this would undeniably appear from
the goodly company annong whom you are enlisted, and who war
one and the same warfare. I have heard some affirm, that the
most bitter enemies to the present work of God were Pharisees.
They meant, men who had the form of godliness, but denied the
power of it. But I cannot say so. The sharpest adversaries
thereof whom I have hitherto known (unless one might except a
few honourable men whom I may be excused from naming)
were the scum of Cornwall, the rabble of Bilston and Darlaston,
the wild beasts of Walsal, and the turnkeys of Newgate.
13. Might not the sight of these troops show any reasonable
man to what General they belonged; as well as the weapons
they never fail to use?—the most horrid oaths and execrations,
and lawless violence, carrying away as a flood whatsoever it is
which stands before it; having no eyes, nor ears, no regard to
the loudest cries of reason, justice, or humanity. Can you join
heart or hands with these any longer? with such an infamous,
scandalous rabble-rout, roaring and raging as if they were just
broke loose, with their captain Apollyon, from the bottomless
pit? Does it not rather concern you, and that in the highest
degree, as well as every friend to his King and country, every
lover of peace, justice, and mercy, immediately to join and
stop any such godless crew, as they would join to stop a fire
just beginning to spread, or an inundation of the sea?
14. If, on the contrary, you join with that godless crew,
and streng'hen their hands in their wickedness, must not you,
in all reason, be accounted (like them) a public enemy of
mankind? And indeed such must every one appear, in the
eye of unprejudiced reason, who opposes, directly or indirectly,
the reformation of mankind. By reformation, I mean the
bringing them back (not to this or that system of opinions, or
this or that set of rites and ceremonies, how decent and
significant soever; but) to the calm love of God and one
another, to an uniform practice of justice, mercy, and truth.
With what colour can you lay any claim to humanity, to
benevolence, to public spirit, if you can once open your
mouth, or stir one finger, against such a reformation as this?
It is a poor excuse to say, “O, but the people are brought
into several erroneous opinions!” It matters notastraw, whether
they are or no; (I speak of such opinions as do not touch the
foundation;) it is scarce worth while to spend ten words about
it. Whether they embrace this religious opinion or that, is no
more concern to me, than whether they embrace this or that
system of astronomy. Are they brought to holy tempers and
holy lives? This is mine, and should be your, inquiry; since on
this, both social and personal happiness depend, happiness
temporal and eternal. Are they brought to the love of God
and the love of their neighbour? Pure religion and undefiled
is this. How long then will you “darken counsel by words
without knowledge?” The plain religion now propagated is Love.
And can you oppose this without being an enemy to mankind?
15. No, nor without being an enemy to your King and coun
try; especially at such a time as this. For, however men of no
thought may not see or regard it, or hectoring cowards may
brave it out, it is evident to every man of calm reflection, that
our nation stands on the very brink of destruction. And why
are we thus, but because “the cry of our wickedness is goneup to
heaven?” because we have so exceedingly, abundantly, beyond
measure, “corrupted our ways before the Lord?” and because
to all our other abominations we have added the open fighting
against God; the not only rejecting, but even denying, yea,
blaspheming his last offers of mercy; the hindering others
who were desirous to close there with; the despitefully using
his messengers, and the variously troubling and oppressing
those who did accept of his grace, break off their sins, and
turn to him with their whole heart.
16. I cannot but believe, it is chiefly on this account that
God hath now “a controversy with our land.” And must not
any considerate man be inclined to form the same judgment, if
he reviews the state of public affairs for only a few years last
past? I will not enter into particulars; but, in general, can
you possibly help observing, that, whenever there has been any
thing like a public attempt to suppress this new sect, (for so it
was artfully represented,) another and another public trouble
arose? This has been repeated so often, that it is surprising
any man of sense can avoid taking notice of it. May we “turn”
at length “to Him that smiteth us, hearing the rod and Him
that appointeth it !” May we “humble ourselves under the
mighty hand of God,” before the great deep swallow us up!
17. Just now, viz., on the 4th of this instant December, the
Reverend Mr. Henry Wickham, one of His Majesty's Justices
of Peace for the West-riding of Yorkshire, writes an order
*
To the Constable of Keighley, commanding him, “to convey
the body of Jonathan Reeves” (whose real crime is, the calling
sinners to repentance) “to His Majesty’s gaol and castle of
York; suspected,” said the precept, “ of being a spy among us,
and a dangerous man to the person and government of His
Majesty King George.”
God avert the omen I I fear this is no presage either of the
repentance or deliverance of our poor nation
18. If we will not turn and repent, if we will harden our
hearts, and acknowledge neither his judgments nor mercies;
what remains, but the fulfilling of that dreadful word, which
God spake by the Prophet Ezekiel: “Son of man, when the
land sinneth against me by trespassing grievously, then will I
stretch forth my hand upon it, and break the staff of the bread
thereof—Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job,
were in it, they should deliver but their own souls. Or if I
bring a sword upon that land, and say, Sword, go through the
land:—Or if I send a pestilence into that land, and pour out
my fury upon it in blood:—Though Noah, Daniel, and Job,
were in it, as I live, saith the Lord God, they shall deliver
neither son nor daughter; they shall but deliver their own
souls by their righteousness.” (xiv. 13, 14, 17, 19, 20.)
“Yet, behold, therein shall be left a remnant, that shall be
brought forth, both sons and daughters.—And ye shall be com
forted concerning the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem.
–And ye shall know that I have not done without cause all
that I have done in it, saith the Lord God.” (Verses 22, 23.)
