A Letter to a Roman Catholic
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. YoU have heard ten thousand stories of us who are
commonly called Protestants, of which if you believe only
one in a thousand, you must think very hardly of us. But
this is quite contrary to our Lord's rule, “Judge not, that ye
be not judged;” and has many ill consequences; particularly
this,—it inclines us to think as hardly of you. Hence we are
on both sides less willing to help one another, and more
ready to hurt each other. Hence brotherly love is utterly
destroyed; and each side, looking on the other as monsters,
gives way to anger, hatred, malice, to every unkind affection;
which have frequently broke out in such inhuman barbarities
as are scarce named among the Heathens.
2. Now, can nothing be done, even allowing us on both
sides to retain our own opinions, for the softening our hearts
towards each other, the giving a check to this flood of
unkindness, and restoring at least some small degree of love
among our neighbours and countrymen? Do not you wish
for this? Are you not fully convinced, that malice, hatred,
revenge, bitterness, whether in us or in you, in our hearts or
yours, are an abomination to the Lord? Be our opinions
right, or be they wrong, these tempers are undeniably
wrong. They are the broad road that leads to destruction,
to the methermost hell.
3. I do not suppose all the bitterness is on your side. I
know there is too much on our side also; so much, that I
fear many Protestants (so called) will be angry at me too, for
writing to you in this manner; and will say, “It is showing
you too much favour; you deserve no such treatment at our
hands.”
4. But I think you do. I think you deserve the tenderest
regard I can show, were it only because the same God hath
raised you and me from the dust of the earth, and has made
us both capable of loving and enjoying him to eternity; were it
only because the Son of God has bought you and me with
his own blood. How much more, if you are a person fearing
God, (as without question many of you are,) and studying to
have a conscience void of offence towards God and towards
man?
5. I shall therefore endeavour, as mildly and inoffensively
as I can, to remove in some measure the ground of your
unkindness, by plainly declaring what our belief and what
our practice is; that you may see, we are not altogether such
monsters as perhaps you imagined us to be.
A true Protestant may express his belief in these or the
like words:—
6. As I am assured that there is an infinite and independent
being, and that it is impossible there should be more than one;
so I believe, that this One God is the Father of all things,
especially of angels and men; that he is in a peculiar manner
the Father of those whom he regenerates by his Spirit, whom
he adopts in his Son, as co-heirs with him, and crowns with
an eternal inheritance; but in a still higher sense the Father
of his only Son, whom he hath begotten from eternity.
I believe this Father of all, not only to be able to do what
soever pleaseth him, but also to have an eternal right of
making what and when and how he pleaseth, and of possessing
and disposing of all that he has made; and that he of his own
goodness created heaven and earth, and all that is therein.
7. I believe that Jesus of Nazareth was the Saviour of the
world, the Messiah so long foretold; that, being anointed
with the Holy Ghost, he was a Prophet, revealing to us the
whole will of God; that he was a Priest, who gave himself a
sacrifice for sin, and still makes intercession for transgressors;
that he is a King, who has all power in heaven and in earth,
and will reign till he has subdued all things to himself.
I believe he is the proper, natural Son of God, God of
God, very God of very God; and that he is the Lord of all,
baving absolute, supreme, universal dominion over all things;
but more peculiarly our Lord, who believe in him, both by
conquest, purchase, and voluntary obligation.
I believe that he was made man, joining the human nature
with the divine in one person; being conceived by the
singular operation of the Holy Ghost, and born of the blessed
Virgin Mary, who, as well after as before she brought him
forth, continued a pure and unspotted virgin.
WOL. X.
I believe he suffered inexpressible pains both of body and
soul, and at last death, even the death of the cross, at the time
that Pontius Pilate governed Judea, under the Roman Emperor;
that his body was then laid in the grave, and his soul went to
the place of separate spirits; that the third day he rose again
from the dead; that he ascended into heaven; where he
remains in the midst of the throne of God, in the highest power
and glory, as Mediator till the end of the world, as God to
all eternity; that, in the end, he will come down from heaven,
to judge every man according to his works; both those who
shall be then alive, and all who have died before that day.
8. I believe the infinite and eternal Spirit of God, equal
with the Father and the Son, to be not only perfectly holy in
himself, but the immediate cause of all holiness in us;
enlightening our understandings, rectifying our wills and
affections, renewing our natures, uniting our persons to
Christ, assuring us of the adoption of sons, leading us in our
actions; purifying and sanctifying our souls and bodies, to a
full and eternal enjoyment of God.
9. I believe that Christ by his Apostles gathered unto him
self a Church, to which he has continually added such as
shall be saved; that this catholic, that is, universal, Church,
extending to all nations and all ages, is holy in all its mem
bers, who have fellowship with God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; that they have fellowship with the holy angels,
who constantly minister to these heirs of salvation; and with
all the living members of Christ on earth, as well as all who
are departed in his faith and fear.
10. I believe Godforgives all the sins of them that truly repent
and unfeignedly believe his holy gospel; and that, at the last
day, all men shall rise again, every one with his own body.
I believe, that as the unjust shall, after their resurrection,
be tormented in hell for ever, so the just shall enjoy
inconceivable happiness in the presence of God to all eternity.
ll. Now, is there anything wrong in this? Is there any
one point which you do not believe as well as we?
But you think we ought to believe more. We will not
now enter into the dispute. Only let me ask, If a man
sincerely believes thus much, and practises accordingly, can
any one possibly persuade you to think that such a man shall
perish everlastingly?
12. “But does he practise accordingly?” If he does not,
we grant all his faith will not save him. And this leads me
to show you, in few and plain words, what the practice of a
true Protestant is.
I say, a true Protestant; for I disclaim all common
swearers, Sabbath-breakers, drunkards; all whoremongers,
liars, cheats, extortioners; in a word, all that live in open
sin. These are no Protestants; they are no Christians at
all. Give them their own name; they are open Heathens.
They are the curse of the nation, the bane of society, the
shame of mankind, the scum of the earth.
13. A true Protestant believes in God, has a full confidence
in his mercy, fears him with a filial fear, and loves him with all
his soul. He worships God in spirit and in truth, in everything
gives him thanks; calls upon him with his heart as well as
his lips, at all times and in all places; honours his holy name
and his word, and serves him truly all the days of his life.
Now, do not you yourself approve of this? Is there any
one point you can condemn? Do not you practise as well as
approve of it? Can you ever be happy if you do not? Can
you ever expect true peace in this, or glory in the world to
come, if you do not believe in God through Christ? if you
do not thus fear and love God? My dear friend, consider,
I am not persuading you to leave or change your religion, but
to follow after that fear and love of God without which all reli
gion is vain. I say not a word to you about your opinions or
outward manner of worship. But I say, all worship is an abomi
nation to the Lord, unless you worship him in spirit and in
truth; with your heart, as well as your lips; with your spirit,
and with your understanding also. Be your form of worship
what it will, but in everything give him thanks; else it is all
but lost labour. Use whatever outward observances you please,
but put your whole trust in him; but honour his holy name
and his word, and serve him truly all the days of your life.
14. Again: A true Protestant loves his neighbour, that is,
every man, friend or enemy, good or bad, as himself, as he
loves his own soul, as Christ loved us. And as Christ laid
down his life for us, so is he ready to lay down his life for his
brethren. He shows this love, by doing to all men, in all
points, as he would they should do unto him. He loves,
honours, and obeys his father and mother, and helps them to
the uttermost of his power. He honours and obeys the King,
and all that are put in authority under him. He cheerfully
G 2 "
submits to all his Governors, Teachers, spiritual Pastors, and
Masters. He behaves lowly and reverently to all his betters.
He hurts nobody, by word or deed. He is true and just in
all his dealings. He bears no malice or hatred in his heart.
He abstains from all evil speaking, lying and slandering;
neither is guile found in his mouth. Knowing his body to
be the temple of the Holy Ghost, he keeps it in sobriety,
temperance, and chastity. He does not desire other men’s
goods; but is content with that he hath; labours to get his
own living, and to do the whole will of God in that state of
life unto which it has pleased God to call him.
15. Have you anything to reprove in this? Are you not
herein even as he? If not, (tell the truth,) are you not con
demned both by God and your own conscience? Can you
fall short of any one point hereof without falling short of
being a Christian 7
Come, my brother, and let us reason together. Are you
right if you only love your friend and hate your enemy? Do
not even the Heathens and publicans so ? You are called
to love your enemies; to bless them that curse you, and to
pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you.
But are you not disobedient to the heavenly calling? Does
your tender love to all men, not only the good, but also the
evil and unthankful, approve you the child of your Father
which is in heaven? Otherwise, whatever you believe and
whatever you practise, you are of your father the devil. Are
you ready to lay down your life for your brethren? And do
you do unto all as you would they should do unto you? If
not, do not deceive your own soul: You are but a Heathen
still. Do you love, honour, and obey your father and mother,
and help them to the utmost of your power? Do you honour
and obey all in authority? all your Governors, spiritual
Pastors, and Masters? Do you behave lowly and reverently
to all your betters? Do you hurt nobody, by word or deed?
Are you true and just in all your dealings? Do you take
care to pay whatever you owe ? Do you feel no malice, or
envy, or revenge, no hatred or bitterness to any man? If
you do, it is plain you are not of God: For all these are the
tempers of the devil. Do you speak the truth from your
heart to all men, and that in tenderness and love? Are you
“an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile?” Do you keep
your body in sobriety, temperance, and chastity, as knowing
it is the temple of the Holy Ghost, and that, if any man defile
the temple of God, him will God destroy? Have you learned,
in every state wherein you are, therewith to be content? Do
you labour to get your own living, abhorring idleness as you
abhor hell-fire? The devil tempts other men; but an idle man
tempts the devil. An idle man’s brain is the devil’s shop,
where he is continually working mischief. Are you not sloth
ful in business? Whatever your hand finds to do, do you do
it with your might? And do you do all as unto the Lord,
as a sacrifice unto God, acceptable in Christ Jesus?
This, and this alone, is the old religion. This is true, primi
tive Christianity. O when shall it spread over all the earth !
When shall it be found both in us and you? Without waiting
for others, let each of us, by the grace of God, amend one.
16. Are we not thus far agreed? Let us thank God for
this, and receive it as a fresh token of his love. But if God
still loveth us, we ought also to love one another. We ought,
without this endless jangling about opinions, to provoke one
another to love and to good works. Let the points wherein
we differ stand aside; here are enough wherein we agree,
enough to be the ground of every Christian temper, and of
every Christian action.
Obrethren, let us not still fall out by the way! I hope to see
you in heaven. And if I practise the religion above described,
you dare not say I shall go to hell. You cannot think so. None
can persuade you to it. Your own conscience tells you the con
trary. Then if we cannot as yet think alike in all things, at
least we may love alike. Herein we cannot possibly do amiss.
For of one point none can doubt a moment,-“God is love;
and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him.”
17. In the name, then, and in the strength of God, let us
resolve, First, not to hurt one another; to do nothing unkind
or unfriendly to each other, nothing which we would not have
done to ourselves: Rather let us endeavour after every instance
of a kind, friendly, and Christian behaviour towards each other.
Let us resolve, Secondly, God being our helper, to speak
nothing harsh or unkind of each other. The sure way to
avoid this, is to say all the good we can, both of and to one
another: In all our conversation, either with or concerning
each other, to use only the language of love; to speak with
all softness and tenderness; with the most endearing expres
sion which is consistent with truth and sincerity.
Let us, Thirdly, resolve to harbour no unkind thought, no
unfriendly temper, towards each other. Let us lay the axe to
the root of the tree; let us examine all that rises in our heart,
and suffer no disposition there which is contrary to tender
affection. Then shall we easily refrain from unkind actions
and words, when the very root of bitterness is cut up.
Let us, Fourthly, endeavour to help each other on in what
ever we are agreed leads to the kingdom. So far as we can,
let us always rejoice to strengthen each other's hands in
God. Above all, let us each take heed to himself, (since each
must give an account of himself to God,) that he fall not
short of the religion of love; that he be not condemned in
that he himself approveth. Olet you and I (whatever others
do) press on to the prize of our high calling! that, being
justified by faith, we may have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ; that we may rejoice in God through Jesus
Christ, by whom we have received the atonement; that the
love of God may be shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
Ghost which is given unto us. Let us count all things but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ our
Lord; being ready for him to suffer the loss of all things, and
counting them but dung, that we may win Christ.
I am
Your affectionate servant, for Christ's sake.
DUBLIN, July 18, 1749.
