Thoughts upon Slavery
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
I. 1. BY slavery, I mean domestic slavery, or that of a servant
to a master. A late ingenious writer well observes, “The
variety of forms in which slavery appears, makes it almost
impossible to convey a just notion of it, by way of definition.
There are, however, certain properties which have accompanied
slavery in most places, whereby it is easily distinguished from
that mild, domestic service which obtains in our country.”*
2. Slavery imports an obligation of perpetual service, an
obligation which only the consent of the master can dissolve.
Neither in some countries can the master himself dissolve it,
without the consent of Judges appointed by the law. It
generally gives the master an arbitrary power of any
correction, not affecting life or limb. Sometimes even these
are exposed to his will, or protected only by a fine, or some
slight punishment, too inconsiderable to restrain a master of
an harsh temper. It creates an incapacity of acquiring
anything, except for the master's benefit. It allows the
master to alienate the slave, in the same manner as his cows
* See Mr. Hargrave's Plea for Somerset the Negro.
and horses. Lastly, it descends in its full extent from parent
to child, even to the last generation.
3. The beginning of this may be dated from the remotest
period of which we have an account in history. It commenced
in the barbarous state of society, and in process of time spread
into all nations. It prevailed particularly among the Jews,
the Greeks, the Romans, and the ancient Germans; and was
transmitted by them to the various kingdoms and states
which arose out of the Roman Empire. But after Christianity
prevailed, it gradually fell into decline in almost all parts of
Europe. This great change began in Spain, about the end of
the eighth century; and was become general in most other
kingdoms of Europe, before the middle of the fourteenth.
4. From this time slavery was nearly extinct till the
commencement of the sixteenth century, when the discovery
of America, and of the western and eastern coasts of Africa,
gave occasion to the revival of it. It took its rise from the
Portuguese, who, to supply the Spaniards with men to
cultivate their new possessions in America, procured Negroes
from Africa, whom they sold for slaves to the American
Spaniards. This began in the year 1508, when they imported
the first Negroes into Hispaniola. In 1540, Charles the
Fifth, then King of Spain, determined to put an end to
Negro slavery; giving positive orders that all the Negro
slaves in the Spanish dominions should be set free. And
this was accordingly done by Lagasca, whom he sent and
empowered to free them all, on condition of continuing to
labour for their masters. But soon after Lagasca returned
to Spain, slavery returned and flourished as before. After
wards, other nations, as they acquired possessions in America,
followed the examples of the Spaniards; and slavery has
taken deep root in most of our American colonies.
II. Such is the nature of slavery; such the beginning of
Negro slavery in America. But some may desire to know
what kind of country it is from which the Negroes are
brought; what sort of men, of what temper and behaviour
are they in their own country; and in what manner they are
generally procured, carried to, and treated in, America.
1. And, First, what kind of country is that from whence
they are brought? Is it so remarkably horrid, dreary, and
barren, that it is a kindness to deliver them out of it? I
believe many have apprehended so; but it is an entire
mistake, if we may give credit to those who have lived many
years therein, and could have no motive to misrepresent it.
2. That part of Africa whence the Negroes are brought,
commonly known by the name of Guinea, extends along the
coast, in the whole, between three and four thousand miles.
From the river Senegal, seventeen degrees north of the line,
to Cape Sierra-Leone, it contains seven hundred miles.
Thence it runs eastward about fifteen hundred miles, including
the Grain Coast, the Ivory Coast, the Gold Coast, and the
Slave Coast, with the large kingdom of Benin. From thence
it runs southward, about twelve hundred miles, and contains
the kingdoms of Congo and Angola.
3. Concerning the first, the Senegal coast, Monsieur Brue,
who lived there sixteen years, after describing its fruitfulness
near the sea, says, “The farther you go from the sea, the
more fruitful and well-improved is the country, abounding
in pulse, Indian corn, and various fruits. Here are vast
meadows, which feed large herds of great and small cattle;
and the villages, which lie thick, show the country is well
peopled.” And again: “I was surprised to see the land so
well cultivated: Scarce a spot lay unimproved; the low
lands, divided by small canals, were all sowed with rice; the
higher grounds were planted with Indian corn, and peas of
different sorts. Their beef is excellent; poultry plenty, and
very cheap, as are all the necessaries of life.”
4. As to the Grain and Ivory Coast, we learn from eye
witnesses, that the soil is in general fertile, producing
abundance of rice and roots. Indigo and cotton thrive
without cultivation; fish is in great plenty; the flocks and
herds are numerous, and the trees loaden with fruit.
5. The Gold Coast and Slave Coast, all who have seen it
agree, is exceeding fruitful and pleasant, producing vast quan
tities of rice and other grain, plenty of fruit and roots, palm
wine and oil, and fish in great abundance, with much tame
and wild cattle. The very same account is given us of the
soil and produce of the kingdoms of Benin, Congo, and Angola.
From all which it appears, that Guinea, in general, is far
from an horrid, dreary, barren country,–is one of the most
fruitful, as well as the most pleasant, countries in the known
world. It is said indeed to be unhealthy; and so it is to
strangers, but perfectly healthy to the native inhabitants.
6. Such is the country from which the Negroes are brought.
We come next to inquire what sort of men they are, of what
temper and behaviour, not in our plantations, but in their
native country. And here likewise the surest way is to take
our account from cye and ear witnesses. Now, those who
have lived in the Senegal country observe, it is inhabited by
three nations, the Jalofs, Fulis, and Mandingos. The King
of the Jalofs has under him several Ministers, who assist in
the exercise of justice. The Chief Justice goes in circuit
through all his dominions, to hear complaints and determine
controversies; and the Viceroy goes with him, to inspect the
behaviour of the Alkadi, or Governor, of each village. The
Fulis are governed by their chief men, who rule with much
moderation. Few of them will drink anything stronger than
water, being strict Mahometans. The Government is easy,
because the people are of a quiet and good disposition, and
so well instructed in what is right, that a man who wrongs
another is the abomination of all. They desire no more land
than they use, which they cultivate with great care and
industry: If any of them are known to be made slaves by
the white men, they all join to redeem them. They not
only support all that are old, or blind, or lame among them
selves, but have frequently supplied the necessities of the
Mandingos, when they were distressed by famine.
7. “The Mandingos,” says Monsieur Brue, “are rigid
Mahometans, drinking neither wine nor brandy. They are
industrious and laborious, keeping their ground well cultivated,
and breeding a good stock of cattle. Every town has a
Governor, and he appoints the labour of the people. The
men work the ground designed for corn; the women and girls,
the rice-ground. He afterwards divides the corn and rice
among them; and decides all quarrels, if any arise. All the
Mahometan Negroes constantly go to public prayers thrice a
day; there being a Priest in every village, who regularly
calls them together; and it is surprising to see the modesty,
attention, and reverence which they observe during their
worship. These three nations practise several trades; they
have smiths, saddlers, potters, and weavers; and they are very
ingenious at their several occupations. Their smiths not
only make all the instruments of iron which they have occa
sion to use, but likewise work many things neatly in gold
and silver. It is chiefly the women and children who weave
fine cotton cloth, which they dye blue and black.”
8. It was of these parts of Guinea that Monsieur Allanson,
correspondent of the Royal Academy of Sciences at Paris,
1rom 1749 to 1753, gives the following account, both as to the
country and people:—“Which way soever I turned my eyes, I
beheld a perfect image of pure nature: An agreeable solitude,
bounded on every side by a charming landscape; the rural
situation of cottages in the midst of trees; the ease and quiet
ness of the Negroes, reclined under the shade of the spreading
foliage, with the simplicity of their dress and manners: The
whole revived in my mind the idea of our first parents, and
I seemed to contemplate the world in its primitive state.
They are, generally speaking, very good-natured, sociable,
and obliging. I was not a little pleased with my very first
reception; and it fully convinced me, that there ought to be a
considerable abatement made in the accounts we have of the
savage character of the Africans.” He adds: “It is amazing
that an illiterate people should reason so pertinently concerning
the heavenly bodies. There is no doubt, but that, with proper
instruments, they would become excellent astronomers.”
9. The inhabitants of the Grain and Ivory Coast are repre
sented by those that deal with them, as sensible, courteous,
and the fairest traders on the coasts of Guinea. They rarely
drink to excess; if any do, they are severely punished by the
King’s order. They are seldom troubled with war: If a
difference happen between two nations, they commonly end
the dispute amicably.
The inhabitants of the Gold and Slave Coast likewise,
when they are not artfully incensed against each other, live
in great union and friendship, being generally well-tempered,
civil, tractable, and ready to help any that need it. In
particular, the natives of the kingdom of Whidah are civil,
kind, and obliging to strangers; and they are the most
gentleman-like of all the Negroes, abounding in good
manners toward each other. The inferiors pay the utmost
respect to their superiors; so wives to their husbands,
children to their parents. And they are remarkably indus
trious; all are constantly employed,—the men in agriculture,
the women in spinning and weaving cotton.
10. The Gold and Slave Coasts are divided into several dis
tricts, some governed by Kings, others by the principal men,
who take care each of their own town or village, and prevent or
appease tumults. They punish murder and adultery severely;
very frequently with death. Theft and robbery are punished
by a fine proportionable to the goods that were taken. All
the natives of this coast, though Heathens, believe there is one
God, the Author of them and all things. They appear like
wise to have a confused apprehension of a future state. And,
accordingly, every town and village has a place of public wor
ship. It is remarkable that they have no beggars among them;
such is the care of the chief men, in every city and village, to
provide some easy labour even for the old and weak. Some
are employed in blowing the smiths’ bellows; others in
pressing palm-oil; others in grinding of colours. If they are
too weak even for this, they sell provisions in the market.
11. The natives of the kingdom of Benin are a reasonable
and good-natured people. They are sincere and inoffensive,
and do no injustice either to one another or to strangers.
They are eminently civil and courteous: If you make them a
present, they endeavour to repay it double; and if they are
trusted till the ship returns the next year, they are sure
honestly to pay the whole debt. Theft is punished among them,
although not with the same severity as murder. If a man and
woman of any quality are taken in adultery, they are certain
to be put to death, and their bodies thrown on a dunghill, and
left a prey to wild beasts. They are punctually just and honest
in their dealings; and are also very charitable, the King
and the great Lords taking care to employ all that are capable
of any work. And those that are utterly helpless they keep
for God’s sake; so that here also are no beggars. The
inhabitants of Congo and Angola are generally a quiet people.
They discover a good understanding, and behave in a friendly
manner to strangers, being of a mild temper and an affable
carriage. Upon the whole, therefore, the Negroes who inhabit
the coast of Africa, from the river Senegal to the southern
bounds of Angola, are so far from being the stupid, senseless,
brutish, lazy barbarians, the fierce, cruel, perfidious savages
they have been described, that, on the contrary, they are
represented, by them who have no motive to flatter them, as
remarkably sensible, considering the few advantages they have
for improving their understanding; as industrious to the
highest degree, perhaps more so than any other natives of so
warm a climate; as fair, just, and honest in all their dealings,
unless where white men have taught them to be otherwise;
and as far more mild, friendly, and kind to strangers, than any
of our forefathers were. Our forefathers / Where shall we
find at this day, among the fair-faced natives of Europe, a
nation generally practising the justice, mercy, and truth,
which are found among these poor Africans? Suppose the
preceding accounts are true, (which I see no reason or
pretence to doubt of) and we may leave England and France,
to seek genuine honesty in Benin, Congo, or Angola.
III. We have now seen what kind of country it is from
which the Negroes are brought; and what sort of men (even
white men being the judges) they were in their own country.
Inquire we, Thirdly, In what manner are they generally
procured, carried to, and treated in, America.
1. First. In what manner are they procured? Part of
them by fraud. Captains of ships, from time to time, have
invited Negroes to come on board, and then carried them
away. But far more have been procured by force. The
Christians, landing upon their coasts, seized as many as they
found, men, women, and children, and transported them to
America. It was about 1551 that the English began trading
to Guinea; at first, for gold and elephants’ teeth; but soon
after, for men. In 1556, Sir John Hawkins sailed with two
ships to Cape Verd, where he sent cighty men on shore to
catch Negroes. But the natives flying, they fell farther
down, and there set the men on shore, “to burn their towns
and take the inhabitants.” But they met with such resist
ance, that they had seven men killed, and took but ten
Negroes. So they went still farther down, till, having taken
enough, they proceeded to the West Indies and sold them.
2. It was some time before the Europeans found a more
compendious way of procuring African slaves, by prevailing
upon them to make war upon each other, and to sell their
prisoners. Till then they seldom had any wars; but were in
general quiet and peaceable. But the white men first taught
them drunkenness and avarice, and then hired them to sell
one another. Nay, by this means, even their Kings are
induced to scll their own subjects. So Mr. Moore, factor of
the African Company in 1730, informs us: “When the King
of Barsalli wants goods or brandy, he sends to the English
Governor at James's Fort, who immediately sends a sloop.
Against the time it arrives, he plunders some of his neigh
bours towns, selling the people for the goods he wants. At
other times he falls upon one of his own towns, and makes
bold to sell his own subjects.” So Monsieur Brue says, “I
wrote to the King,” (not the same,) “if he had a sufficient
number of slaves, I would treat with him. He seized three
hundred of his own people, and sent word he was ready to
deliver them for the goods.” He adds: “Some of the natives
are always ready” (when well paid) “to surprise and carry off
their own countrymen. They come at night without noise, and
if they find any lone cottage, surround it and carry off all the
people.” Barbot, another French factor, says, “Many of the
slaves sold by the Negroes are prisoners of war, or taken in the
incursions they make into their enemies’ territories. Others
are stolen. Abundance of little Blacks, of both sexes, are
stolen away by their neighbours, when found abroad on the
road, or in the woods, or else in the corn-ficlds, at the time of
year when their parents keep them there all day to scare away
the devouring birds.” That their own parents sell them is
utterly false: Whites, not Blacks, are without natural affection!
3. To set the manner wherein Negroes are procured in a yet
stronger light, it will suffice to give an extract of “Two Voyages
to Guinea” on this account. The first is taken verbatim
from the original manuscript of the Surgeon’s Journal:—
“Sestro, Dec. 29, 1724.—No trade to-day, though many
traders came on board. They informed us, that the people
are gone to war within land, and will bring prisoners enough
in two or three days; in hopes of which we stay.
“The 30th.—No trade yet; but our traders came on
board to-day, and informed us the people had burnt four
towns; so that to-morrow we expect slaves off.
“The 31st.—Fair weather; but no trading yet. We sce
each night towns burning. But we hear many of the Sestro
men are killed by the inland Negroes; so that we fear this
war will be unsuccessful.
“The 2nd of January.—Last might we saw a prodigious
fire break out about eleven o’clock, and this morning see the
town of Sestro burned down to the ground.” (It contained
some hundred houses.) “So that we find their enemies are
too hard for them at present, and consequently our trade
spoiled here. Therefore about seven o’clock we weighed
anchor, to procecd lower down.”
4. The second extract, taken from the Journal of a Surgeon,
who went from New York on the same trade, is as follows:
“The commander of the vessel sent to acquaint the King,
that he wanted a cargo of slaves. The King promised to
furnish him; and, in order to it, set out, designing to surprise
some town, and make all the people prisoners. Some time
after, the King sent him word, he had not yet met with the
desired success; having attempted to break up two towns,
but having been twice repulsed; but that he still hoped to
procure the number of slaves. In this design he persisted,
till he met his enemies in the field. A battle was fought,
which lasted three days. And the engagement was so bloody,
that four thousand five hundred men were slain upon the spot.”
Such is the manner wherein the Negroes are procured ! Thus
the Christians preach the Gospel to the Heathens !
5. Thus they are procured. But in what numbers and in
what manner are they carried to America? Mr. Anderson,
in his History of Trade and Commerce, observes: “England
supplies her American colonies with Negro slaves, amounting
in number to about an hundred thousand every year;” that
is, so many are taken on board our ships; but at least ten
thousand of them die in the voyage; about a fourth part
more die at the different islands, in what is called the season
ing. So that at an average, in the passage and seasoning
together, thirty thousand die; that is, properly, are murdered.
O Earth, O Sea, cover not thou their blood |
6. When they are brought down to the shore in order to
be sold, our Surgeons thoroughly examine them, and that
quite naked, women and men, without any distinction; those
that are approved are set on one side. In the mean time, a
burning-iron, with the arms or name of the company, lies in
the fire, with which they are marked on the breast. Before
they are put into the ships, their masters strip them of all
they have on their backs: So that they come on board stark
naked, women as well as men. It is common for several
hundred of them to be put on board one vessel, where they
are stowed together in as little room as it is possible for
them to be crowded. It is easy to suppose what a condition
they must soon be in, between heat, thirst, and stench of
various kinds. So that it is no wonder, so many should die
in the passage; but rather, that any survive it.
7. When the vessels arrive at their destined port, the
Negroes are again exposed naked to the eyes of all that flock
together, and the examination of their purchasers. Then they
are separated to the plantations of their several masters, to see
*M -
each other no more. Here you may see mothers hanging
over their daughters, bedewing their naked breasts with tears,
and daughters clinging to their parents, till the whipper soon
obliges them to part. And what can be more wretched than
the condition they then enter upon? Banished from their
country, from their friends and relations for ever, from every
comfort of life, they are reduced to a state scarce anyway pre
ferable to that of beasts of burden. In general, a few roots,
not of the nicest kind, usually yams or potatoes, are their food;
and two rags, that neither screen them from the heat of the
day, nor the cold of the night, their covering. Their sleep is
very short, their labour continual, and frequently above their
strength; so that death sets many of them at liberty before
they have lived out half their days. The time they work in
the West Indies, is from day-break to noon, and from two
o'clock till dark; during which time, they are attended by
overseers, who, if they think them dilatory, or think anything
not so well done as it should be, whip them most unmercifully,
so that you may see their bodies long after wealed and scarred
usually from the shoulders to the waist. And before they
are suffered to go to their quarters, they have commonly
something to do, as collecting herbage for the horses, or
gathering fuel for the boilers; so that it is often past twelve
before they can get home. Hence, if their food is not pre
pared, they are sometimes called to labour again, before they
can satisfy their hunger. And no excuse will avail. If they
are not in the field immediately, they must expect to feel the
lash. Did the Creator intend that the noblest creatures in
the visible world should live such a life as this?
Are these thy glorious work, Parent of Good P
8. As to the punishments inflicted on them, says Sir Hans
Sloane, “they frequently geld them, or chop off half a foot:
After they are whipped till they are raw all over, some put
pepper and salt upon them; some drop melted wax upon their
skin; others cut off their ears, and constrain them to broil and
eat them. For rebellion,” (that is, asserting their native liberty,
which they have as much right to as to the air they breathe,)
“they fasten them down to the ground with crooked sticks
on every limb, and then applying fire, by degrees, to the feet
and hands, they burn them gradually upward to the head.”
9. But will not the laws made in the plantations prevent or
redress all cruelty and oppression? We will take but a few
of those laws for a specimen, and then let any man judge:
In order to rivet the chain of slavery, the law of Virginia
ordains: “That no slave shall be set free upon any pretence
whatever, except for some meritorious services, to be adjudged
and allowed by the Governor and Council; and that where
any slave shall be set free by his owner, otherwise than is
herein directed, the Churchwardens of the parish, wherein
such Negro shall reside for the space of one month, are
hereby authorized and required to take up and sell the said
Negro by public outcry.”
10. Will not these lawgivers take effectual care to prevent
cruelty and oppression?
The law of Jamaica ordains: “Every slave that shall run
away, and continue absent from his master twelve months,
shall be deemed rebellious.” And by another law, fifty pounds
are allowed to those who kill or bring in alive a rebellious
slave. So their law treats these poor men with as little cere
mony and consideration, as if they were merely brute beasts!
But the innocent blood which is shed in consequence of such
a detestable law, must call for vengeance on the murderous
abettors and actors of such deliberate wickedness.
11. But the law of Barbadoes exceeds even this: “If any
Negro under punishment, by his master, or his order, for
running away, or any other crime or misdemeanor, shall suffer
in life or member, no person whatsoever shall be liable to any
fine therefore. But if any man, of wantonness, or only of
bloody-mindedness, or cruel intention, wilfully kill a Negro of
his own,” (now, observe the severe punishment 1) “he shall
pay into the public treasury fifteen pounds sterling! and not
be liable to any other punishment or forfeiture for the same!”
Nearly allied to this is that law of Virginia: “After
proclamation is issued against slaves that run away, it is
lawful for any person whatsoever to kill and destroy such
slaves, by such ways and means as he shall think fit.”
We have seen already some of the ways and means which
have been thought fit on such occasions; and many more might
be mentioned. One gentleman, when I was abroad, thought
fit to roast his slave alive | But if the most natural act of
“running away” from intolerable tyranny, deserves such
relentless severity, what punishment have these lawmakers to
£xpect hereafter, on account of their own enormous offences?
IV. 1. This is the plain, unaggravated matter of fact
Such is the manner wherein our African slaves are procured;
such the manner wherein they are removed from their native
land, and wherein they are treated in our plantations. I
would now inquire, whether these things can be defended, on
the principles of even heathen honesty; whether they can be
reconciled (setting the Bible out of the question) with any
degree of either justice or mercy.
1 2. The grand plea is, “They are authorized by law.” But
can law, human law, change the nature of things? Can it
turn darkness into light, or evil into good? By no means.
Notwithstanding ten thousand laws, right is right, and wrong
is wrong still. There must still remain an essential differ
ence between justice and injustice, cruelty and mercy. So
that I still ask, Who can reconcile this treatment of the
Negroes, first and last, with either mercy or justice?
Where is the justice of inflicting the severest evils on those
that have done us no wrong? of depriving those that never
injured us in word or deed, of every comfort of life? of tearing
them from their native country, and depriving them of liberty
itself, to which an Angolan has the same natural right as an
Englishman, and on which he sets as high a value? Yea,
where is the justice of taking away the lives of innocent,
inoffensive men; murdering thousands of them in their own
land, by the hands of their own countrymen; many thou
sands, year after year, on shipboard, and then casting them
like dung into the sea; and tens of thousands in that cruel
slavery to which they are so unjustly reduced ?
3. But waving, for the present, all other considerations, I
strike at the root of this complicated villany; I absolutely
deny all slave-holding to be consistent with any degree of
natural justice.
I cannot place this in a clearer light than that great
ornament of his profession, Judge Blackstone, has already
done. Part of his words are as follows:—
“The three origins of the right of slavery assigned by
Justinian, are all built upon false foundations: (1) Slavery is
said to arise from captivity in war. The conqueror having a
right to the life of his captives, if he spares that, has then a
right to deal with them as he pleases. But this is untrue, if
taken generally,–that, by the laws of nations, a man has a
right to kill his enemy. He has only a right to kill him in
particular cases, in cases of absolute necessity for self-defence.
And it is plain, this absolute necessity did not subsist, since
he did not kill him, but made him prisoner. War itself is
justifiable only on principles of self-preservation: Therefore it
gives us no right over prisoners, but to hinder their hurting
us by confining them. Much less can it give a right to torture,
or kill, or even to enslave an enemy when the war is over.
Since therefore the right of making ourprisoners slaves, depends
on a supposed right of slaughter, that foundation failing, the
consequence which is drawn from it must fail likewise.
“It is said, Secondly, slavery may begin by one man’s
selling himself to another. And it is true, a man may sell
himself to work for another; but he cannot sell himself to be
a slave, as above defined. Every sale implies an equivalent
given to the seller, in lieu of what he transfers to the buyer.
But what equivalent can be given for life or liberty? His
property likewise, with the very price which he seems to
receive, devolves ipso facto to his master, the instant he
becomes his slave: In this case, therefore, the buyer gives
nothing, and the seller receives nothing. Of what validity
then can a sale be, which destroys the very principle upon
which all sales are founded ?
“We are told, Thirdly, that men may be born slaves, by
being the children of slaves. But this, being built upon the
two former rights, must fall together with them. If neither
captivity nor contract can, by the plain law of nature and
reason, reduce the parent to a state of slavery, much less can
they reduce the offspring.” It clearly follows, that all
slavery is as irreconcilable to justice as to mercy.
4. That slave-holding is utterly inconsistent with mercy, is
almost too plain to need a proof. Indeed, it is said, “that
these Negroes being prisoners of war, our captains and
factors buy them, merely to save them from being put to
death. And is not this mercy?” I answer, (1.) Did Sir
John Hawkins, and many others, seize upon men, women,
and children, who were at peace in their own fields or houses,
merely to save them from death? (2) Was it to save them
from death, that they knocked out the brains of those they
could not bring away? (3.) Who occasioned and fomented
those wars, wherein these poor creatures were taken prisoners?
Who excited them by money, by drink, by every possible
means, to fall upon one another? Was it not themselves?
They know in their own conscience it was, if they have any
conscience left. But, (4.) To bring the matter to a short
issue, can they say before God, that they ever took a single
voyage, or bought a single Negro, from this motive? They
cannot; they well know, to get money, not to save lives, was
the whole and sole spring of their motions.
5. But if this manner of procuring and treating Negroes
is not consistent either with mercy or justice, yet there is
a plea for it which every man of business will acknowledge
to be quite sufficient. Fifty years ago, one meeting an
eminent Statesman in the lobby of the House of Commons,
said, “You have been long talking about justice and equity.
Pray which is this bill; equity or justice?” He answered
very short and plain, “D–n justice; it is necessity.” Here
also the slave-holder fixes his foot; here he rests the strength
of his cause. “If it is not quite right, yet it must be so;
there is an absolute necessity for it. It is necessary we
should procure slaves; and when we have procured them, it
is necessary to use them with severity, considering their
stupidity, stubbornness, and wickedness.”
I answer, You stumble at the threshold; I deny that villany
is ever necessary. It is impossible that it should ever be
necessary for any reasonable creature to violate all the laws
of justice, mercy, and truth. No circumstances can make it
necessary for a man to burst in sunder all the ties of humanity.
It can never be necessary for a rational being to sink himself
below a brute. A man can be under no necessity of degrading
himself into a wolf. The absurdity of the supposition is so
glaring, that one would wonder any one can help seeing it.
6. This in general. But, to be more particular, I ask, First,
What is necessary? and, Secondly, To what end? It may
be answered, “The whole method now used by the original
purchasers of Negroes is necessary to the furnishing our
colonies yearly with a hundred thousand slaves.” I grant,
this is necessary to that end. But how is that end necessary?
How will you prove it necessary that one hundred, that one,
of those slaves should be procured? “Why, it is necessary
to my gaining an hundred thousand pounds.” Perhaps so:
But how is this necessary? It is very possible you might be
both a better and a happier man, if you had not a quarter of
it. I deny that your gaining one thousand is necessary either
to your present or eternal happiness. “But, however, you
must allow, these slaves are necessary for the cultivation of
our islands; inasmuch as white men are not able to labour in
hot climates.” I answer, First, it were better that all those
islands should remain uncultivated for ever; yea, it were more
desirable that they were altogether sunk in the depth of the
sea, than that they should be cultivated at so high a price as
the violation of justice, mercy, and truth. But, Secondly, the
supposition on which you ground your argument is false. For
white men, even Englishmen, are well able to labour in hot
climates; provided they are temperate both in meat and drink,
and that they inure themselves to it by degrees. I speak no
more than I know by experience. It appears from the ther
mometer, that the summer heat in Georgia is frequently equal
to that in Barbadoes, yea, to that under the line. And yet I
and my family (eight in number) did employ all our spare time
there, in felling of trees and clearing of ground, as hard labour
as any Negro need be employed in. The German family, like
wise, forty in number, were employed in all manner of labour.
And this was so far from impairing our health, that we all con
tinued perfectly well, while the idle ones round about us were
swept away as with a pestilence. It is not true, therefore,
that white men are not able to labour, even in hot climates,
full as well as black. But if they were not, it would be
better that none should labour there, that the work should be
left undone, than that myriads of innocent men should be
murdered, and myriads more dragged into the basest slavery.
7. “But the furnishing us with slaves is necessary for the
trade, and wealth, and glory of our nation.” Here are several
mistakes. For, First, wealth is not necessary to the glory of
any nation; but wisdom, virtue, justice, mercy, generosity,
public spirit, love of our country. These are necessary to the
real glory of a nation; but abundance of wealth is not. Men
of understanding allow that the glory of England was full
as high in Queen Elizabeth’s time as it is now; although our
riches and trade were then as much smaller, as our virtue was
greater. But, Secondly, it is not clear that we should have
either less money or trade, (only less of that detestable trade of
man-stealing,) if there was not a Negro in all our islands, or in
all English America. It is demonstrable, white men, inured to
it by degrees, can work as well as them; and they would do it,
were Negroes out of the way, and proper encouragement given
them. However, Thirdly, I come back to the same point:
Better no trade, than trade procured by villany. It is far
better to have no wealth, than to gain wealth at the expense
of virtue. Better is honest poverty, than all the riches bought
by the tears, and sweat, and blood, of our fellow-creatures.
8. “However this be, it is necessary, when we have slaves,
to use them with severity.” What, to whip them for every
petty offence, till they are all in gore blood? to take that
opportunity of rubbing pepper and salt into their raw flesh?
to drop burning sealing-wax upon their skin? to castrate
them ? to cut off half their foot with an axe? to hang them
on gibbets, that they may die by inches, with heat, and
hunger, and thirst? to pin them down to the ground, and
then burn them by degrees, from the feet to the head? to
roast them alive? When did a Turk or a Heathen find it
necessary to use a fellow-creature thus?
I pray, to what end is this usage necessary? “Why, to
prevent their running away; and to keep them constantly to
their labour, that they may not idle away their time: So miser
ably stupid is this race of men, yea, so stubborn, and so wicked.”
Allowing them to be as stupid as you say, to whom is that
stupidity owing? Without question, it lies altogether at the
door of their inhuman masters; who give them no means, no
opportunity, of improving their understanding; and, indeed,
leave them no motive, either from hope or fear, to attempt any
such thing. They were no way remarkable for stupidity while
they remained in their own country: The inhabitants of
Africa, where they have equal motives and equal means of
improvement, are not inferior to the inhabitants of Europe; to
some of them they are greatly superior. Impartially survey,
in their own country, the natives of Benin, and the natives of
Lapland; compare (setting prejudice aside) the Samoeids and
the Angolans; and on which side does the advantage lie, in
point of understanding? Certainly the African is in no respect
inferior to the European. Their stupidity, therefore, in our
plantations is not natural; otherwise than it is the natural
effect of their condition. Consequently, it is not their fault,
but yours: You must answer for it, before God and man.
9. “But their stupidity is not the only reason of our treating
them with severity. For it is hard to say, which is the greatest,
this, or their stubbornness and wickedness.” It may be so:
But do not these, as well as the other, lie at your door? Are
not stubbornness, cunning, pilfering, and divers other vices,
the natural, necessary fruits of slavery? Is not this an
observation which has been made in every age and nation?
And what means have you used to remove this stubbornness?
Have you tried what mildness and gentleness would do? I
knew one that did; that had prudence and patience to make
the experiment; Mr. Hugh Bryan, who then lived on the
borders of South Carolina. And what was the effect? Why,
that all his Negroes (and he had no small number of them)
loved and reverenced him as a father, and cheerfully obeyed
him out of love. Yea, they were more afraid of a frown from
him, than of many blows from an overseer. And what pains
have you taken, what method have you used, to reclaim them.
from their wickedness? Have you carefully taught them,
that there is a God, a wise, powerful, merciful Being, the
Creator and Governor of heaven and earth? that he has
appointed a day wherein he will judge the world, will take an
account of all our thoughts, words, and actions? that in that
day he will reward every child of man according to his works?
that then the righteous shall inherit the kingdom prepared
for them from the foundation of the world; and the wicked
shall be cast into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels? If you have not done this, if you have taken no
pains or thought about the matter, can you wonder at their
wickedness? What wonder, if they should cut your throat?
And if they did, whom could you thank for it but yourself?
You first acted the villain in making them slaves, whether
you stole them or bought them. You kept them stupid and
wicked, by cutting them off from all opportunities of improv
ing either in knowledge or virtue: And now you assign their
want of wisdom and goodness as the reason for using them
worse than brute beasts'
V. 1. It remains only to make a little application of the
£observations. But to whom should that application
e made? That may bear a question. Should we address
ourselves to the public at large? What effect can this have?
It may inflame the world against the guilty, but is mot likely
to remove that guilt. Should we appeal to the English nation
in general? This also is striking wide; and is never likely to
procure any redress for the sore evil we complain of. As little
would it in all probability avail, to apply to the Parliament.
So many things, which seem of greater importance, lie before
them, that they are not likely to attend to this. I therefore
add a few words to those who are more immediately
concerned, whether captains, merchants, or planters.
2. And, First, to the captains employed in this trade. Most
of you know the country of Guinea; several parts of it, at
least, between the river Senegal and the kingdom of Angola.
Perhaps, now, by your means part of it is become a dreary,
uncultivated wilderness, the inhabitants being all murdered
or carried away, so that there are none left to till the ground.
But you well know how populous, how fruitful, how pleasant
it was a few years ago. You know, the people were not
stupid, not wanting in sense, considering the few means of
improvement they enjoyed. Neither did you find them savage,
fierce, cruel, treacherous, or unkind to strangers. On the
contrary, they were, in most parts, a sensible and ingenious
people. They were kind and friendly, courteous and obliging,
and remarkably fair and just in their dealings. Such are the
men whom you hire their own countrymen to tear away from
this lovely country; part by stealth, part by force, part made
captives in those wars which you raise or foment on purpose.
You have seen them torn away,+children from their parents,
parents from their children; husbands from their wives, wives
from their beloved husbands, brethren and sisters from each
other. You have dragged them who had never done you any
wrong, perhaps in chains, from their native shore. You have
forced them into your ships like an herd of swine,—them who
had souls immortal as your own; only some of them leaped
into the sea, and resolutely stayed under water, till they
could suffer no more from you. You have stowed them
together as close as ever they could lie, without any regard
either to decency or convenience. And when many of them
had been poisoned by foul air, or had sunk under various
hardships, you have seen their remains delivered to the deep,
till the sea should give up his dead. You have carried the
survivors into the vilest slavery, never to end but with life;
such slavery as is not found among the Turks at Algiers, no,
nor among the Heathens in America.
3. May I speak plainly to you? I must. Love constrains
me; love to you, as well as to those you are concerned
with.
Is there a God? You know there is. Is he a just God?
Then there must be a state of retribution; a state wherein
+he just God will reward every man according to his
works. Then what reward will he render to you? O think
betimes ! before you drop into eternity | Think now, “He
shall have judgment without mercy that showed no mercy.”
Are you a man? Then you should have an human heart.
But have you indeed? What is your heart made of? Is
there no such principle as compassion there? Do you never
feel another’s pain? Have you no sympathy, no sense of
human woe, no pity for the miserable? When you saw the
flowing eyes, the heaving breasts, or the bleeding sides and
tortured limbs of your fellow-creatures, was you a stone, or
a brute? Did you look upon them with the eyes of a tiger?
When you squeezed the agonizing creatures down in the
ship, or when you threw their poor mangled remains into
the sea, had you no relenting? Did not one tear drop
from your eye, one sigh escape from your breast? Do you
feel no relenting now? If you do not, you must go on, till
the measure of your iniquities is full. Then will the great
God deal with you as you have dealt with them, and require
all their blood at your hands. And at “that day it shall
be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah than for you!”
But if your heart does relent, though in a small degree,
know it is a call from the God of love. And “to-day, if
you will hear his voice, harden not your heart.” To-day
resolve, God being your helper, to escape for your life.
Regard not money ! All that a man hath will he give for
his life : Whatever you lose, lose not your soul: Nothing
can countervail that loss. Immediately quit the horrid
trade: At all events, be an honest man.
4. This equally concerns every merchant who is engaged in
the slave-trade. It is you that induce the African villain to
sell his countrymen; and in order thereto, to steal, rob,
murder men, women, and children without number, by enabling
the English villain to pay him for so doing, whom you overpay
for his execrable labour. It is your money that is the spring
of all, that empowers him to go on: So that whatever he or
the African does in this matter is all your act and deed. And
is your conscience quite reconciled to this? Does it never
reproach you at all? Has gold entirely blinded your eyes, and
stupified your heart? Can you see, can you feel, no harm
therein? Is it doing as you would be done to? Make the case
your own. “Master,” said a slave at Liverpool to the merchant
that owned him, “what, if some of my countrymen were to come
here, and take away my mistress, and Master Tommy, and
Master Billy, and carry them into our country, and make them
slaves, how would you like it?” His answer was worthy of a
man: “I will never buy a slave more while I live.” O let his
resolution be yours! Have no more any part in this detestable
business. Instantly leave it to those unfeeling wretches who
Laugh at human nature and compassion :
Be you a man, not a wolf, a devourer of the human species 1
Be merciful, that you may obtain mercy!
5. And this equally concerns every gentleman that has an
estate in our American plantations; yea, all slave-holders, of
whatever rank and degree; seeing men-buyers are exactly on
a level with men-stealers. Indeed you say, “I pay honestly
for my goods; and I am not concerned to know how they are
come by.” Nay, but you are; you are deeply concerned to
know they are honestly come by. Otherwise you are a par
taker with a thief, and are not a jot homester than him. But
you know they are not honestly come by; you know they are
procured by means nothing near so innocent as picking of
pockets, house-breaking, or robbery upon the highway. You
know they are procured by a deliberate series of more com
plicated villany (of fraud, robbery, and murder) than was ever
practised either by Mahometans or Pagans; in particular, by
murders, of all kinds; by the blood of the innocent poured
upon the ground like water. Now, it is your money that pays
the merchant, and through him the captain and the African
butchers. You therefore are guilty, yea, principally guilty, of
all these frauds, robberies, and murders. You are the spring
that puts all the rest in motion; they would not stir a step
without you; therefore, the blood of all these wretches who
die before their time, whether in their country or elsewhere, lies
upon your head. “The blood of thy brother” (for, whether
thou wilt believe it or no, such he is in the sight of Him that
made him) “crieth against thee from the earth,” from the ship,
and from the waters. O, whatever it costs, put a stop to its
cry before it be too late: Instantly, at any price, were it the
half of your goods, deliver thyself from blood-guiltiness!
Thy hands, thy bed, thy furniture, thy house, thy lands,
are at present stained with blood. Surely it is enough;
accumulate no more guilt; spill no more the blood of the
innocent! Do not hire another to shed blood; do not pay
him for doing it ! Whether you are a Christian or no, show
yourself a man I Be not more savage than a lion or a bear !
6. Perhaps you will say, “I do not buy any Negroes; I
only use those left me by my father.” So far is well; but is
it enough to satisfy your own conscience? Had your father,
have you, has any man living, a right to use another as a
slave? It cannot be, even setting Revelation aside. It cannot
be, that either war, or contract, can give any man such a
property in another as he has in his sheep and oxen. Much
less is it possible, that any child of man should ever be born
a slave. Liberty is the right of every human creature, as soon
as he breathes the vital air; and no human law can deprive
him of that right which he derives from the law of nature.
If, therefore, you have any regard to justice, (to say nothing
of mercy, nor the revealed law of God,) render unto all their
due. Give liberty to whom liberty is due, that is, to every
child of man, to every partaker of human nature. Let none
serve you but by his own act and deed, by his own voluntary
choice. Away with all whips, all chains, all compulsion |
Be gentle toward all men; and see that you invariably do
unto every one as you would he should do unto you.
7. Othou God of love, thou who art loving to every man,
and whose mercy is over all thy works; thou who art the
Father of the spirits of all flesh, and who art rich in mercy
unto all; thou who hast mingled of one blood all the nations
upon earth; have compassion upon these outcasts of men, who
are trodden down as dung upon the earth ! Arise, and help
these that have no helper, whose blood is spilt upon the
ground like water | Are not these also the work of thine
own hands, the purchase of thy Son’s blood? Stir them up
to cry unto thee in the land of their captivity; and let their
complaint come up before thee; let it enter into thy ears!
Make even those that lead them away captive to pity them,
and turn their captivity as the rivers in the south. O burst
thou all their chains in sunder; more especially the chains
of their sins! Thou Saviour of all, make them free, that
they may be free indeed!
The servile progeny of Ham
Seize as the purchase of thy blood |
Let all the Heathens know thy name:
From idols to the living God
The dark Americans convert,
And shine in every pagan heart 1
A.
