A Calm Address to Our American Colonies
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
TO THE READER.
I was of a different judgment on this head, till I read a
tract entitled, “Taxation no Tyranny.” But as soon as I
received more light myself, I judged it my duty to impart it
to others. I therefore extracted the chief arguments from
that treatise, and added an application to those whom it most
concerns. I was well aware of the treatment this would
bring upon myself; but let it be, so I may in any degree
serve my King and country.
A late tract, wrote in answer to this, is wrote in just such
a spirit as I expected. It is strewed over with such flowers
as these: “Contemptible sophistry ! Fallacious to the last
degree Childish quirks! Pitiful sophisms 1” with strong
assertions, repeated over and over, and with florid quotations.
But all the arguments which are produced therein, may be
contained in a nut-shell.
The writert asserts twenty times, “He that is taxed without
* Thus translated by Pitt:
“O check your wrath, my sons; the nations spare ;
And save your country from the woes of war;
Nor in her sacred breast, with rage abhorr'd,
So fiercely plunge her own victorious sword ' "-EDIT.
+ Or writers. For I am informed by a correspondent in Bristol, that this letter
was wrote by two Anabaptist Ministers, assisted by a gentleman and a tradesman
of the Church of England.
his own consent, that is, without being represented, is a
slave.” I answer, No; I have no representative in Parlia
ment; but I am taxed; yet I am no slave. Yea, nine in ten
throughout England have no representative, no vote; yet
they are no slaves; they enjoy both civil and religious liberty
to the utmost extent.
He replies, “But they may have votes if they will; they
may purchase freeholds.” What! Can every man in England
purchase a freehold? No, not one in an hundred. But, be
that as it may, they have no vote now; yet they are no
slaves, they are the freest men in the whole world.
“Who then is a slave?” Look into America, and you
may easily see. See that Negro, fainting under the load,
bleeding under the lash ! He is a slave. And is there “no
difference” between him and his master? Yes; the one is
screaming, “Murder ! Slavery !” the other silently bleeds
and dies !
“But wherein then consists the difference between liberty
and slavery?” Herein: You and I, and the English in
general, go where we will, and enjoy the fruit of our labours:
This is liberty. The Negro does not: This is slavery.
Is not then all this outcry about liberty and slavery mere
rant, and playing upon words?
This is a specimen of this writer's arguments. - Let us just
touch upon his quotations:
“All the inhabitants of England,” says the fanciful
Montesquieu, as one terms him, “have a right of voting at
the election of a representative, except such as are so mean, as
to be deemed to have no will of their own l’’ Nay, if all have
a right to vote that have a will of their own, certainly this
right belongs to every man, woman, and child in England.
One quotation more : “Judge Blackstone says, “In a free
state, every man who is supposed to be a free agent ought to
be in some measure his own governor. Therefore, one
branch, at least, of the legislative power should reside in the
whole body of the people.” But who are the whole body of
the people? According to him, every free agent. Then the
argument proves too much. For are not women free agents?
Yea, and poor as well as rich men. According to this
argument, there is no free state under the sun.
The book which this writer says I so strongly recommend,
I never yet saw with my eyes. And the words which he says
I spoke, never came out of my lips. But I really believe, he
was told so.
I now speak according to the light I have. But if any
one will give me more light, I will be thankful.
BRETHREN AND CountRY MEN,
1. THE grand question which is now debated, (and with
warmth enough on both sides) is this, Has the English
Parliament a right to tax the American colonies?
In order to determine this, let us consider the nature of
our colonies. An English colony is, a number of persons to
whom the King grants a charter, permitting them to settle
in some far country as a corporation, enjoying such powers
as the charter grants, to be administered in such a manner
as the charter prescribes. As a corporation they make laws
for themselves; but as a corporation subsisting by a grant
from higher authority, to the control of that authority they
still continue subject.
Considering this, nothing can be more plain, than that the
supreme power in England has a legal right of laying any
tax upon them for any end beneficial to the whole empire.
2. But you object, “It is the privilege of a freeman and
an Englishman to be taxed only by his own consent. And
this consent is given for every man by his representatives in
Parliament. But we have no representatives in Parliament.
Therefore we ought not to be taxed thereby.”
I answer, This argument proves too much. If the Parlia
ment cannot tax you because you have no representation
therein, for the same reason it can make no laws to bind you.
If a freeman cannot be taxed without his own consent, neither
can he be punished without it; for whatever holds with regard
to taxation, holds with regard to all other laws. Therefore
he who denies the English Parliament the power of taxation,
denies it the right of making any laws at all. But this
power over the colonies you have never disputed; you have
always admitted statutes for the punishment of offences, and
for the preventing or redressing of inconveniences; and the
reception of any law draws after it, by a chain which cannot
be broken, the necessity of admitting taxation.
3. But I object to the very foundation of your plea: That
“every freeman is governed by laws to which he has consented:”
As confidently as it has been asserted, it is absolutely false.
In wide-extended dominions, a very small part of the people
are concerned in making laws. This, as all public business,
must be done by delegation; the delegates are chosen by a
select number. And those that are not electors, who are far
the greater part, stand by, idle and helpless spectators.
The case of electors is little better. When they are near
equally divided, in the choice of their delegates to represent
them in the Parliament or National Assembly, almost half of
them must be governed, not only without, but even against,
their own consent.
And how has any man consented to those laws which were
made before he was born? Our consent to these, may, and
to the laws now made even in England, is purely passive.
And in every place, as all men are born the subjects of some
state or other, so they are born, passively, as it were,
consenting to the laws of that state. Any other than this
kind of consent, the condition of civil life does not allow.
4. But you say, you “are entitled to life, liberty, and
property by nature; and that you have never ceded to any
sovereign power the right to dispose of these without your
consent.”
While you speak as the naked sons of nature, this is
certainly true. But you presently declare, “Our ancestors,
at the time they settled these colonies, were entitled to all the
rights of natural-born subjects within the realm of England.”
This likewise is true; but when this is granted, the boast of
original rights is at an end. You are no longer in a state of
nature, but sink down into colonists, governed by a charter.
Tf your ancestors were subjects, they acknowledged a
Sovereign; if they had a right to English privileges, they
were accountable to English laws, and had ceded to the King
and Parliament the power of disposing, without their consent,
of both their lives, liberties, and properties. And did the
Parliament cede to them a dispensation from the obedience
which they owe as natural subjects? or any degree of inde
Pendence, not enjoyed by other Englishmen?
5. “They did not” indeed, as you observe, “by emigra
tion forfeit any of those privileges; but they were, and their
descendants now are, entitled to all such as their circum
stances enable them to enjoy.”
That they who form a colony by a lawful charter, forfeit no
G 2
privilege thereby, is certain. But what they do not forfeit by
any judicial sentence, they may lose by natural effects. When
a man voluntarily comes into America, he may lose what he
had when in Europe. Perhaps he had a right to vote for a
knight or burgess; by crossing the sea he did not forfeit this
right. But it is plain, he has made the exercise of it no
longer possible. He has reduced himself from a voter to one
of the innumerable multitude that have no votes.
6. But you say, “As the colonies are not represented in
the British Parliament, they are entitled to a free power of
legislation. For they inherit all the right which their
ancestors had of enjoying all the privileges of Englishmen.”
They do inherit all the privileges which their ancestors had;
but they can inherit no more. Their ancestors left a country
where the representatives of the people were elected by men
particularly qualified, and where those who wanted that
qualification were bound by the decisions of men whom they
had not deputed. You are the descendants of men who either
had no votes, or resigned them by emigration. You have
therefore exactly what your ancestors left you; not a vote in
making laws, nor in choosing legislators; but the happiness
of being protected by laws, and the duty of obeying them.
What your ancestors did not bring with them, neither they
nor their descendants have acquired. They have not, by aban
doning their right in one legislature, acquired a right to consti
tute another; any more than the multitudes in England who
have no vote, have a right to erect a Parliament for themselves.
7. However, the “colonies have a right to all the privi
leges granted them by royal charters, or secured to them by
provincial laws.”
The first clause is allowed: They have certainly a right to
all the privileges granted them by royal charters; provided
those privileges be consistent with the British constitution.
But as to the second there is a doubt: Provincial laws may
grant privileges to individuals of the province; but surely no
province can confer provincial privileges on itself! They
have a right to all which the King has given them; but not
to all which they have given themselves.
A corporation can no more assume to itself privileges which
it had not before, than a man can, by his own act and deed,
assume titles or dignities. The legislature of a colony may
be compared to the vestry of a large parish, which may lay a
cess on its inhabitants, but still regulated by the law, and
which, whatever be its internal expenses, is still liable to
taxes laid by superior authority.
8. But whereas I formerly allowed, “If there is, in the
charter of any colony, a clause exempting them from taxes
for ever, then they have a right to be so exempted;” I allowed
too much. For to say, that the King can grant an exemption
from the power of Parliament, is saying in other words, that
one branch of the legislature can grant away the power of the
others. This is so far from being true, that if there is, in
the charter of any colony, a clause exempting them from
taxes for ever, yet, unless it were confirmed by an act of the
whole Legislature, that clause is void in itself. The King (to
use the phrase of the law) was “deceived in his grant,” as
having given that which he had no right to bestow.
Of all these charters, then, it may be said, either they do
contain such a clause, or they do not. If they do not, the
plea of charter-exemption drops. If they do, although the
charter itself stands good, yet that clause of it is null and void,
as being contrary to the principles of the British Constitution.
9. Give me leave to add a few words on this head: The
following acts show clearly, that, from the Restoration, the
colonies were considered as part of the realm of England, in
point of taxation, as well as everything else —
25th Charles II, chap. 7, expressly relates to the colonies,
and lays several specific duties on commodities exported from
the plantations.
9th Anne, chap. 10, orders a revenue to be raised in America
from the post-office.
9th Anne, chap. 27, lays a duty on several goods imported
into America.
3d George II., chap. 28, lays a duty on all rice exported
from Carolina to the South of Cape Finisterre.
8th George II., chap. 19, extends the same to Georgia.
6th George II., chap. 13, lays several duties on rum, sugar,
and molasses imported into North-America.
10. All that impartially consider what has been observed,
must readily allow that the English Parliament has an
undoubted right to tax all the English colonies.
But whence then is all this hurry and tumult? Why is
America all in an uproar? If you can yet give yourselves
time to think, you will see the plain case is this:
A few years ago, you were assaulted by enemies, whom
you were not well able to resist. You represented this to
your mother-country, and desired her assistance. You was
largely assisted, and by that means wholly delivered from all.
your enemies.
After a time, your mother-country, desiring to be
re-imbursed for some part of the large expense she had been
at, laid a small tax (which she had always a right to do) on
one of her colonies.
But how is it possible, that the taking this reasonable and
legal step should have set all America in a flame?
I will tell you my opinion freely; and perhaps you will
not think it improbable. I speak the more freely, because
I am unbiassed; I have nothing to hope or fear from either
side. I gain nothing either by the Government or by the
Americans, and probably never shall. And I have no preju
dice to any man in America: I love you as my brethren
and countrymen.
11. My opinion is this: We have a few men in England
who are determined enemies to monarchy. Whether they hate
His present Majesty on any other ground than because he is.
a King, I know not. But they cordially hate his office, and
have for some years been undermining it with all diligence, in
hopes of erecting their grand idol, their dear commonwealth,
upon its ruins. I believe they have let very few into their
design; (although many forward it, without knowing anything
of the matter;) but they are steadily pursuing it, as by various
other means, so in particular by inflammatory papers, which
are industriously and continually dispersed throughout the
town and country; by this method they have already wrought
thousands of the people even to the pitch of madness. By
the same, only varied according to your circumstances, they
have likewise inflamed America. I make no doubt but these
very men are the original cause of the present breach between
England and her colonies. And they are still pouring oil
into the flame, studiously incensing each against the other,
and opposing, under a variety of pretences, all measures of
accommodation. So that, although the Americans in general
love the English, and the English in general love the
Americans, (all, I mean, that are not yet cheated and
exasperated by these artful men,) yet the rupture is growing
wider every day, and none can tell where it will end.
These good men hope it will end in the total defection of
North-America from England. If this were effected, they
trust the English in general would be so irreconcilably
disgusted, that they should be able, with or without foreign
assistance, entirely to overturn the Government; especially
while the main of both the English and Irish forces are at so
convenient a distance.
12. But, my brethren, would this be any advantage to
you? Can you hope for a more desirable form of govern
ment, either in England or America, than that which you
now enjoy? After all the vehement cry for liberty, what
more liberty can you have? What more religious liberty can
you desire, than that which you enjoy already? May not
every one among you worship God according to his own
conscience? What civil liberty can you desire, which you
are not already possessed of? Do not you sit, without restraint,
“every man under his own vine?” Do you not, every one,
high or low, enjoy the fruit of your labour? This is real,
rational liberty, such as is enjoyed by Englishmen alone; and
not by any other people in the habitable world. Would the
being independent of England make you more free? Far,
very far from it. It would hardly be possible for you to
steer clear, between anarchy and tyranny. But suppose,
after numberless dangers and mischiefs, you should settle
into one or more republics, would a republican government
give you more liberty, either religious or civil? By no
means. No governments under heaven are so despotic as
the republican; no subjects are governed in so arbitrary a
manner as those of a commonwealth. If any one doubt of
this, let him look at the subjects of Venice, of Genoa, or
even of Holland. Should any man talk or write of the Dutch
Government, as every cobbler does of the English, he would
be laid in irons before he knew where he was. And then,
woe be to him | Republics show no mercy.
13. “But if we submit to one tax, more will follow.”
Perhaps so, and perhaps not. But if they did; if you were
taxed (which is quite improbable) equal with Ireland or Scot
land, still, were you to prevent this, by renouncing connexion
with England, the remedy would be worse than the disease.
For O ! what convulsions must poor America feel, before any
other Government was settled? Innumerable mischiefs must
ensue, before any general form could be established. And
the grand mischief would ensue when it was established; when
you had received a yoke which you could not shake off.
14. Brethren, open your eyes! Come to yourselves! Be
no longer the dupes of designing men! I do not mean any of
your countrymen in America; I doubt whether any of these
are in the secret. The designing men, the Ahithophels, are
in England; those who have laid their scheme so deep, and
covered it so well, that thousands, who are ripening it, suspect
nothing at all of the matter. These well-meaning men,
sincerely believing that they are serving their country, exclaim
against grievances, which either never existed, or are aggra
wated above measure; and thereby inflame the people more
and more, to the wish of those who are behind the scene.
But be not you duped any longer; do not ruin yourselves for
them that owe you no good-will, that now employ you only for
their own purposes, and in the end will give you no thanks.
They love neither England nor America, but play one against
the other, in subserviency to their grand design of overturning
the English Government. Be warned in time; stand and
consider, before it is too late; before you have entailed
confusion and misery on your latest posterity. Have pity
upon your mother-country ! Have pity upon your own |
Have pity upon yourselves, upon your children, and upon all
that are near and dear to you ! Let us not bite and devour
one another, lest we be consumed one of another ! O let us
follow after peace | Let us put away our sins ! the real
ground of all our calamities; which never will or can be
thoroughly removed, till we fear God and honour the King!
A SERMoN preached by Dr. Smith, in Philadelphia, has
been lately reprinted in England. It has been much
admired, but proceeds all along upon wrong suppositions.
These are confuted in the preceding tract; yet I would just
touch upon them again.
Dr. Smith supposes, 1. They have a right of granting their
own money; that is, of being exempt from taxation by the
supreme power. If they “contend for” this, they contend
for neither more nor less than independency. Why then do
they talk of their “rightful Sovereign?” They acknowledge
no Sovereign at all.
That they contend for “the cause of liberty,” is another
mistaken supposition. What liberty do you want, either civil
or religious? Youhad the very same liberty we have in England.
I say you had; but you have now thrown away the substance,
and retain only the shadow. You have no liberty, civil or
religious, now, but what the Congress pleases to allow.
But you justly suppose, “We are by a plain original
contract entitled to a community of privileges, with our
trethren that reside in England, in every civil and religious
respect.” (Page 19.) Most true. And till you appointed
your new sovereigns, you enjoyed all those privileges. Indeed
you had no vote for members of Parliament; neither have I,
because I have no freehold in England. Yet the being
taxed by the Parliament is no infringement either of my civil
or religious liberty. And why have you no representatives
in Parliament? Did you ever desire them?
But you say again, “No power on earth has a right to
grant our property without our consent.” (Page 22.)
Then you have no Sovereign; for every Sovereign under
heaven has a right to tax his subjects; that is, “to grant
their property, with or without their consent.” Our Sove
reign” has a right to tax me, and all other Englishmen,
whether we have votes for Parliament-men or no.
Vainly, therefore, do you complain of “unconstitutional
exactions, violated rights, and mutilated charters.” (Page 24.)
Nothing is exacted but according to the original constitution
both of England and her colonies. Your rights are no more
violated than mine, when we are both taxed by the supreme
power; and your charters are no more mutilated by this,
than is the charter of the city of London.
Vainly do you complain of being “made slaves.” Am I
or two millions of Englishmen made slaves because we are
taxed without our own consent?
You may still “rejoice in the common rights of freemen.”
I rejoice in all the rights of my ancestors. And every right
which I enjoy is common to Englishmen and Americans.
But shall we “surrender any part of the privileges which
we enjoy by the express terms of our colonization;” that is,
of our charter? By no means; and none requires it of you.
None desires to withhold anything that is granted by the
* That is, in connexion with the Lords and Commons.
express terms of your charters. But remember! one of your
first charters, that of Massachusetts-Bay, says, in express
terms, you are exempt from paying taxes to the King for
seven years; plainly implying, that after those seven years
you are to pay them like other subjects. And remember your
last charter, that of Pennsylvania, says, in express terms, you.
are liable to taxation; yea, it objects against being taxed by
the King, unless in connexion with the Lords and Commons.
But “a people will resume,” you say, “the power which
they never surrendered, except”—No need of any exception.
They never surrendered it at all; they could not surrender
it; for they never had it. I pray, did the people, unless you
mean the Norman army, give William the Conqueror his
power? And to which of his successors did the people of
England (six or seven millions) give the sovereign power?
This is mere political cant; words without meaning. I know
but one instance in all history wherein the people gave the
sovereign power to any one: That was to Massaniello of
Naples. And I desire any man living to produce another
instance in the history of all nations.
Ten times over, in different words, you “profess yourselves
to be contending for liberty.” But it is a vain, empty
profession; unless you mean by that threadbare word, a liberty
from obeying your rightful Sovereign, and from keeping the
fundamental laws of your country. And this undoubtedly it
is, which the confederated colonies are now contending for,
