A Scheme of Self-Examination
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
Sunday.—Love of God and Simplicity: Means of which are,
Prayer and Meditation.
1. HAve I been simple and recollected in everything I
said or did? Have I (1.) been simple in everything, that is,
looked upon God, my Good, my Pattern, my one Desire, my
Disposer, Parent of Good; acted wholly for Him; bounded
my views with the present action or hour? (2) Recol
lected? that is, has this simple view been distinct and unin
terrupted? Have I, in order to keep it so, used the signs
agreed upon with my friends, wherever I was ? Have I done
anything without a previous perception of its being the will
of God? or without a perception of its being an exercise or a
means of the virtue of the day? Have I said anything
without it?
2. Have I prayed with fervour? at going in and out of
church? in the church? morning and evening in private?
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, with my friends, at
rising? before lying down? on Saturday noon? all the time
I am engaged in exterior work in private? before I go into
the place of public or private prayer, for help therein?
Have I, wherever I was, gone to church morning and even
ing, unless for necessary mercy? and spent from one hour to
three in private? Have I, in private prayer, frequently
stopped short and observed what fervour? Have I repeated
it over and over, till I adverted to every word? Have I at
the beginning of every prayer or paragraph owned I cannot
pray? Have I paused before I concluded in his name, and
adverted to my Saviour now interceding for me at the right
hand of God, and offering up these prayers?
3. Have I duly used ejaculations? that is, have I every
hour prayed for humility, faith, hope, love, and the particular
virtue of the day? considered with whom I was the last
hour, what I did, and how 7 with regard to recollection, love
of man, humility, self-denial, resignation, and thankfulness?
considered the next hour in the same respects, offered up all
I do to my Redeemer, begged his assistance in every
particular, and commended my soul to his keeping? Have
I done this deliberately, not in haste, seriously, not doing
anything else the while, and fervently as I could?
4. Have I duly prayed for the virtue of the day? that is,
have I prayed for it at going out and coming in?
deliberately, seriously, fervently?
5. Have I used a Collect at nine, twelve, and three? and
grace before and after eating? aloud at my own room?
deliberately, seriously, fervently?
6. Have I duly meditated? every day, unless for necessary
mercy, (1.) From six, &c., to prayers? (2) From four to
five? What was particular in the providence of this day?
How ought the virtue of the day to have been exerted upon
it? How did it fall short? (Here faults.) (3.) On Sunday,
from six to seven, with Kempis? from three to four on
redemption, or God’s attributes? Wednesday and Friday,
from twelve to one, on the Passion? after ending a book, on
what I had marked in it?
Monday.—Love of Man.
1. HAvE I been zealous to do, and active in doing, good?
that is, (1.) Have I embraced every probable opportunity of
doing good, and preventing, removing, or lessening evil?
(2.) Have I pursued it with my might? (3.) Have I thought
anything too dear to part with, to serve my neighbour?
(4.) Have I spent an hour at least every day in speaking to
some one or other? (5.) Have I given any one up till he
expressly renounced me? (6.) Have I, before I spoke to
any, learned, as far as I could, his temper, way of thinking,
past life, and peculiar hinderances, internal and external?
fixed the point to be aimed at? then the means to it?
(7.) Have I in speaking proposed the motives, then the
difficulties, then balanced them, then exhorted him to con
sider both calmly and deeply, and to pray earnestly for
help? (8.) Have I in speaking to a stranger explained what
religion is not? (not negative, not external ;) and what it.
is? (a recovery of the image of God;) searched at what step
in it he stops, and what makes him stop there? exhorted
and directed him? (9.) Have I persuaded all I could to
attend public prayers, sermons, and sacraments, and in
general to obey the laws of the Church Catholic, the Church
of England, the State, the University, and their respective
Colleges? (10.) Have I, when taxed with any act of
obedience, avowed it, and turned the attack with sweetness
and firmness? (11.) Have I disputed upon any practical
point, unless it was to be practised just then ? (12.) Have
I in disputing, (i.) Desired him to define the terms of the
question; to limit it; what he grants, what denies?
(ii) Delayed speaking my opinion? let him explain and
prove his? then insinuated and pressed objections?
(13.) Have I after every visit asked him who went with me,
“Did I say anything wrong?” (14.) Have I when any one
asked advice, directed and exhorted him with all my
power?
2. Have I rejoiced with and for my neighbour in virtue or
pleasure? grieved with him in pain, for him in sin?
3. Have I received his infirmities with pity, not anger?
4. Have I thought or spoke unkindly of or to him ?
Have I revealed any evil of any one, unless it was necessary
to some particular good I had in view? Have I then done
it with all the tenderness of phrase and manner consistent
with that end? Have I anyway appeared to approve them
that did otherwise?
5. Has good-will been, and appeared to be, the spring of
all my actions toward others?
6. Have I duly used intercession? (1.) Before, (2.) After,
speaking to any? (3.) For my friends on Sunday? (4.) For
my pupils on Monday? (5.) For those who have parti
cularly desired it, on Wednesday and Friday? (6.) For the
family in which I am, every day?
