A Roman Catechism, with a Reply Thereto
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
PREFA CE.
IT has been a frequent complaint among some of the Romish
Church, that the Protestants have misrepresented the doctrine
of their Church: On the other side, the Protestants accuse
the writers in that Church, of concealing, disguising, and
palliating their doctrines. The latter justify their charge by
producing such authors as have in several ages not only
taught that doctrine, but taught it as the doctrine of their
Church; the former deny the charge, by appealing from
particular authors to an higher authority, to Councils and
public acts and decrees, to Missals, Breviaries, and Catechisms.
Now, though those Protestants are not to be blamed, when
the authors they quote have been first licensed and approved
in that Church, and were never afterward condemned by it;
yet in composing this Catechism, to avoid contention as much
as I can, I have generally observed their directions, and have
seldom made use of particular authors, but when it is for the
explication of a doctrine that is not sufficiently explained, or
for confirmation of a doctrine generally received. I am very
confident that the quotations throughout are true, having again
and again examined them; and I have been as careful as I
could not to mistake the sense of them; that I might rightly
understand and truly represent the doctrine which I profess
to censure; for without a faithful and impartial examination
of an error, there can be no solid confutation of it.
SECTION I.
oF THE CHURCH, AND RULE of FAITH.
QUESTION 1. WHAT is the Church of Rome?
ANswer. The Church of Rome is that Society of Christians
which professes it necessary to salvation to be subject to the
Pope of Rome,” as the alone visible head of the Church.t
REPLY. Christ is the Head, from whom the whole body is
fitly joined together. And the holding to that Head (Coloss.
ii. 19) is the one great note of the Church, given by St. Austin.
* Dicimus, definimus, pronunciamus absolute necessarium ad salutem, omni
humanae creature subesse Romano Pontifici. Extravag. c. Unam sanctam de
Majoritate et Obedientia.
“We say, define, and pronounce, that it is absolutely necessary to salvation,
for every man to be subject to the Pope of Rome.”
+ Bellarm. De Eccles. milit. l. 3, c. 2, sec. Nostra autem sententia; et cap. 5,
sec. Respondeo neminem
(De Unit. Eccles. c. 3, 4.) But there is neither in Scripture
nor antiquity any evidence for a visible head, and much less
for the visible head, the Pope; and, least of all, that it is
necessary to salvation to be subject to him.
If it is necessary to salvation to be subject to him, it is
necessary to know who is the Pope; but that the world hath
often been divided about, when there were sometimes three,
and for about forty years together two, Popes.—Wide Theod.
Niem. de Schism. Univers.
Q. 2. How comes subjection to the Pope to be necessary to
salvation, and an essential note of the Church?
A. Because the Pope is Christ's Vicar, St. Peter's successor,
(Concil. Trid. Sess. 6; Decret. de Reform. cap. 1; Bulla Pii
IV, sup. Form. Juram.,) and hath the supreme power on
earth over the whole Church. (Con. Trid. Sess. 14, c. 7.)
“The Church is called one, as it has one invisible Head,—
Christ; and one visible, who doth possess the chair at Rome,
as the lawful successor of St. Peter, prince of the Apostles.”
(Catech. Rom. par. 1, c. 10, n. 11.)
REPLY. If Christ gave no such power to St. Peter, or the
Pope be not St. Peter's successor, then the Pope has no
pretence to this power. Now, we read that “Christ gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, for the work of the ministry
and the edifying the body.” (Eph. iv. 11, 12.) But that he
gave one Apostle pre-eminence above the rest, much less
absolute power over them, we read not. This power they
were forbidden to attempt or desire; (Matt. xx. 26;) and St.
Paul was so far from acknowledging it, that he challenged an
equality with the rest of the Apostles, (Gal. i. 15, 17,) and,
upon occasion, withstood St. Peter. (Gal. ii. 11.)
To this we may add the judgment of St. Cyprian: “The
other Apostles are the same St. Peter was, endowed with
an equal fellowship of honour and power.” (Epist. de Unit.
Eccles.)
Q. 3. What authority doth the Church of Rome challenge?
A. She declares that she is the mother and mistress of all
Churches; (Concil. Later. 4, can. 2; Concil. Trid. Sess. 7; De
Bapt. can. 3, &c.;) and that to believe her so to be is necessary
to salvation. (Bulla Pii IV, super. Form. Jur.) Pope Innocent
III, thus decreed: “As God is called universal Lord, because
all things are under his dominion; so the Church of Rome is
called Catholic, or universal, because all Churches are subject
unto her.” (Apud Baron. Annal. 1199.)
REPLY. As it was foretold, so it was fulfilled: “Out of
Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem.” (Isaiah ii. 3.) There the Church began; and
therefore, in the Synodical Epistle of the Second General
Council of Constantinople, Jerusalem is called “the mother
of all Churches.” (Baron. A. D. 382, p. 461.)
If she is the mistress because she is the mother, (as Pope
Innocent I. would have it, Epist. 1, Concil., tom. 4, p. 5)
then Jerusalem was the mistress. If the mistress because
she was once the imperial city, then Constantinople was so
likewise; and accordingly it was decreed in the Fourth
General Council, that of Chalcedon, can. 28, “That the
Church of Constantinople should have equal privileges with
that of Rome, because she is the imperial seat.”
And if she claims this sovereign authority upon any other
reason, she never had, nor can ever prove, a right to it.
This is confirmed by Pope Pius II., (when a Cardinal) who
saith, that “before the time of the Nicene Council, little regard
was had to the Church of Rome.” (Epist. 288.)
Q. 4. What use doth she make of this authority?
A. She requires all persons, upon her sole authority, to
receive and believe the doctrines she proposes to be received
and believed,” and without the belief of which she declares
there is no salvation.f
REPLY. “The gospel which was preached of me, is not after
man; for I neither received it of man, neither was I taught
it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.” (Gal. i. 11, 12.)
“Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other
gospel unto you, than that which we have preached, let him
be accursed.” (Verses 8, 9.)
The Church of Rome cannot avoid St. Paul’s anathema,
* Sacrosancta synodus omnibus Christi fidelibus interdicit, ne posthac de sanc
tissimá Eucharistiá aliter credere, docere, aut praedicare audeant, quam ut est
hoc praesenti decreto explicatum, atque definitum.–Concil. Trid. Sess. 13, Decret.
de Euchar. So again, Sess. 25, Decret. de Purgatorio. And there are above a hun
dred anathemas in that Council in point of doctrine against such as do not so believe.
+ Hanc veram catholicam fidem, extra quam nemo salvus esse potest: That is,
“This is the true Catholic faith, without which no man can be saved.”—Bulla
Pii IV., super Form. Juram.
/
when she requires to bow down before an image, which the
Scripture forbids; and forbids to read the Scripture, which it
requires.
And without doubt the text of the Apostle holds as much
against any other, as against himself or an angel from heaven.
Q. 5. Doth not the Church of Rome acknowledge the holy
Scripture to be a sufficient rule for faith and manners?
A. No: For there are some doctrines proposed by that
Church as matters of faith, and some things required as
necessary duty, which are by many learned men among
themselves confessed not to be contained in Scripture.
REPLY. We read in Scripture of “the faith once delivered
to the saints;” (Jude 3;) and “all” or the whole “Scrip
ture is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be
perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works.” (2 Tim.
iii. 16, 17.)
The Scripture, therefore, is a rule sufficient in itself, and
was by men divinely inspired at once delivered to the world;
and so neither needs, nor is capable of, any further addition.
So Tertullian: “Let Hermogenes show that this thing is
written. If it be not written, let him fear the woe pronounced
against them that add to, or take from, Scripture.” (Contra
Hermog., c. 22.)
Q. 6. What doctrines of faith and matters of practice are
thus acknowledged not to be in Scripture?
A. The doctrines of transubstantiation, (Scotus in 4 Sent.
Dist. 11, q.3, et Yribarn in Scot.,) of the seven sacraments,
(Bellarm. l. 2, de Effectu Sacram., c. 25, sec. Secunda pro
batio, ) of purgatory, (Roffens. contra Luther., art. 18,) and
the practice of half-communion, (Concil. Constan., Sess. 13,
Cassander, art. 22,) worshipping of saints and images, (Bel
larm. de Cult. Sanct, l. 3, c. 9, sec. Praeterea. Cassand. Con
sult, art. 21, sec. 4) indulgences, (Polyd. Virg. de Invent.,
l. 8, c. 1) and service in an unknown tongue. (Bellarm. de
Verb. Dei, l. 2, c. 26.)
REPLY. On the contrary, St. Augustine writes, “If any
one concerning Christ and his Church, or concerning any
other things which belong to faith or life, I will not say if we,
but (which St. Paul hath added) if an angel from heaven,
preach unto you besides what ye have received in the Law
and Evangelical Writings, let him be accursed.” (Contr.
Petil, l. 3, c. 6.) For as all faith is founded upon divine
authority, so there is now no divine authority but the
Scriptures; and, therefore, no one can make that to be of
divine authority which is not contained in them. And if
transubstantiation and purgatory, &c., are not delivered in
Scripture, they cannot be doctrines of faith.
Q. 7. What doth the Church of Rome propound to herself
as an entire rule of faith?
A. Scripture with tradition; and she requires that the
traditions be received and reverenced with the like pious
regard and veneration as the Scriptures; and whosoever
knowingly contemns them, is declared by her to be accursed.
(Concil. Trid. Sess. 4; Decret. de Can. Script.)
REPLY. “In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines
the commandments of men;” (Matt. xv. 9;) forbidding that
as unlawful which God hath not forbidden, and requiring
that as necessary duty which God hath not required.
So St. Hierom: “The sword of God,” his word, “doth
smite those other things, which they find and hold of their
own accord, as by apostolical tradition, without the authority
and testimony of Scripture.” (In Cap. 1, Aggaei.)
Q. 8. What do they understand by traditions?
A. Such things belonging to faith and manners as were
dictated by Christ, or the Holy Ghost in the Apostles, and
have been preserved by a continual succession in the Catholic
Church, from hand to hand, without writing. (Concil. Trid.
ibid.)
REPLY. But St. Cyril affirms, “It behoveth us not to
deliver, no, not so much as the least thing of the holy mysteries
of faith, without the holy Scripture. That is the security of
our faith, not which is from our own inventions, but from
the demonstration of the holy Scriptures.” (Catechis. 5.)
Q. 9. What are those traditions which they profess to have
received from Christ and his Apostles?
A. The offering the sacrifice of the mass for the souls in
purgatory, (Conc. Trid. Sess. 22, c. 2) the mystical bene
dictions, incensings, garments, and many other things of the
like kind, (c. 5) salt, spittle, exorcisms, and wax candles used
in baptism, &c., (Catech. Rom., par. 2, c. 2, n. 59, 65, &c.,)
the Priests shaving the head after the manner of a crown.
(Ibid. c. 7, n. 14.)
REPLY. “Laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold
the tradition of men.” (Mark vii. 8.)
“It is necessary even for novices to learn the Scriptures,
that the mind may be well confirmed in piety, and that they
may not be accustomed to human traditions.” (St. Basil in
Reg. Brev. Reg. 95.)
The Church of Rome hath no more to show for their holy
water, and incensings, and salt, and spittle, &c., than the
Pharisees for their traditions; and since they no less impose
them as divine than the other, they are alike guilty with them.
Q. 10. Doth the Church of Rome agree with other Churches
in the number of canonical books of Scripture?
A. No: For she hath added to the canonical books of the
Old Testament, Esdras, Tobit, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus,
Baruch, the two Books of Maccabees,” and a new part of
Esther and Daniel; which whole Books, with all their parts,f
whosoever rejects as not canonical, is accursed. (Concil.
Trident. Sess. 4, Decret. de Scriptur.)
REPLY. These apocryphal books were wrote after prophecy
and divine inspiration ceased, and so were not received by
the Jewish Church, (to whom “were committed the oracles
of God,” Rom. iii. 2) nor by the Christian Church, as the
Sixtieth Canon of the Council of Laodicea shows, where there
is a catalogue of the canonical Books, without any mention of
these.
“As therefore the Church doth read Tobias, Judith, and
the Books of the Maccabees, but doth not receive them into
the canonical Scriptures; so it doth read the two volumes of
Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus for the edification of the people,
not to establish the authority of ecclesiastical principles.”
St. Jerome. (In Prologo Proverb.)—See Bellarm. de Verbo,
l. 1, c. 10 init.
* These books are so sacred, as that they are of infallible truth.-Bellarm. De
Verbo, l. 1, c. 10, sec. Ecclesia vera.
+ Wherefore doth the Council add, “with all their parts; ” unless that all
should understand those parts also, about which there was some time a dispute,
to belong to the sacred canon of the Bible?—Ibid. c. 7, sec. Denique.
Q. 11, Are the people of the Church of Rome permitted
to read the Scripture in a tongue vulgarly known?
A. No; they were for a time permitted to read it, under
the caution of a license, where it could be obtained; (Reg.
Ind. Libr. Prohib. Reg. 4;) but since they are forbid it, or to
have so much as any summary or historical compendium of it
in their own tongue. (Index Libr. Prohib. Auctor. Sixti V.,
et Clem. VIII. Observat. circa 4 Regulam.)
REPLY. Under the Law, the people had the Scriptures in
a tongue vulgarly known; and they were required to read
the law, and to be conversant in it: “These words, which I
command thee this day, shall be in thine heart,” &c.; (Deut.
vi. 6;) and accordingly our Saviour sends them thither:
“Search the Scriptures.” (John v. 39.) So St. Paul requires
that his “Epistle be read to all the brethren;” (1 Thess. v.
27;) and, if so, it was wrote in a language they understood.
And so it was in the primitive Church; therefore St.
Chrysostom exhorts his hearers, though secular men, to
provide themselves Bibles, the medicines of their souls, to be
their perpetual instructers. (Comment. in Coloss. iii. 16.)
Q. 12. For what reason is the Scripture thus prohibited
among them?
A. “Because,” say they, “if it be permitted to be read
every where, without difference, there would more prejudice
than profit proceed from it.” (Reg. Ind. Libr. Prohib. Reg. 4.)
REPLY. In the Apostles’ times there were some that
“wrested the Scriptures to their own destruction;” and yet
the Apostle thought of no other expedient than to give the
Christians a caution, that they were “not also led away with
the error of the wicked.” (2 Pet. iii. 16, 17.) The way to
prevent this, therefore, is, not to keep the Scriptures from
the people, which “were written for our learning,” (Rom.
xv. 4,) but to exhort them to a diligent perusal of them: “Ye
err, not knowing the Scriptures.” (Matt. xxii. 29.)
“The sheep should not cast away their skin, because wolves
sometimes hide themselves under it.” (St. Austin de Serm.
Dom. in Monte.)
Q. 13. Since the Scripture may be misunderstood, have
they no judge to determine the sense of it?
A. They say, “It belongs to the Church” (of Rome) “to
judge of the sense of Scripture, and no one may presume to
interpret the Scripture contrary to the sense which Mother
Church hath held and doth hold.” (Concil. Trid. Sess. 4.
Decret. de Edit. et Usu Script.)
It cannot be called the Church of God where the legitimate
successor of St. Peter in the Roman Chair, and the undoubted
vicar of Christ, doth not preside: What the Church doth
teach is the express word of God; and what is taught against the
sense and consent of the Church, is the express word of the
devil. (Cardinal Hosius de expresso Dei verbo, p. 642, 643.)
REPLY. While the Apostles were alive, the Churches of
Christ, in matters of dispute, applied themselves to them, as
in the point of circumcision; (Acts xv.2;) but since they of
the Church of Rome can never prove the like infallibility in
their Church, nor direct us where it is, we think ourselves as
well in our Church as they can be in theirs; and that as long
as we have the Scripture, the Church is to be referred to the
Scripture, and not the Scripture to the Church; and that, as
the Scripture is the best expounder of itself, so the best way
to know whether anything be of divine authority, is to apply
ourselves to the Scripture.
“If I would have the Church demonstrated, it is not by
human teachings, but by the divine oracles.” (St. Aug. de
Unit. Eccles. cap. 3.)
“The way for understanding the Scriptures, is to demon
strate out of themselves, concerning themselves.” (Clem.
Alex. Strom. l. 7, p. 757.)
SECTION II.
OF REPENTANCE AND OBEDIENCE.
QUESTION 14. WHAT doth the Church of Rome teach
concerning repentance?
ANswer (1.) It teacheth that contrition, which is a sorrow
for sin past, and a purpose of not committing it for the future,
though perfected with charity, is not sufficient to reconcile a
person to God without penance, or confession to a Priest
either in act or desire. (Concil. Trid. Sess. 14, c. 4. Catech.
Rom. Pars 2, de Sacrament. Paenit. n. 38.)
A. (2.) She teacheth that attrition, or imperfect contrition,
proceeding merely from the fear of hell, is equivalent to
contrition, by virtue of confession; and that attrition doth
dispose to receive the grace of the sacrament of penance, and
leads to justification. (Sess. 14, cap. 4. Bellarm. de Paenit. l. 2,
c. 18, sec. Sed sciendum est.)—See Question 77.
REPLY. Contrition is but another word for repentance; and
repentance is a qualification for pardon and reconciliation:
“A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not
despise.” (Psalm li. 17.) “Repent, and be converted, that
your sins may be blotted out.” (Acts iii. 19.) The same
texts which make contrition sufficient, without confession to
the Priest, make attrition insufficient without there be
contrition. And as the former doctrine of the insufficiency
of contrition without confession, makes that necessary which
God hath not made necessary; so this latter of the sufficiency
of attrition upon confession to the Priest without contrition,
makes that unnecessary which God hath made necessary.
Q. 15. What is the judgment of the Church of Rome as
to good works?
A. The Church of Rome doth affirm that the good works
of justified persons do truly deserve eternal life; (Concil.
Trid. Sess. 6, c. 16;) and if any one say that such works do
not truly deserve an increase of grace here, and eternal life
hereafter, let him be accursed. (Ibid. Can. 32.)
“Our good works do merit eternal life, not only by virtue
of God’s covenant and acceptation, but also by reason of the
work itself.” (Bellarm. de Justif. l. 5, c. 17.)
REPLY. Truly to deserve is to make 'our debtor: “To
him that worketh ” (that is, that meriteth) “is the reward
not reckoned of grace, but of debt.” (Rom. iv. 4.) “But
can a man be profitable to God?” (Job xxii. 2.) Our
Saviour teaches us otherwise: “When ye shall have done all
those things which are commanded you, say, We are
unprofitable servants; we have done that which was our duty
to do.” (Luke xvii. 10.)
A command to do it, and grace to obey that command,
and a “far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,” as a
reward, (2 Cor. iv. 17,) will shame the pretence of real merit,
and turn the anathema upon themselves. And they may as
soon reconcile light and darkness, as the grace of God and
merit of Christ to this doctrine.
Q. 16. But is there no allowance for such as have not good
works of their own sufficient to merit for themselves?
A. Yes; there are indulgences to be obtained, by which
persons may be discharged from the punishment of sin here
and in purgatory; and if any affirm these indulgences to be
useless, or that the Church hath no power to grant them, he
is accursed. (Concil. Trid. Sess. 25, Decret. de Indulg.)
The Popes and Prelates of the Church are judges
appointed by God to remit faults and punishments in his
name by an indulgence, if so be justice be satisfied through
the application of the satisfaction of Christ and his saints.
(Bellarm. de Indulg. l. 1, c. 5, sec. Jam vero.)
REPLY. What God binds, no person can untie; and what
he unties, no man can bind. But this course of indulgence,
still upheld in the Church of Rome, doth untie what God
doth bind; it makes sin easy and cheap, and prostitutes the
strict rules of Christianity to the basest purposes. For when
a person can have a plenary indulgence for so trivial a
satisfaction as the standing before the doors of St. Peter’s
Church at Rome, when the Pope blesses the people at Easter,
it makes sin as easy to be committed as pardoned.
Q. 17. How far do those indulgences extend?
A. Sometimes to days, sometimes to years, nay, some of
them were plenary indulgences;* some were for a discharge
from punishments here, others from the pains of purgatory,t
and some granted an eternal reward.
Q. 18. Upon what terms were those indulgences to be
obtained?
A. By money,t pilgrimages, § assisting the Pope, reciting
certain prayers."
* Bellarm. de Indulgent. l. 1, c. 9, init. “Plenary indulgence doth take
away all the punishment due to sin.” Ibid. sec. Indulgentiá Quadragen.
* Ibid. c. 7, sec. Et quidem.
# This is implied Concil. Trid. Sess. 21, c. 9, though it is called by the soft
name of alms.
§ So many are granted to particular churches in Rome, for the benefit of
pilgrims.
| So those that upon his motion took up arms against the Albigenses,
had by an indulgence the promise of an eternal reward. Baron. ad A. D. 1179,
n. 7.
"| So Pope Alexander VI. granted to those that recited this prayer to the
blessed Virgin, and St. Ann her mother, 30,000 years' indulgence.
REPLY. The scandal given by them was so notorious, that
order was given by the Council of Trent for reforming the
abuses of them; but when the Fathers thought fit not to dis
cover those abuses, and only forbad wicked gain, (Sess. 25,
Decret. de Indulg.,) they left a large scope for making a gain
of them. And two of the Popes under whom that Council sat,
viz., Paul III., and Julius III., (A Bull of Indulgence to the
Fraternity of the Altar, Paris, 1550, v. B. Taylor's Defence,
Part II., l. 2, p. 8) proceeded in the same course as their
predecessors, if they did not exceed them; for by their Bulls,
there is granted to all such of the Fraternity of the Holy Altar,
as visit the Church of St. Hilary of Chartres, during the six
weeks of Lent, 775,700 years of pardon, besides fourteen or
fifteen plenary indulgences. And since that, Urban VIII.,
(Bullar. to 3., p. 74) and Clement X., (A.D. 1671. Bull
upon the Canonization of five Saints,) have granted by their
indulgence a plenary remission of sins.
Q. 19. Upon what pretence or reason is the doctrine and
practice of indulgences founded ?
A. Upon works of supererogation,” that is, the overplus
of the satisfactions of Christ and the saints, which is a
treasury, (Concil. Trid. Sess., 21, c. 9) committed to the
Church’s custody,t and to be disposed of as she sees meet.
(Bellarm. Ibid. c. 3.)
REPLY. “The sufferings of this present time are not worthy
to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us;”
(Rom. viii. 18;) so 2 Cor. iv. 17. “Every one of us shall
give an account of himself to God.” (Rom. xiv. 12.) If there
be no comparison betwixt the reward and our sufferings for
it, then no one has merit to transfer to another; and if every
man must give an account of himself, then no man can be
saved by the merits of another. But suppose there is a
superabundance of satisfactions in the saints; yet what need
“Hail Mary ! full of grace : The Lord be with thee, thy grace with me !
Blessed be thou among women; and blessed be St. Ann thy mother, from whom,
O Virgin Mary, thou hast proceeded without sin and spot; but of thee hath
Jesus Christ been born, the Son of the living God. Amen.”
Thesaur. War. Exercit. in Grat. Sodal. B. V. M. Bruxel. Edit. 2 An. 1658,
p. 287.
* “That supererogation is necessary to indulgence, no one can deny,” saith
Bellarm. de Indulg. l. 1, c. 2, init.
+ So Pope Clem. VI., Constit. Extrav. in Bellarm. ibid. sec. ult,
WOL. X. II
is there of them, when there is such an infinite value in the
sufferings of Christ, who “by one offering hath for ever
perfected them that are sanctified;” (Heb. x. 14;) or who
gave the Church the power so to apply them?
Q. 20. Whither do the souls of those go that die in a state
of grace, but are not sufficiently purged from their sins, or
have not had a plenary indulgence for the remission of them?
A. Such go to purgatory, a place of torment in the other
world, near to hell, (Bellarm. de Purg., l. 2, c. 6, sec. Quinta
est,) where they are to continue till they have made full
satisfaction for their sins, and are throughly purged and
prepared for heaven, whereinto no unclean thing can enter.
(Catech. Rom., par. 1, c. 6, n. 3.)
Q. 21. How come those persons to be punished in the
other world, who depart in a state of grace out of this ?
A. Because they have not here fulfilled the penance
imposed upon them, or due from them to God. (Bellarm. de
Indulg, l. 1, c. 6, 7.) See Quest. 19.
REPLY. That those that die in a state of grace are yet in a
state of torment, and are to be purged in the other world, is
contrary to Scripture and antiquity. “There is no con
demnation to them which are in Christ Jesus.” (Rom. viii.
1.) “Whom he justified, them he also glorified.” (Verse
30.) “Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect?
It is God that justifieth: Who is he that condemneth?’”
(Verses 33, 34.) As justification and condemnation are here
opposed by the Apostle, so are condemnation and glorifica
tion; and he that is justified, upon the same reason that he
cannot be condemned, shall be glorified. Now, the elect are
justified before they go out of this world; and consequently
shall have nothing laid to their charge in the next.
“The servants of God then have peace, then enjoy quiet
rest and security; when, being drawn from these storms of
the world, we arrive at the haven of our everlasting habita
tion and security; when, this death being ended, we enter
into immortality.” (St. Cypr. de Mortal, sec. 2.)
“To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise.” (Luke
xxiii. 43.) Paradise is acknowledged to be the seat of the
blessed. (Bellarm. de Sanct. Beat., l. 1, c. 3, Testim. 4.)
Now, if there was a purgation necessary for sinners, he that
believed and repented not till the last moment of his life,
might be well supposed to need it; and should have been
sent rather to purgatory than paradise.
After the night of this life there is no purgation; and “it
is better to be corrected and purged now, than to be sent to
the torment there, where the time of punishing is and not of
purging.” (Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 15, in Plag. Grand.)
Q. 22. Of what continuance is the punishment of that state?
A. It is but for an appointed time; and the person is to
continue in it till he is purged from his sin, and has suffered
the punishment due to it. (Catech. Ibud.; Bellarm. De Purg.,
l. 2, c. 8, sec. Quantum ad primum.)
REPLY. The state that believers immediately enter upon
after death, is said to be “life” for the comfort, and “ever
lasting” for the continuance, of it.
“He that believeth on Him that sent me hath everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed
from death unto life.” (John v. 24.)
So St. Cyprian: “The end of this life being completed, we
are divided into the habitations of everlasting, either death or
immortality.” (Ad Demetr., sec. 16.)
Q. 23. Is there no way by which the souls of those that
are in purgatory may be delivered out of that prison, and
their time of torment shortened?
A. They may be helped and delivered by the suffrages of
the faithful that are alive; that is, by prayers, alms, and
masses; and other works of piety, such as indulgences.
(Concil. Trid, Sess. 25, Decr. de Purgat.; Sess. 22, can. 3.
Bellarm. de Purgat., l. 2, c. 16, sec. Ad haec.)
REPLY. “Betwixt us and you there is a great gulf fixed,
so that they which would pass from hence to you” (to relieve
you) “cannot.” (Luke xvi. 26.)
As the state in which Abraham and Lazarus were, needed ni
relief; so that in which the rich man was, could not obtain it.
“After death is no help to be gotten by godliness or repent
ance. Lazarus doth not there go to the rich man, nor the
rich man unto Lazarus. For the garners are sealed up, and
the time is fulfilled.” (Epiphanius contr. Cathar., Haer. 59.)
And if a man’s own repentance cannot help him, much less
can another's good works profit him.
So St. Jerome: “While we are in this world, we may be
II 2
able to help one another, either by our prayers, or by our
counsels: But when we shall come before the judgment-seat
of Christ, neither Job, nor Daniel, nor Noah, can intreat for
any one; but every one must bear his own burden.” (Lib. 3,
Com. in Galat., c. 6.) And he elsewhere saith: “What shall
be to all in the day of judgment, this is accomplished to
every one at the day of death.” (In Joel, c. 2.)
Q. 24. Is the doctrine of purgatory a matter of faith, and
necessary to be believed ?
A. Yes: For whosoever shall say that there is no debt of
temporal punishment to be paid, either in this world or in
purgatory, before there can be an admission into heaven, is
accursed. (Concil. Trid, Sess. 6, Can. 30, & Sess. 25, Decret.
de Purg.) And whosoever shall say, The sacrifice of the mass
is not to be used for the dead, is accursed. (Ibid., Sess. 22,
Can. 3.) This is one of the principles, without the belief of
which there is no salvation. (Bulla Pii Quarti.)
REPLY. Bishop Fisher saith, that there is none or very little
mention of purgatory among the ancients. (Roffens. Luther?
Confut., Art. 18; & Polyd. Virg. de Invent. l. 8, c. 1.) It is
then no little encroachment on the Christian world, to make
it now a doctrine of faith, and to require it, upon pain of
damnation, to be believed.
Q. 25. In what place were the souls of the Patriarchs, and
other good men, before the coming of Christ?
A. Before the death and resurrection, (Catech. Rom.,
par. 1, c. 6, n. 3, 6,) or ascension of Christ, (Bellarm. de
Christ., l. 4, c. 11,) the gates of heaven were open to none;
and the souls of good men departed were detained in a
certain place called Limbus Patrum, which is the uppermost
part of hell; the lowermost being the place of the damned;
next above that, purgatory; next to that, limbus infantum;
above that, limbus patrum. (Bellarm. de Purg. l. 2, c. 6, sec.
Quod autem.)
REPLY. We read that Elijah was taken up into heaven,
(2 Kings ii. 11,) and he and Moses appeared in glory. (Luke
ix. 30; Matt. xvii. 2.) And Abraham is represented as in
paradise, the blessed abode of good men in the other world.
(Luke xvi. 23.)
So St. Austin expounds it: “The bosom of Abraham is
the rest of the blessed poor, whose is the kingdom of heaven,
into which, after this life, they are received.” (Quaest.
Evangel, l. 2, c. 38.)
Q. 26. In what condition were they while thus detained in
limbo ?
A. They are not agreed in the nature and condition of the
place: For the Catechism saith, “They were sustained by
hope, and were without any sense of grief.” (N. 3.) And
presently, that, “although they were without other sense
of grief, yet, being kept in suspense, they were tormented with
the hope of that blessed glory which they did expect.” (N. 4.)
REPLY. But the Scripture tells us, that the state where
Abraham was, was not only a state of rest, but also of comfort.
(Luke xvi. 25.)
Q. 27. How and when were they delivered thence?
A. They were delivered by Christ at his descent into hell;
(Catech. Rom, ibid., n.5, 6;) so that ever since that place
remains empty. (Bellarm. de Purg., l. 2, c. 6, sec. Octava est.)
REPLY. The Scripture says not one word of this.
Q. 28. What use do they make of this doctrine?
A. Hereby they give a reason why there is neither precept
nor example in the Old Testament for the invocation of saints
departed, (Bellarm. de Sanct. Beat., l. 1, c. 19, sec. Item
Exod,) because they were, for their punishment, enclosed in
this place, and were there held bound by the devils, till delivered
by Christ. (Catech. Rom, ibid., n. 5.) And so the people of
those times only prayed to God; and did not use to say,
“Holy Abraham, pray for me.” (Bellarm, ibid.)
REPLY. There is neither precept nor example for the invo
cation of saints in the New Testament; and if that be a reason
for a limbus before Christ, it may be a reason for a limbus
still; and they may as well exclude the saints from heaven
now as then, if there be no more for their invocation in the
New Testament than was in the Old. Thus Salmero, a
learned disputant in the Council of Trent: “Invocations
of saints have no express ground in all the Scriptures.”
(Ad 1 Tim. 2, Disp. 7, sec. Sed cum autem et nec obstat.)
SECTION III.
OF DIVINE WORSHIP.
QUESTION 29. Of what doth the service in the Roman
Church consist?
ANswer. It consists of prayers and hymns offered to God,
angels, and saints; of lessons taken out of the Scriptures,
and legends; and of profession of faith in the creeds.
REPLY. Cardinal Quignonius, at the instance of Pope
Paul the Third, reformed the Breviary; and instead of
legends, set Scriptures for the lessons. But Pope Pius
Quintus, who afterward undertook to reform it also, pro
hibited that of Quignonius, (Bulla Prefixa Breviar. Rom.
Jussu Pii V. Edit.,) and instead of the Scriptures, placed
legends again; and so it continues.
Q. 30. In what language is their service performed?
A. It is performed in all places among them in the Latin
tongue, which is in no place vulgarly understood.
Q. 31. Is the having the service in an unknown tongue
enjoined in the Church of Rome?
A. Yes: It is required that it should be celebrated in the
Latin tongue; and whosoever shall say that it ought only to
be administered in the vulgar tongue is accursed. (Concil.
Trid., Sess. 23, c. 8, & Can. 9.) Hence, when of late years the
Missal, or Mass-book, was translated into French, it was
declared, by Pope Alexander the Seventh, to be a “seed
plot of disobedience, rashness, and schism;” and he calls
them that did it, “ sons of perdition; ” and doth “condemn,
reprobate, and forbid” that Missal.
REPLY. In divine worship, (as in all other actions,) the
first thing to be considered is the end, and the next thing
is the means conducing to that end. The end is the honour
of God, and the edification of the Church; and then God is
honoured, when the Church is edified. The means conducing
to that end, are to have the service so administered as may
inform the mind, engage the affections, and increase devotion:
But that cannot be done, where the tongue it is celebrated
in is not understood.
Thus we are taught by the Apostle: “He that speaketh in
an unknown tongue speaketh not unto men.” (1 Cor. xiv. 2.)
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 103*
“If I know not the meaning of the voice, he that speaketh
shall be a barbarian unto me.” (Verse 11.) “If thou shalt
bless with the Spirit,” (by the gift of an unknown tongue,)
“how shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned say
Amen at thy giving of thanks?” (Verse 16.) How can the
people be attentive to the lessons, answer at the responses, be
devout in the prayers, profess their faith in the creeds, when
they do not understand what is read, prayed, or professed ?
Thus St. Ambrose, on 1 Cor. xiv.: “It is evident that the
mind is ignorant where the tongue is not understood. The
unskilful person, hearing what he doth not understand, knows
not the conclusion of the prayer, and doth not answer, Amen.”
Q. 32. What are the objects of worship in the Church of
Rome?
A. Besides the blessed Trinity, angels, the Virgin Mary,
and saints.
REPLY. Our Saviour says, “Thou shalt worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.” (Matt. iv. 10.) As
divine worship is due to God, so it is not lawful to give it to
any other.
The Church of Rome doth acknowledge this, but says the
worship they give to saints and angels is not of that kind
(Catech. Rom., par. 3, c. 2, n. 8, par. 4, c. 6, n. 3.)
But what worship is peculiar to God, if prayer is not? So
thought St. Ambrose: “Thou only art to be invocated.” (De
Obitu Theodos.)
For God alone can receive our prayer, or can give what we
pray for, or be the object of our faith and trust.
Q. 33. What honour do they give to the angels?
A. (1.) The Church of Rome teaches that angels are to be
worshipped, (Catech. Rom., par. 3, c. 2, n. 8, 9, venerari,
adorare, colere,) invoked, and prayed to. (Ibid., n. 10.) And
they have litanies and prayers composed for this purpose.
(Litaniae, sec. Angelorum, vid. Horologium Tutelaris Angeli a
Drexelio. p. 84, Duac. 1623.)
A. (2.) They teach, that as every particular person hath a
guardian angel from his birth, (Catech. Rom., par. 4, cap. 9,
sec. 1, n. 4, 6,) so it is fit to commit themselves more parti
cularly to him, (Horolog. Drex., p. 108,) after this manner:
“Blessed angel ! to whose care our loving Creator hath
committed me, defend me this day, I beseech you, from all
dangers, and direct me in the way I ought to walk.” (The
Child’s Catechism, 1678.)
REPLY. We honour the holy angels, as they are God’s
ministers, and are “sent forth to minister unto them that shall
be heirs of salvation.” (Heb. i. 14.) But, to worship or pray
to them, we dare not, as it is what they themselves refuse and
abhor, (Rev. xix. 10,) and the Scripture doth condemn as “a
sign of a fleshly mind, vainly intruding into those things which
we have not seen.” (Col. ii. 18.) Theodoret, upon this text,
saith, that the practice of worshipping angels continued a long
time in Phrygia and Pisidia; wherefore the Synod of Laodicea
doth forbid praying to angels: “For Christians ought not to
forsake the Church of God, and depart aside and invocate
angels, which are things forbidden.” (Conc. Laod, Can. 35.)
Q. 34. What religious honour do they give to the saints?
A. They pray to them as their intercessors, make confessions
to them, offer incense, and make vows to them, venerate their
images and relics.
Q. 35. For what reason do they pray to saints?
A. That by their help they may obtain benefits from God,
(Concil. Trid, Sess. 25, de Invocat.,) who doth confer many
favours upon mankind, by their merit, and grace, and inter
cession. (Catech. Rom., par. 3, c. 2, sec. 12.–Missal. Rom.
proprium Missarum de Sanctis.)
Q. 36. After what manner do they pray to saints?
A. They pray to them as favourites with God, that they
would take them into their protection, and would obtain those
things of God for them which they want. Therefore they
plead that they have two different forms of prayers; for to God
they properly say, “Have mercy upon us, hear us:” To a
saint, “Pray for us.” (Catech. Rom., par. 4, c. 6, n. 3.)
Q. 37. But have they not those forms in their Missals,
Breviaries, and common books of devotion, which are parti
cularly and immediately applied to the saints for obtaining
what they want?
A. Yes; it is too manifest to be denied; and though they
have been more sparing of late years, yet nothing formerly
more frequent. As, for instance: In a Missal printed at
Paris, an. 1520, fol. 51, there is this prayer to St. Agnes:—
“O Agnes, woman of the Lamb, do thou enlighten us
within | Destroy the roots of sin, O excellent Lady. After
the grievances of the world, do thou translate us to the
company of the blessed!”
REPLY. “There is one God, and one Mediator between
God and men, the Man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a
ransom for all.” (1 Tim. ii. 5, 6.)
“Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died,
yea, rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand
of God, who also maketh intercession for us.” (Rom. viii. 34.)
As there is but one God to us, though “there are gods many,
and lords many;” (1 Cor. viii. 5;) so to us there is but “one
Mediator,” or Intercessor, though we should grant there are
many intercessors and mediators. For though the angels and
saints may intercede for us in heaven, that no more makes them
such intercessors as we may pray to, than because there are
gods many, we may pray to them, as we do to the true God.
The Scripture knows no difference between a Mediator of
intercession and redemption: He alone makes intercession
for us that died and rose, and is at the right hand of God.
And He alone has a right to our prayers, and to Him alone
may we address them.
So Origen: “All prayers, and supplications, and thanks
givings, are to be sent up to God the Lord of all, by that
High Priest who is above all angels, being the living Word
of God.” (Lib. 5, Cont. Cels., pp. 233,239.)
So again: “We ought to pray only to the God over all,
and his only Son, the first-born of every creature, who, as
our High Priest, offers his prayers to his God, and our God.”
(Lib. 8, pp. 395,402.)
To have other mediators and intercessors is “not to hold
the Head,” (Coloss. ii. 19,) in the judgment of the Apostle,
and the Council of Laodicea, where it is said, “Christians
ought not to forsake the Church and invocate angels. If any
man, therefore, be found to give himself to this privy idolatry,
let him be anathema; because he hath forsaken our Lord
Jesus, the Son of God, and betaken himself to idolatry.”
Q. 38. What is the worship they give to the Virgin Mary?
A. They fly unto her as the advocatrix of the faithful, the
mother of God; that by prayer to her they may obtain help
through her most excellent merits with God. (Catech. Rom.,
par. 4, cap. 5, n. 8.)
REPLY. We honour this blessed Virgin as the mother of the
holy Jesus, and as she was a person of eminent piety; but we
do not think it lawful to give that honour to her which belongs
not to a creature, and doth equal her with her Redeemer.
Q. 39. Have they not some singular forms of devotion to
l:er ?
A. Yes; for apprehending her to be in glory superior to
all created beings, they offer a service to her, beyond what
they give either to angels or saints.
Q. 40. After what manner do they apply themselves to her?
A. According to some Missals, they ask her to command her
Son, by the right and authority of a mother; (Missal. Paris.
Anno 1520, folio 65;) or, as it is in the Breviaries used at this
day, “Show thyself a mother.” (Brev. Rom. Fest. Assump.)
They pray to her, that she would loose the bands of the guilty,
bring light to the blind, would make them mild and chaste, and
cause their hearts to burn in love to Christ. (Officium B. M.
in the hymn called Planctus B. M., Antwerp, 1641.)
In a book printed lately in London, the author saith, that
“whatever gifts are bestowed upon us by Jesus, we receive
them by the mediation of Mary; no one being gracious to
Jesus that is not devoted to Mary; that the power of Mary
in the kingdom of Jesus is suitable to her maternity; and
though the condition of some great sinners may be so deplor
able, that the limited excellency and merits cannot effectually
bend the mercies of Jesus to relieve them; yet such is the
acceptableness of the mother of Jesus to Jesus, that whoso
ever is under the verge of her protection, may confide in her
intercession to Jesus;” that the person devoted to her, is to
beg of her to accompany him as his “sacred guide, advocate,
and champion, against the assaults of sin and sensuality.”
(Contemplations of the Life and Glory of Holy Mary, &c., pp.
7–9, 14. Printed anno 1685.)
Much after the fore-cited manner did the Council of Con
stance invoke the blessed Virgin, as other Councils used to do
the Holy Ghost, calling her the “mother of grace, the fountain
of mercy;” and they call on her for “light from heaven.”
REPLY. We cannot but wonder at the applications made to
the blessed Virgin in the Church of Rome, whose acts on earth,
and whose power in heaven, the Scripture doth very sparingly
relate, or is altogether silent in. We read nothing there of her
bodily assumption into heaven, nor of her exaltation to a
throne above angels and archangels. (Brev. Rom. AEstiv. Fest.
Assump.) We read nothing there of her being the mother
of grace and mercy, (Officium parvum B. M. ad Matutin.,
Catech. par. 4, c. 5, n. 8,) the queen and gate of heaven, the
advocatrix of sinners; (Completor. Catech. par. 4, c. 5, n.8;)
and of her power in destroying all heresies in the world,
(Fest. Assump.,) and being all things to all. (Missale Paris.
ibid. & Le Psaultier de Jesus. Paris, 1620, p. 126.)
When we read so much of the blessed Virgin in books of
this kind, and so little of her in the divine writings, we cannot
but reflect upon what is said by Epiphanius, of a certain sect
of women that in his time offered cakes to the Virgin Mary,
which he calls an “impious thing,” and altogether “contrary
to the doctrine of the Holy Ghost.” (Haeres. 78, p. 1054. Par.
1622.) And he further adds, “This the Holy Ghost doth
warn us of, in that Christ saith, ‘Woman, what have I to do
with thee?” where he calls her woman, and as it were prophe
sying, to refute those schisms and heresies which he knew
would arise in the world; and that no one, being moved by a
certain admiration of the blessed Virgin, might turn himself
to those dotages of heresies.” And he adds, “Let the Virgin
Mary be honoured, but the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be
adored.” (Haeres., 79, n. 4, 7, &c.) Much more hath that
Father there to this purpose.
But what would this Father have said, if, instead of a chair
adorned and set forth in honour of the Virgin Mary, (as those
women did,) he had found her advanced to a throne of a
mediatrix in heaven? What, if instead of cakes, there had
been litanies and prayers offered to her, and that in more
abundance than to Christ himself? What, if he had found
them praying, “O holy mother, succour the miserable, help
the weak, comfort those that mourn?” (Breviar. Rom. AEstiv.
Suffragia.) I doubt not but he would have said of this, what
he doth of the other, that they “would obtrude her upon us
for God;” and have called it “heresy and idolatry.”
Q. 41. What external representations or memorials have
they in the Church of Rome, which they give veneration and
worship to?
A. They have the relics and images of the Virgin Mary
and saints (Concil. Trid, Sess. 25, de Invoc.)
Q. 42. What do they mean by relics?
A. The bodies or remainders of them, or particular things
belonging or relating to them when alive, as an arm, or thigh,
bones, or ashes; (Ex Decret. Regist. Praefix. Brev. Rom.;)
and the part in which they suffered; (Catech. Rom, par. 3,
c. 2, n. 15;) or the things by which they suffered; as the
chains with which St. Peter was bound. (Brev. Rom. Par.
AEstiv. Aug. Fest. Petri ad Vinc.)
REPLY. “He” (God by Michael) “buried Moses; but no
man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.” (Deut. xxxiv. 6.)
S. Barradas the Jesuit, upon the place, saith, “It is the
common opinion of Lyra, Abulensis, Cajetan, and others, that
the sepulchre was hid, lest the Israelites, who were inclined
to the worship of idols, should worship Moses as God. For
they say, that when the devil would for that reason have
showed the grave and the body of Moses to the Israelites, St.
Michael hindered; and this was the contention spoken of
Jude 9.” (Seb. Barrad. Itinerar. Fil. Israel.)
They could give no greater honour to the body of Moses,
than is given to relics in the Church of Rome; and if that
was idolatry, and Moses’s body was concealed to prevent it,
then there is as much reason to think it unlawful now in this
case, as it was then in that.
Q. 43. For what cause do they show this regard to relics?
A. By the veneration of them they obtain the help of the
saints (Concil. Trid, Sess. 25, de Invocat.) whom the relics
relate to ; and many benefits are thereby conferred by God
upon mankind; for by these the dead have been raised, the
infirm cured, and devils cast out. (Catech. Rom, ibid.; Breviar.
Rom., ibid.)
REPLY. We read of Hezekiah, (2 Kings xviii. 4) that he
“brake in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made:”
And the reason was, because the children of Israel did burn
incense to it. The brazen serpent was of God’s own institu
tion; (Num. xxi. 8;) by looking up to which, the people were
formerly cured. And though it was preserved as a memorial
of that divine operation; yet, when abused to idolatry, he cut
it in pieces. And were these truly relics of saints, and did
work those miracles they pretend, it would be no reason for
that reverence and worship they give to them; but the
reverence and worship given to them should, according to
good King Hezekiah’s practice, be a reason to give them a
decent interment.
Q. 44. What kind of reverence or worship is required to
be given to images and pictures in the Church of Rome?
A. They kiss them, uncover the head, and fall down, before
them; offer incense, and pray to them, and use all such pos
tures of worship as they would do to the person or persons
thereby represented, (whether Christ, the Virgin Mary, or
other saints,) if they were present: And whosoever doth think
otherwise, is accursed. (Concil. Trid., Sess. 25, de Invocat.
Catech. Rom., par. 4, c. 6, n. 4.) And accordingly, the Priest
is to direct the people to them, that they may be worshipped.
(Ut Colantur, Catech. Rom., par. 3, c. 2, n. 24.)
REPLY. On the contrary, the Second Commandment teaches
us, “Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or
any likeness of anything that is in heaven above,” &c. “Thou
shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them.” In
which there are two words to be considered: The one, pesel,
which we rightly translate graven image; for it properly
signifies anything carved and cut out of wood or stone; and
so it is about forty times rendered in the Greek translation,
7 Aurlov, “a graven thing.” So that an idol and an image are
there forbidden. The next word is themunah, which doth
properly signify a similitude or likeness, (as is confessed,) and
is always so translated. And thus it was understood by the
Fathers. So Justin Martyr, when he recites this law, saith,
“God forbad every image and similitude,” sixova was ouoloux.
And therefore Cassander grants that the ancient Christians
“abhorred all veneration of images.” (Consult, art. 21, de
Imagin.) Indeed, the command is so express against this
practice, that there has been a kind of self-condemnation in
the Church of Rome; whilst they commonly either altogether
leave out this Commandment, (The Child's Catechism, printed
1678) or render it imperfectly and by halves: “Thou shalt
not make to thee an idol.”
Q. 45. What do they profess is their intention in the
reverence they give to images and pictures?
A. They declare that the honour given to images and
pictures is referred to the prototypes, (Concil. Trid, ibid.,)
or the persons represented by them, whether God the Father,
Christ, angels, or saints; and when they fall down before
the image or picture, they worship God, or Christ, the angel,
or saint.
REPLY. If an image be a representation of a divine person,
and worship be due to the image for the sake of the person
represented in it; then, such as the person is, such must the
worship be that is due to his image; and what is due to the
person, if present, is due to the image in his absence. For to
give one honour to the person, and another to the image; a
superior to the person, and an inferior to the image; is to
terminate the worship in the image, and not pass it from thence
to the person, as Gretser, the Jesuit, argues: (De Cruce, l. 1,
c. 49, sec. Secundo itaque :) But if it be to pass from the
image unto the person, then we know what they do when they
kiss, and uncover their heads, and bow down to, and worship,
an image; and have reason to remember the Apostle's advice:
“Keep yourselves from idols.” (1 John v. 21.)
Q. 46. What regard have they to the material cross or
crucifix?
A. (1.) They ascribe peculiar virtue to it, and pray that God
would make the wood of the cross to “be the stability of faith,
an increase of good works, the redemption of souls.” (Ponti
ficale in Bened. Novae Crucis.)
(2.) They use all expressions of outward adoration, by kiss
ings and prostrations, &c. (Missale Fer. 6, In Parasc.)
(3.) They pray directly to it, to “increase grace in the
godly, and blot out the sins of the guilty.” (Ibid., Sub Ante
Domin. Pass. et Fest. Invent. Crucis.)
(4.) They give latria to it, which is the sovereign worship
that is peculiar to God. (Pontif Rom. Ordo ad Recep. Imper.
Rubr. 1, et Gretser de Cruce, l. 1, c. 49.)
REPLY. The Church of Rome, though without any autho
rity from Scripture, (which uses the words promiscuously,)*
makes a distinction between latria and doulia: The former is
the worship they give to God; the latter the worship they give
to saints. Now, they grant, that to give latria, or sovereign
worship, to any besides God, is idolatry; and that, were not
the host the very body and blood of Christ, it would be no
less than idolatry to give that honour to the host, which they
* EösAevdate, “Ye did service to them that were no gods.” (Gal. iv. 8.)
Exarpevaav, “They served the creature.” (Rom. i. 25.)
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 11]
give to Christ: We understand, then, how to call that worship
they give to the cross: They themselves call it latria; so we
may, by their leave, call it idolatry. For whatever the host
is, the cross is but a representation, and not the person
worshipped.
Q. 47. Do they think it lawful to represent God and the
blessed Trinity by pictures and images, and to worship them?
A. Such pictures are not only almost everywhere received
in the Church of Rome, but universally tolerated; (Bellarm.
de Imag., l. 2, c. 8, sec. Ultimo probatur;) and are both
recommended as expedient for the people. (Concil. Trid,
Sess. 25, de Sacr. Imag. Catech. Rom., par. 3, c. 2, n. 20,)
and proposed to them to be worshipped. (Cajetan. in Aquin.,
q. 25, art. 3.)
REPLY. There is nothing more expressly forbidden in
Scripture, than the making any image or representation of
God: “Take ye good heed unto yourselves, (for ye saw no
manner of similitude,) lest ye corrupt yourselves; and make
you a graven image, the similitude of any figure.” (Deut. iv.
15, 16.) If it had been acceptable to God, he would have
chosen a similitude to appear in ; but seeing he did not,
they were not to presume to make one for him. This is to
“change his glory.” (Rom. i. 21, &c.) And “to place such
an image in a Christian temple is abominable,” saith St.
Austin. (De Fide et Symb., c. 7.) And “thus to describe
the Trinity, is a deformation of it,” saith Cassander. (Art.
21, sec. de Imag.)
Q. 48. Upon what pretence do they make such representa
tions of God?
A. They say, they thereby represent not God, but some of
his properties and actions, after the manner they are described
in Scripture; as when “the Ancient of days” is said to “sit
on a throne, having the books opened before him; ” (Dan.
vii. 9, 10;) thereby signifying his etermity and infinite wisdom.
(Catech. Rom., ibid.)
REPLY. But what is this to those images and pictures used
by them which have no resemblance in Scripture? Such are
their descriptions of the Trinity in Unity, as of God the
Father like an old man, having the Son lying in his bosom,
and the IIoly Ghost over his head like a dove.
(2.) God himself never appeared in any form; and so the
resemblance in Daniel was only a prophetical scheme, and did
no more belong to God than the eyes and ears that are ascribed
to him in Scripture.
(3) God cannot be represented at all, but by such proper
ties and effects: But if an image of God be forbidden to be
worshipped, then the image, even by such properties and
effects, is forbidden to be worshipped.
Q. 49. But are not such descriptions of God, the way to
represent him, as if he was like unto one of us?
A. Such pictures are not without danger to be exposed to
such as cannot read the Scriptures, if they are not taught that
they are to be taken metaphorically. (Bellarm. de Imag., l. 2,
c. 8, sec. Respondent.)
REPLY. Cassander saith, “I wish those from whom this
information is to be received, were not the authors of these
superstitions; ” and he adds, “That the teaching is not enough,
without the occasions be removed.” (Art. 21, de Imag.)
This he saith of all images, but more especially of such as are
made to represent God.
SECTION IV.
OF THE SACRAMENTS.
QUESTION 50. WHAT is a sacrament?
ANswer. A sacrament is a sensible thing, which by the
institution of God hath a power, as well of causing, as of
signifying, holiness and righteousness. (Catech. Rom., par. 2,
cap. 1, n. 11.)
Q. 51. How many sacraments are there in the Church of
Rome?
A. There are seven; namely, baptism, confirmation,
eucharist, penance, extreme unction, orders, and matrimony.
(Concil. Trid., Sess. 7, Can. 1.)
Q. 52. Is this number determined to be a matter of faith?
A. Whosoever saith, that there are more or fewer than seven
instituted by Christ, or that any of the seven are not truly
and properly sacraments, is accursed. (Ibid.)
REPLY. Cassander saith, that we shall not easily find any
before Peter Lombard, who lived about 1139, that did define
the number of the sacraments. (Art. 13., sec. De Num.
Sacram.) And St. Austin is very positive that there are but
two of divine institution.* Now, that there should be
sacraments of divine institution, that are neither instituted
in the gospel, nor known to be so till 1100 years after our
Saviour, nor be made a matter of faith till 1500, may be a
doctrine received in the Church of Rome, but will not easily
be believed by any out of it.
Q. 53. What are the parts of a sacrament?
A. The parts of a sacrament are the matter or element, and
the form of words of consecration: So the matter in baptism
is water; the form is, “I baptize thee,” &c.
REPLY. That a sacrament should consist of matter and
form, and yet either have no form, as confirmation and extreme
unction; or have neither matter nor form, of divine institu
tion, as penance and matrimony, is to make them sacraments,
and to be none. Our Church rightly affirms of the additional
sacraments, they have not any visible sign ordained of God.
(Article 25.)
Q. 54. Of what virtue are the sacraments?
A. The sacraments contain the grace which they signify,
and confer grace ex opere operato, “by the work itself,” upon
such as do not put an obstruction. (Concil. Trid, ibid., can.
6, 8.) For these sensible and natural things work by the
almighty power of God in the sacraments, what they could
not do by their own power. (Catech. Rom., ibid., n. 27.)
REPLY. It is not sufficient that adult persons have no indis
position to receive the grace of the sacraments; for there is
also required a mind well-instructed, a sound belief, and a
heart well inclined for that purpose. (2.) The virtue in the
sacraments doth not proceed from the mere elements and words,
but from the blessing of God in consequence of his promise to
such only as rightly partake of them, and are qualified for it.
Q. 55. What is necessary to a sacrament on the part of
those that officiate?
* “Our Lord Jesus Christ,” saith he, “hath knit Christians together, with
sacraments most few in number, most easy to be kept, most excellent in significa
tion; as are baptism and the Lord's supper.”—Epist. ad Januar. 118.
A. It is absolutely necessary, that those that make and
consecrate the sacraments have an intention of doing at least
what the Church doeth, and doth intend to do. (Concil. Trid.,
ibid., can. 11.)
REPLY. From hence it follows, that if there be no inten
tion, the sacraments are none. And so there is no certainty
whether the Priest be a Priest, or whether in the eucharist
the elements continue not elements after consecration, and
what is taken for the host be no other than bread. For without
the intention, neither is the Priest ordained, nor are the
elements consecrated.
OF BAPTISM.
Q. 56. Who may administer the sacrament of baptism?
A. It chiefly belongs to Bishops, Priests, and Deacons;
but, in case of necessity, men or women, Jews, infidels, or
heretics may do it, if they intend to do what the Church
doeth. (Concil. Trid, Sess. 7, De Bapt., can. 4; Catech.
Rom., pars 2, c. 2, n. 24.)
REPLY. Our Saviour gave commission to the Apostles and
their successors, in the office of the ministry, to “teach all
nations, baptizing them.” (Matt. xxviii. 19, 20.) So that
women, Jews, and infidels, have no more a power to admi
nister baptism, than they have to teach, or to be Priests.
Q. 57. What ceremonies are used in the administration of
baptism in the Church of Rome?
A. Before baptism, there is, (1.) Chrism, or oil mixed with
water, in the consecration of it. (Catech., ibid., n. 11, 60.)
(2.) Exorcism, composed of certain words, prayers, and
actions, for driving away the devil out of the child, and the
salt, &c. (Catech., ibid., n. 65.) And the Priest is to blow in
the face of the child, after the form of a cross, saying, “Go
out of him, Satan,” &c. (Pastorale, Antwerp, 1625.)
(3.) The forehead, eyes, breast, &c., are to be crossed, to
show that, by the mystery of baptism, the senses are opened
to receive God, and to understand his commands. (Catech.,
n.67; Pastor., ibid.)
(4.) Then some exorcised salt is to be put into the mouth,
to signify a deliverance from the putrefaction of sin, and the
savour of good works. (Catech., ibid., n. 66.) And the Priest
in putting it into the mouth, saith, “N, take the salt of
wisdom, and let it be a propitiation for thee to eternal life.
Amen.” (Pastor, ibid.)
(5.) Then the nose and ears are to be anointed with
spittle, and then the child is to be brought to the water, as
the blind man to Siloam, to signify it brings light to the
mind. (Catech., ibid., n. 60.)
After baptism, (1.) The Priest anoints the top of the head
with chrism; (Catech., ibid., n. 72;) and he adds, “Let him
anoint thee with the chrism of salvation.” (Pastor., ibid.)
(2.) He puts a white garment on the baptized, saying,
“Take this white garment, which thou mayest bring before
the judgment-seat of Christ, that thou mayest have life
eternal.” (Catech., ibid., n. 73.)
(3.) A lighted candle is put into the hand, to show a faith
inflamed with charity, and nourished with good works. (Ibid.,
n. 74.)
REPLY. It is pleaded for these ceremonies, that they are
appointed for the majesty of divine worship; and that the
benefits contained in the sacraments may be better imprinted
on the mind. (Catech, par. 2, c. 2, n. 59.)
But can we think it for the majesty of baptism to have it
dressed up like a form of conjuration, that the child must be
supposed to be possessed with the devil, and the Priest must
blow in his face three times, with, “Get thee out, Satan,”
before he can say, “Peace be with thee; ” and that he must
cross him half a score times, or more, from part to part, in
preparation to baptism?
Can we think it for the majesty of it, to have salt exorcised
in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and to be
put into the mouth of the child, for a propitiation unto
eternal life? Can we think it for the majesty of this ordinance,
that the Priest should put some of his own spittle in his left
hand, and then taking it thence with the thumb and fore
finger of his right hand, touch both ears of the infant, and
say, “Ephphatha, be thou opened !” and then his nostrils,
and say, “For the odour of sweetness; but thou, O devil,
fly;” and then on his right hand, after the manner of a cross,
saying, “N, I deliver unto thee the mark of our Lord Jesus
Christ, (t)* that thou mayest drive the adversary from thee
on every side, and have life eternal?”
And what are the benefits imprinted on the mind by these
* N.B. Where this mark (+) stands, the sign of the cross is made.
I 2
fantastical ceremonies? Or when is it such benefits are
promised as these are said to signify? Is it not rather
a debasing of it, to have such rites and prayers introduced
into it, as signify that which baptism was never appointed
for? To give an instance in the salt used in it:—
THE EXORCISM OF THE SALT.
“I exorcise thee, O creature of salt, in the name of the
Father (t) Omnipotent, and in the love of our (t) Lord Jesus
Christ, and in the virtue of the Holy (t) Spirit. I exorcise
thee by the living (+) God, by the true (t) God, by the holy
(+) God, who hath created thee for the safeguard of mankind,
and hath commanded it to be consecrated by his servants for
the people that come to believe, that in the name of the holy
Trinity thou beest made a wholesome sacrament to put
the enemy to flight. Therefore we pray thee, O our Lord
God, that in sanctifying (t) thou dost sanctify this creature
of salt, and in blessing (t) thou dost bless it, that it may be a
perfect medicine to all that take it.”
OF CONFIRMATION.
Q. 58. Is confirmation a sacrament?
A. It is, properly and truly; and whosoever holds otherwise
is accursed. (Concil. Trid, Sess. 7, de Confirm., can. 1.)
REPLY. The Roman Catechism saith, that sacraments
cannot be instituted by any but God. (Catech., ibid., n. 6.)
And yet the great Schoolman, Alex. Ales, saith, “Christ did
not institute nor declare confirmation to be a sacrament.”
(Pars 4, q.4, m. 1.) So by their own confession it is none.
Q. 59. What is the matter of the sacrament of confirmation?
A. The matter is chrism, which is an ointment compounded
of oil-olive and balsam, and consecrated by the Bishop (Cate.
Rom., par. 2, c. 3, n. 2, 7, 27) upon Maundy-Thursday.
(Sum of Christian Doctrine, London, 1686.)
REPLY. That chrism is either of divine institution, or the
matter of a sacrament, may be said, but cannot be proved.
Q. 60. What is the form of consecration?
A. The form is the words used by the Bishop, when he
crosses the forehead with the chrism, viz., “I sign thee with
the sign of the cross, and I confirm thee with the chrism of
salvation, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.”
(Catech., n. 2, 11.)
REPLY. It is said that Christ instituted the matter and form
of confirmation from the authority of Pope Fabian; (pars 4,
q. 3, m. 2, n. 3, & q. 9, m. l;) but Alexander Ales saith, it
was ordained by the Meldensian Council. (Catech. Rom., ibid.,
n. 6, 12, et Bellarminus de Confirm., c. 2.) And indeed the
Roman Catechism, after some pretence to divine institution,
thinks it safest to resolve it into the authority of the Church.
Q. 61. What ceremonies are used in confirmation?
A. (1.) In the anointing, the Bishop dips the tip of his
finger in the chrism, and, making a cross, saith, “I sign
thee,” &c. (Pontific. de Confirm.)
(2.) After confirmation, he strikes the person slightly on the
cheek, that he may remember he is to suffer all injuries for the
name of Christ, with patience and courage. (Catech., n. 25.)
(3.) Then the person to be confirmed, setting his foot
upon the right foot of the godfather, (Pontific., ibid.,) is to
have his head bound with a clean head-band for some days
more or less, with reverence to the holy chrism; which done,
the band is to be preserved in the sacrarium, or other clean
place, till the following Ash-Wednesday, to be burnt to holy
ashes. (Pastorale.)
REPLY. Whether we consider the far-fetched significations
of these ceremonies or the virtue put in them, the abuse is
intolerable; as, for instance, that in consecration of the
chrism, the Bishop blows upon it, to signify the descent of the
Holy Ghost for the sanctification of it, (Bellarm. de Confirm.,
l. 2, c. 13, sec. Tertio habet, ) and that it hath a power of
sanctification as the instrument of God. (Ibid., sec. Quarta
caremonia.) So the Bishop prays in the consecration of it,
that God “in bestowing spiritual grace upon this ointment,
would pour out the fulness of sanctification, and that it may
be to all that are to be anointed with it, for the adoption of
sons by the Holy Spirit. Amen.” (Pontif Rom.)
OF THE EUCHARIST.
Q. 62. WHAT is the eucharist?
A. It is a sacrament wherein is truly, really, and substan
tially contained whole Christ, God-Man, body and blood,
bones and nerves, (Catech. Rom., par. 2, c. 4, n. 33,) soul
and divinity, under the species or appearance of bread and
wine. (Concil. Trid, Sess. 13, de Real. Praes., c. 1; A Sum
of Christian Doctrine, printed 1686.)
Q. How do they attempt to prove this?
A. From the words of our Saviour,—“This is my body;”
which, say they, clearly demonstrate that the same body
which was born of the Virgin, and is now in heaven, is in
the sacrament. (Catech., par. 2, c. 4, n. 26.)
Q. 63. What becomes of the bread and wine after
consecration?
A. Upon consecration there is a conversion of the whole sub
stance of the bread into the substance of Christ's body; and of
the whole substance of the wine into the substance of Christ’s
blood; which conversion is usually called transubstantiation.
(Concil. Trid ibid., c. 4; Concil. Later., 4, can. 1.)
REPLY. (1.) No such change of the substance of the bread
into the substance of Christ's body, can be inferred from our
Saviour’s words, “This is my body;” (Matt. xxvi. 26;) for
it is not said, “This is turned into my body,” but, “This is
my body;” which, if it be taken literally, would rather prove
the substance of the bread to be his body. Therefore
Cardinal Cajetan acknowledges, it is nowhere said in the
Gospel that the bread is changed into the body of Christ; but
they have it from the authority of the Church. (Cajet. in
Aquin., par. 3, q.75, art. 1.)
(2.) It is farther evident that the words, are not to be taken
in their proper sense; for it is called bread as well after con
secration as before it. (1 Cor. x. 17; xi. 26–28.) So that
what was called his body was also bread at the same time.
(3) The mystical relation which the bread by consecration
has to Christ's body is sufficient to give it the name of his
body. For it is the usual way of Scripture, to call things of
a sacramental nature, by the names of those things they are
the figure of (Aug. Epist. 23.) So, circumcision is called
the covenant. (Gen. xvii. 13.) And the killing, dressing, and
eating the lamb, is called the passover. (Exodus xii. 11.)
And after the same manner is the bread in the sacrament
Christ’s body; that is, as circumcision was the covenant, and
the lamb the passover, by signification and representation, by
type and figure. And so the elements are called by the
Fathers, “the images,” (Orig. Dial. 3, Contr. Marcion,) “the
symbols,” (Euseb. Dem. Evang. l. 1, c. 1, et ult,) “the figure,”
(Aug. contr. Adimant., c. 12,) of Christ’s body and blood.
Q. 64. What is then that which is seen and tasted in the
eucharist?
A. The things seen and tasted are the accidents only of
bread and wine; there is the savour, colour, and quantity of
bread and wine, without any of their substance; but under
those accidents there is only the body and blood of Christ.
(Catech. Rom., n. 37, 44.)
REPLY. Our Saviour appealed to the senses of his
disciples: “Handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh
and bones, as ye see me have.” (Luke xxiv. 39.) Take
away the certainty of sense, and there is no discerning a
body from a spirit; and grant transubstantiation, and we
take away the certainty of sense.
Q. 65. Is the body and blood of Christ broken when the
host is broken and divided ?
A. No, because Christ is impassible; (Abridgment of
Christ. Doctrine, c. 11, sec. Euchar.;) and, besides, there is
whole and entire Christ under either species or element,
under the species of bread, and under every particle of it;
under the species of wine, and under every drop of it. (Conc.
Trid, ibid., c. 3.)
REPLY. If every particle of the host is as much the whole
body of Christ, as the whole host is before it be divided, then
a whole may be divided into wholes; for, divide it and sub
divide it, it is still whole. Whole it is before the division, whole
it is in the division, and whole it is after it. Thus unreason
able, as well as false, is the doctrine of transubstantiation.
Q. 66. Do they administer the sacrament in both kinds of
bread and wine?
A. No; the people are permitted to receive it only in one
kind, and are denied the cup. (Trid, Sess. 21, c. 1.)
REPLY. It is acknowledged that our Saviour instituted and
delivered the sacrament in both kinds; (Concil. Constant.,
Sess. 13; Trid., Sess. 21, c. 1, 2;) and that it so continued
even in the Church of Rome for above one thousand years
after. (Consult. Cassandri., art. 22.) And yet with a non
obstante to both, they forbid the peoplc to drink of it; and
declare, whoever thinks it necessary to receive in both kinds,
is accursed. (Concil. Trid, ibid., can. 1.)
Q. 67. For what reason doth the Church of Rome deprive
the people of what our Lord is granted to have instituted ?
A. For just and weighty causes, (Con. Trid, ibid., c. 2,)
such as these: (1.) Lest the blood of Christ should be spilt
upon the ground. (2.) Lest the wine, by being kept for the
sick, should grow eager. (3.) Because many cannot bear
the taste or smell of wine. (4.) Because in many countries
there is such a scarcity of wine, as it is not to be had without
great charge and tedious journeys. (5.) To disprove those
that dehy whole Christ to be contained under each species.
(Catech. Rom, ibid., n. 66.)
REPLY. These are the “just and weighty causes” for their
overruling the plain precept of our Saviour: “Drink ye all
of this.” (Matt. xxvi. 27.) And yet whosoever shall say they
are not just and sufficient reasons, is accursed. (Concil.
Trid, ibid., can. 2.) As if it was sufficient to forbid wine
in the sacrament to all, because some few cannot bear the
taste or smell of it; and it was a just cause to deprive all
countries of it because some have not wine, or cannot obtain
it without difficulty
Q. 68. What is the mass?
A. In the sacrifice of the mass, the same Christ is contained,
and unbloodily offered, who bloodily offered himself upon the
altar of the cross. (Conc. Trid, Sess. 22, can. 1.)
Q. 69. Of what virtue is the sacrifice in the mass?
A. It is truly a propitiatory sacrifice, and is available, not
only for the sins, punishments, and satisfactions of the living,
but also for those of the souls in purgatory. (Ibid.)
Q. 70. Is this necessary to be believed?
A. Yes; and whosoever denies any of this, is accursed,
(Conc. Trid, Sess. 22, can. 1) and incapable of salvation.
(Bulla Pii IV.)
REPLY. The Scripture when it extols the perfection and
infinite value of Christ's sacrifice, doth infer from it, that there
needed not therefore any repetition of it: “He needeth not
daily, as those High Priests, to offer up sacrifice, &c.; for this
he did once, when he offered up himself.” (Hebrews vii. 27.)
But if the same Christ is offered in the mass as was on the
cross, and that unbloody sacrifice is alike propitiatory as the
bloody, there is then a repetition of the same sacrifice, and
he is daily offered. And what is it to say, the one was
bloody and the other is unbloody, when the unbloody is of
the same virtue, and is applied to the same end, as the
bloody? So that, as, if Christ had again been bloodily offered
up, there had been a repetition of that sacrifice; so there is a
repetition of it when he is offered up unbloodily. To have
then a perfect sacrifice daily repeated, and a sacrifice without
suffering, and a propitiation and remission without blood, are
alike irreconcilable to the Apostle. (Hebrews ix. 22, 25, &c.)
Q. 71. May the Priest communicate alone, though there
be none besides to communicate?
A. Yes; the Church of Rome doth approve and commend
solitary masses, and accounts them a communion; partly
because the people do spiritually communicate in it, and
partly because it is celebrated by a public Minister, not only
for himself, but also for the people. (Conc. Trid, ibid., cap. 6.)
REPLY. The Apostle calls the Lord’s supper a communion,
and saith, “All are partakers of that one bread.” (1 Cor. x.
16, 17.) And Cassander saith, “It cannot properly be a
communion unless many partake of it;” and adds from the
Council of Nants, that “it is absurd to say, Lift up your
hearts, when there is none communicates with the Priest.”
(Consult, art. 24, De Solit. Miss.) And yet the Council of
Trent declares, whosoever shall say such masses are unlawful,
and to be abrogated, is accursed. (Sess. 22, Can. 8.)
Q. 72. What honour is to be given to the consecrated host?
A. Latria, or the same sovereign worship which is due
only to God; (Concil. Trid, Sess. 13, cap. 5;) adore it;
(Missale Rom., cap. Missae;) pray to it. (Brev. Rom, Hym.
in F. Corp. Ch.) And whosoever holds it unlawful or
idolatrous so to do, is accursed. (Concil. Trid, ibid., Can. 6.)
REPLY. We freely own that Christ is to be adored in the
Lord’s supper; but that the elements are to be adored, we
deny. If Christ is not corporally present in the host, they
grant their adoration to be idolatry. (Coster. Enchir., c. 8, n.
10.) And that he is not corporally present anywhere but in
heaven, we are taught, Acts i. 11, iii. 21, whither he went,
and where he is to continue till his second coming to judgment.
Q. 73. What are the ceremonies used in the mass?
A. The ceremonies in the mass respect either things,
actions, or words. Among the things, are garments, places,
time, vessels, cloths, incense, lights, &c. (Bellarmin. Doctr.
Trid. de Sacr. Miss.)
Q. 74. What are the garments used by the Priest in the
mass, and what is their signification?
A. (1.) The amice, or white veil, which he puts over his
head, signifies mystically, either the divinity of Christ
covered under his humanity, or the crown of thorns; and
morally, contemplation, or hope. In putting it on, he saith,
“Put on, O Lord, the helmet of salvation upon my head,
that I may overcome all diabolical temptations.”
(2.) The alb, or long white garment, signifies mystically,
the white robe put on our Saviour; and morally, faith and
innocency. In putting it on, he saith, “Make me white, O
Lord, and cleanse my heart, that, being whitened in the
blood of the Lamb, I may enjoy everlasting gladness.”
(3.) The girdle signifies mystically, the cords wherewith
our Saviour was bound; and morally, (being turned up on
both sides,) the two means to preserve chastity, namely,
fasting and prayer. When he puts it about him, he prays,
“Gird me, O Lord, with the girdle of purity, and quench in
my loins the humour of lust, that there may remain in me
the virtue of continency and chastity.” The like account is
given of the maniple, vestment, and stole, and of the divers
colours of the furniture used in the several seasons, in the
“Manual of the Poor Man’s Devotion,” chap. Of the Orna
ments of the Mass.
REPLY. The Council of Trent saith, that the ceremonies of
the mass, such as mystical benedictions, lights, incensings,
garments, &c., are from Apostolical tradition; (Sess. 22, c. 5;)
or, as others, were instituted by the Holy Ghost; (Bellar
minus, cap. de Sacr. Mis. ;) and that they serve for the
majesty of that sacrifice, and to raise the mind to the
contemplation of the divine things concealed in it; so none of
them are superfluous and vain. (Catech., par. 2, c. 4, n.81.)
But how shall we reconcile this to the numerous crossings
and sprinklings, used in the celebration of the mass? For
example: When the Priest is clothed with the garments
rehearsed before, he comes to the altar; and, standing on the
lowest step, just against the middle of it, he makes a
profound reverence to the altar and crucifix. Then he
ascends, and, having placed the books, &c., in order, he
descends to the lowest step, and, turning himself to it, with
his hands joined before his breast, and making a reverence to
the altar or crucifix, he begins the mass, standing upright,
and drawing with his right hand (his left hand laid on his
breast) the sign of the cross from his forehead to his breast.
Then he joins his hands before his breast; the Minister
standing on his left hand behind him, bowing, saith, Ad
Deum, &c. Then the Priest, with the Minister, say the
psalm, Judica me, with Gloria Patri, at which he is to bow
his head to the cross. Then he repeats the Introibo, making
with his right hand the sign of the cross from the forehead to
the breast. Then he bows his head and body to the altar,
and there he stands bowing till the Minister saith,
Misereatur. When he saith, Mea culpa, he smites thrice
upon his breast with the right hand; and thus the Missal
proceeds in its ceremonies in all the remaining parts of the
service.
OF PENANCE.
Q. 75. WHAT is the matter and form of the sacrament of
penance?
A. The matter is contrition, confession, and satisfaction.
The form is, “I absolve.” (Catech. Rom., par. 2, c. 5,
n. 14, 15.)
REPLY. We are told, that the matter of a sacrament is
somewhat sensible; (Catech. Rom., par. 2, c. 1, n. 11;) then
how is penance a sacrament, which has no such matter? For
where is the matter that is sensible in contrition? The
Council, to avoid this, call it, Quasi materia,—“A matter
after a sort.” (Concil. Trid, Sess. 14, can. 3.)
Q. 76. What is confession?
A. Confession is a particular discovery of all mortal sins to
the Priest, with all their circumstances that increase or
diminish the sin, as far as can be called to mind; (Concil.
Trid, Sess. 14, c. 5, & Catech., ibid., n. 48;) without which
neither forgiveness nor salvation is to be obtained. (Trid.,
ibid., Can. 6, 7; Catech., n. 44.)
REPLY. We grant confession to men to be in many cases
of use; public, in case of public scandal; private, to a
spiritual guide for disburdening of the conscience, and as an
help to repentance. But to make auricular confession, or
particular confession to a Priest, necessary to forgiveness and
salvation, when God has not so made it, is apparently to teach
for doctrine the commandment of men; and to make it neces
sary in all cases, is to make, of what may be a useful means, a
dangerous snare, both to the confessor, and those that confess.
Q. 77. Of what kind is the absolution which the Priest
grants upon confession?
A. The absolution is not only declarative, but judicial; and
the sentence pronounced by the Priest is as if pronounced by
the Judge himself; (Concil. Trid, ibid., c. 6, & Can. 9;) he
perfecting what God causes. (Catech., par. 2, 5, n. 17.)
REPLY. To pardon sin, and absolve the sinner judicially,
so as the conscience may rest firmly upon it, is a power
reserved by God to himself. So: “If we confess our sins, he
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness.” (1 John i. 9.) And therefore the
authority of the Priest is only ministerial, declarative, and
conditional. “Men show a ministry in the forgiveness of sins,
but do not exercise a right of power. They pray, but it is
God forgives,” saith St. Ambrose. (De Spir., l. 3, c. 19.)
Q. 78. What is the benefit of absolution?
A. Although a sinner is not so affected with such grief for
his sin, as may be sufficient to obtain pardon; yet, when he
has rightly confessed to a Priest, all his sins are pardoned,
and an entrance is opened into heaven. (Catech., ibid., n. 38.)
REPLY. The grief which is sufficient to obtain pardon, is
contrition; and so the grief which is not sufficient to obtain
pardon, must be attrition; and the meaning then is, that
attrition, with absolution, is as effectual as contrition.
Q. 79. What is satisfaction?
A. It is a compensation made to God, by prayer, fasting,
alms, &c., (Catech., ibid., n. 75,) for all sins committed against
him; (Bellarminus de Satisfact.; Bellarm. de Indulg., l. 1, c. 7,
sec. Quarta propositio;) so that the offender is thereupon
purged from the defilement of sin, and discharged from all
temporal punishments due to him, either here or in purga
tory. (Catech. Rom., ibid., n. 65, 66.)
Q. 80. How do these works become thus satisfactory?
A. They are meritorious and satisfactory, (Catech., ibid.,
n. 72, 73) as they are united to the satisfaction of Christ.
(Bellarm. de Formá Satisfact.; Bellarm. de Indulg., l. 1, c. 4,
sec. Respons, non est quidem.)
REPLY. The giving satisfaction to the Church in case of
scandal, and the imposing penances upon notorious offenders,
is an useful part of ecclesiastical discipline. But to make
that a satisfaction to God which is given to the Church; and
to make our works to satisfy, though but as an appendant to
the satisfaction of Christ, we can by no means allow. Not
the former, because it is derogatory to the justice of God;
not the latter, because it is derogatory to the merits of our
Saviour. For what can make a satisfaction to God, but the
obedience and suffering of his Son? Or what need is there
of another satisfaction after that of our Saviour? “By one
offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified.”
(Heb. x. 14.)
THE SACRAMENT OF EXTREME UNCTION.
Q. 81. WHAT is the matter of the sacrament of extreme
unction ?
A. Oil of olive-berries, (Catech. Rom., par. 2, c. 6, n.5,)
consecrated by a Bishop; which aptly signifies the grace of
the Spirit with which the soul of the sick is invisibly anointed.
(Concil. Trid., Sess. 14, de Extr. Unct., c. 1.)
Q. 82. What is the form of it?
A. The form is, “By this holy anointing, God pardon
thee, by whatever thou hast offended by the fault of the
eyes, nose, or touch.” (Catech., ibid., n. 6.)
Q. 83. What are the parts anointed ?
A. The eyes, because of seeing; the ears, because of hear
ing; the mouth, because of tasting, or speech; the hands,
because of touching; the feet, because of motion; the reins,
because the seat of lust. (Catech., ibid., n. 10.)
Q. 84. When is this anointing administered ?
A. It is to be administered only when persons are supposed
to be near the point of death; (Concil. Trid, ibid., c. 3; Bel
larm. Extr. Unct, l. 1, c. 2, sec. Accedit;) whence it is called
extreme unction. (Catech., ibid., n. 2, 14.)
REPLY. We read, when the twelve Apostles were sent
forth, they “anointed with oil many that were sick, and
healed them;” (Mark vi. 13;) making use of that anointing,
not as a natural means, but as a mystical sign of the miraculous
cure to be wrought by the power of Christ. And as long as
this power continued in the Church, so long there was a
reason for continuing this rite. Accordingly, the Apostle
directs, “Is any sick? Let him call for the Elders of the
Church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil
in the name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall save
the sick.” (James v. 14, 15.) But when the power ceased,
there was no reason for the continuance of this sign. And
yet this ceremony of anointing is not only continued in the
Church of Rome without any pretence to the power, but the
nature and the use of it is wholly perverted from what it was in
apostolical times. For, (1.) This rite was then used in curing
the sick, but was not necessary to it; for we find them also
cured by imposition of hands, (Mark xvi. 18; Acts ix. 17,)
or by a word. (Acts ix. 34.) But in the Church of Rome it
is made absolutely necessary. (2.) In apostolical times it was
a mere rite; but in the Church of Rome it is made a sacra
ment, and whosoever saith it is a mere rite is accursed. (Concil.
Trid., Sess. 14, Can. 1.) (3.) It was used in apostolical times
properly for corporal maladies; but in the Church of Rome
properly for the soul, and but accidentally for the body.
(Bellarm. de Extr. Unct., l. 1, c. 2, sec. Probo igitur.) (4.)
It was used then for the recovery of the sick; but here it is
to be applied only to those that are judged to be past it.
OF THE SACRAMENT OF ORDERS.
Q. 85. Is ordination a sacrament?
A. It is truly and properly a sacrament, and doth confer
grace; and whoso denies this, is accursed. (Concil. Trid., Sess.
7, Can. 1, 23, cap. 3, Can. 3.)
REPLY. We account ordination to be of divine institution,
and that by it a ministerial commission is conveyed; but how
necessary soever this office is to the Church, and grace for the
exercise of it, yet as that grace is not promised to it, we cannot
admit it to be properly and truly a sacrament.
Q. 86. What are the several orders instituted for the service
of the Church?
A. The orders always received by the Catholic Church are
seven,-the greater and less: The greater are the Priest,
Deacon, and Sub-Deacon: The less are the Acolythus, who is
to carry the candle and assist the Sub-Deacon; the Exor
cist, who is to attend and pray over them that are possessed
with the devil; the Reader, and the Ostiarius, or door-keeper.
(Catech., par. 2, c. 7, n. 12, 15, &c.)
REPLY. We know of no authority there is for any order
under a Deacon, so as to anathematize them that do not
receive them. (Concil. Trid, ibid., Can. 2.) We know of
no authority for the forms used in the ordination of those
lower orders; as, when the Bishop admits any to that of
Exorcists, he reaches to them a book in which the exorcisms
are contained, and saith, “Receive, and commit to memory,
and take the power of laying on of hands upon the possessed,
or baptized, or catechumens.” (Catech., ibid., n. 17.)
We know of no authority for this kind of procedure, for
those forms of conjuration contained in those books, or for
the use of those rites therein prescribed, for exorcising
persons, houses, cattle, milk, butter, fruits, &c., infested with
the devil. (See the Pastorale Mechlin, and the Manual of
Exorcisms, Antwerp, 1626.)
oF THE SACRAMENT of MARRIAGE.
Q. 87. Is marriage truly and properly a sacrament?
A. Yes; and whosoever denies it so to be, is accursed.
(Concil. Trid, Sess. 24, Can. 1.)
REPLY. St. Austin saith, that signs, when applied to
religious things, are called sacraments. (Epist. 5.) And in
this large sense he calls the sign of the cross a sacrament; (in
Psalm. cxli.,) and others give the same name to washing the
feet, (Cypr. de Lotione Pedum,) and many other mysteries.
But then matrimony doth no more confer grace, than wash
ing the feet, or using the sign of the cross; which Bellar
mine, after all the virtue he ascribes to it, will not allow to
be properly and truly a sacrament. (De Imag., l. 2, c. 30,
sec. Dices ergo.)
Q. 88. May those that are in holy orders marry, or those
that are married be received into orders in the Church of
Rome?
A. No; these that are married may not be admitted;
(Concil. Later. 1, Can. 21, et Later. 2, Can. 6;) those that
are admitted may not marry; and those that, being admitted,
do marry, are to be separated.
Q. 89. If marriage is a sacrament, and so confers grace,
how comes it to be denied to those that are in holy orders?
(Catech. Rom., par. 2, c. 8, n. 17.)
A. Those in holy orders are the temple of God, and it is a
shameful thing that they should serve uncleanness. (Later.
Concil. 2, Can. 6.)
REPLY. The Apostle, on the contrary, saith, “Marriage is
honourable in all; ” (Heb. xiii. 4;) and gives a hard character
of that doctrine which forbids it. (1 Tim. iv. 1–3.) And
how lawful it was, the direction of the Apostle about it
(1 Tim. iii. 2) doth show. And how convenient it is, is
manifest from the mischiefs attending the prohibition of it
in the Romish Church, which wise men among themselves
have lamented. (Polyd. Virgil. de Invent, l. 3, c. 4, et
Cassander Consult, art. 23.)
THE CONCLUSION.
I MIGHT have added the Fifth Section about the juris
diction which the Church of Rome challenges over Princes,
and about their canonization of saints, their consecration
of Agnus Deis and beads, &c., and the use these and the like
are applied to. I might have further considered their notes
of a Church, and, showed how many of them are not true,
or, however, do not belong to the Church of Rome; but
that would be too large a subject to enter upon: And what
has been said will be sufficient to show how far that
Church hath erred from truth and reason. For if we set
their Councils, Missals, Breviaries, Rituals, and Catechisms
on one side, and Scripture and antiquity on the other, we
shall find their doctrines and practices as well opposite to
those as they are opposite to ours; and may be assured
that persons may sooner lose their eyes, than find there
such a primacy of St. Peter as they contend for, or their
Vicarship of the Pope, the invocation of saints, the worship
of images, service in an unknown tongue, transubstantiation,
purgatory, and the rest that we contend against. Scripture
and indubitable antiquity are the authority we appeal to ;
thither we refer our cause; and can heartily conclude with that
of Vincentius Lyrin, “That is to be held, which hath been
believed everywhere, always, and by all.” (Contr. Haer., c. 3.)
