1768

 

To Samuel Levick

[1]

LONDON, January 2, 1768.

I can stay no longer. I wrote to Mr. Hoskins, Brother Trezize, Rd. Williams, Hitchens, Mitchell, Lovelace, Burrell, Eb--, Mary and Kath. Carmarthen, Brother Thomas, Mr. Thomas, Dyer, Brother Nance, Mitchell, Sister Launder, Brother Gundry, Nichols, Jo. Vinicombe, Rich. Permewan, and Jo. Bennets. The rest to you. Push home with rich and poor. Leave no stone unturned. Lose no time. Exert yourself, trusting in God.

Give my printed letters whoever you judge. Therein you see your first plan. And let that go as far as it can go. But John Fenwick writes from Newcastle: 'We are all of opinion the debt may be cleared in one year. I will give 25. Robert Davison will give 25. John Morrison 25. Miss Dales 50.' Let us undertake it in faith, and it will be done! This should be insisted on with men of substance. [See letter of Jan. 19.]

I want an exact account of the debts in your circuit. Is Jos. Pasco alive Be all alive!--I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Samuel Levick, At Mr. James Mitchell's, In Redruth.

To the Countess of Huntingdon

[2]

LONDON, January 4, 1768.

MY DEAR LADY,--I am obliged to your Ladyship and to Lady Buchan for such a mark of your regard as I did not at all expect. I purpose to return her Ladyship thanks by this post.

That remark is very striking as well as just: If it is the Holy Spirit that bears witness, then all speaking against that witness is one species of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. And when this is done by those who peculiarly profess to honour Him, it must in a peculiar manner grieve that blessed Spirit. Yet I have been lately surprised to observe how many who affirm salvation by faith have lately run into this; running full into Mr. Sandeman's notion that faith is merely an assent to the Bible, and not only undervaluing but even ridiculing the whole experience of the children of God. But so much the more do I rejoice that your Ladyship is still preserved from that spreading contagion, and also enabled plainly and openly to avow the plain, old, simple, unfashionable gospel.

I am glad to hear that your Ladyship has thoughts of being soon in town, but sorry that your health is not yet re-established. Yet certainly health we shall have, if health be best. For the Lord still ruleth in heaven and earth.

Wishing your Ladyship many happy years, I remain, my dear Lady,

Your very affectionate servant.

To Christopher Hopper

[3]

January 9, 1768.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I constitute you, Christopher Hopper by name, Lord President of the North. Enter upon your province, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland, Durham, Yorkshire, and Lincolnshire, without delay. Pray dispatch letters to Jacob Rowell, Jo. Heslop, Richard Boardman, [Rowell was Assistant at the Dales, and Boardman at York: for Heslop, see letters of Sept. 26 and Oct. 1; and Boardman, letter of March 27, 1771.] and your other deputies without loss of time; and quicken them to put forth all their strength and make one push for all. But hold! John Fenwick writes to me: 'I will give 25!' Do not abate him the five! No drawing back! I think the time is come for rolling this reproach from us. Your thought concerning the preachers is a noble one. If fifty of them set such an example, giving a little out of their little, such an instance would have an effect upon many. Let one stir up another. Spare no pains. Write east, west, north, and south. You have a ready mind and a ready pen; and it cannot be used in a better cause.--I am

Yours affectionately.

To James Oddie

[4]

LONDON, January 12, 1768.

DEAR JAMES,--Desire an old tried Scot, William Darney by name, to take a turn or two in the Dunbar Circuit; and I will desire William Minethorp, now near York (a good man and a good preacher), to go down into your circuit and supply his place. Then Alnwick will have the preaching on Sunday, which is highly expedient.

If we pay the debt in one year (and there is a fine prospect), it is all along of your Newcastle people; for nobody else thought of it. Go on, go on, in God's name!--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To his Brother Charles

[5]

LONDON, January 15, 1768.

DEAR BROTHER,--Six or seven hundred pounds is brought to a Conference, of which five hundred at least pays debt. Then extraordinary demands are answered. How much remains for law I am now near three hundred pounds out of pocket, which I borrowed to pay Mr. Pardon. When I receive some more from Newcastle, [See previous letter.] I will send it to Bristol; probably very soon.

It is highly probable one of the three will stand before the Lord. But, so far as I can learn, such a thing has scarce been for these thousand years before, as a son, father, grandfather, atavus, tritavus, preaching the gospel, nay, and the genuine gospel, in a line. You know, Mr. White, sometime Chairman of the Assembly of Divines, was my grandmother's father.

Look upon our little ones at Kingswood as often as you can. A word from you will be a quickening to them. O how many talents are we entrusted with!

'But what account can thy bad steward make' Indeed, we have need to gird up the loins of our mind and run faster the small remainder of our race. 'One thing!' Let us mind one thing only; and nothing great or small but as it ministers to it!

Peace be with you and yours! Adieu.

To Samuel Levick

LONDON, January 19, 1768.

DEAR SAMMY,--I think this is the least we can insist upon --that all our freemen neither directly nor indirectly take anything for the time to come. My little indisposition is passed over. [See letter of Dec. 31, 1767.]

Now, up and be doing! Lose not a day. I desire you (1) exhort our wealthy members to act generously and make a push once for all; (2) encourage the middling ones to subscribe more or less according to the plan; (3) receive two mites from the willing poor; (4) take an exact account of the debts which lie upon the houses in your circuit; (5) before the 20th of next month send me an exact account both of the debts and of the money subscribed, which is to be paid at the spring visitation of the classes. Go on in faith.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Samuel Levick, At Mr. John Nance's, In St. Ives, Cornwall.

To Mrs. Moon

LONDON, January 24, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Formerly, when persons reproached me for doing thus and thus, I have very frequently said, 'In truth I have not done it yet; but by the grace of God I will.' This seems to be the very case with you. You are accused for what you did not, but ought to have done. You ought to have informed me from time to time, not indeed of trifles or idle reports, but of things which you judged to be a real hindrance to the work of God. And God permitted you to be reminded of this omission by those who intended nothing less.

Opposition from their brethren has been one cause why so many who were set free have not retained their liberty. But perhaps there was another more general cause: they had not proper help. One just saved from sin is like a newborn child, and needs as careful nursing. But these had it not. How few were as nursing fathers! How few cherished them as a nurse her own children! So that the greater part were weakened, if not destroyed, before their sinews were knit, for want of that prudent and tender care which their state necessarily required. Do all that you can to cherish them that are left; and never forget

Your affectionate brother.

To Hannah Ball

[6]

LONDON, January 28, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I found a particular love to you from the time that you spoke so freely to me on that nice subject; especially when I found you had resolution to give up all for Christ, and even to pluck out the right eye and cast it from you. Use the same freedom still. Tell me from time to time anything that tries or troubles you. Certainly you will have trials of various kinds. Expect one after another, and conquer all through Him that loves you. Only hold fast your shield! Cast not away that confidence which hath great recompense of reward! Christ is yours! Yea, all He has and is is yours! And let all you are, soul and body, be His! Draw not back! Hang upon Him! Trust Him in all things! and love for His sake, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss Ball, At Mr. Ball's, Laceman, In High Wycombe.

To Peggy Dale

LONDON, January 30, 1768.

MY DEAR PEGGY,--It is a certain truth that the witness of sanctification is a privilege which every one that is sanctified may claim. Yet it is not true that every one that is sanctified does enjoy this. Many who are really sanctified (that is, wholly devoted to God) do not enjoy it as soon as that work is wrought; and many who received it do not retain it, or at the least not constantly. Indeed, they cannot retain it in two cases: either if they do not continue steadily watching unto prayer; or, secondly, if they give way to reasoning, if they let go any parts of 'love's divine simplicity.' I am afraid this was your case: you did not remain simple; you gave way to evil reasoning. But you was as surely sanctified as you was justified. And how soon may you be so again The way, the new and living way, is open! Believe, and enter in!-- I am, my dear Peggy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Joseph Benson

[7]

LONDON, January 31, 1768.

DEAR JOSEPH,--Tommy Taylor we have tried. Therefore I do not desire to part with him. But was T. Dancer out of his wits How was it possible he could write to me about another master without first consulting you I understood what he wrote to be wrote by you all, and therefore immediately spoke to the young man and desired him to give warning where he was that he might be at liberty in March. Perhaps there is a Providence in this blunder. For if Mr. Williams is what he appears to be, he is deeply devoted to God. You shall have what money you want; if T. Lewis will draw upon Mr. Franks for it, not only sixty pounds, but (if need be) sixty to that.

You should write to me often and not too briefly. I am, with love to Brother and Sister Hindmarsh and T. Taylor, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate brother.

If T. Lewis will not, do you draw on Mr. Franks. To Mr. Joseph Benson, At Kingswood School, Near Bristol.

To Mrs. Woodhouse

LONDON, February 3, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You did not willingly omit anything that was in your power. [See letters of May 17, 1766, and Nov. 12, 1768, to her] Therefore you have no reason to be uneasy on that account. Your father went to God in a good old age as a ripe shock of corn. Be you also ready; that, whenever our Lord cometh, He may find you watching!

Undoubtedly God does sometimes show His children things to come in dreams or visions of the night. And whenever they bring us nearer to Him, it is well, whenever they are means of increasing our faith and holiness. Only we must take care not to depend upon them too much, and to bring all to the standard--the law and the testimony. I believe it would be a trial to you if you should hear I was called away. But you have a strong Helper in all trials.

It might please God to calm your troubled mind by that particular outward representation; and let Him work in whatever manner He pleases. Peace and love are blessings, come how they will. These I hope you find increasing in you. Let your soul be all love, and it suffices.--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse, At Mr. Hutton's, In Epworth, Near Thorne, Yorkshire.

To Ann Bolton

[8]

LONDON, February 13, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--The best and most desirable thing of all is that you should live and die wholly devoted to God, waiting upon Him without distraction, serving Him without carefulness, and studying one thing--to be holy both in body and spirit, an whole burnt sacrifice of love. If you have not steadiness and resolution for this, the next thing to be desired is that you may marry a man of faith and love, who has a good temper and a good understanding. The temptation you are now in was perhaps the most dangerous one you ever had in your life. God deliver you from that almost certain destruction which attends the being unequally yoked to an unbeliever!

If you could come up to London before I leave it, which is to be the 7th of March, and had time and resolution to converse with those who are most alive to God, it might be an unspeakable help to you. If you do come, let me know exactly when and how and where you purpose to lodge. And may the God of love 'cover with His wings your head' and keep you from all evil!--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To James Oddie

LONDON, February 14, 1768.

DEAR JEMMY,--I require William Ellis [Oddie's third colleague at Newcastle.] to go into the Dales (if he is not gone already) without delay. Otherwise I require you to forbid his preaching in any of our Societies.

Push on the collection in God's name! I think you will not easily stop short of seven hundred. [See letters of Jan. 12 and 15.]

It is not right, Jemmy; it is not right. They envy the rooms of those poor girls, [The Misses Dale at the Orphan House.] and want at all hazards to thrust them out. I wrote to Molly Dale on Saturday in haste; but to-day I have wrote her my cooler thoughts. Peace be with you and yours.--Dear Jemmy, adieu

To Miss March

STROUD, March 14, 1768.

There are innumerable degrees, both in a justified and a sanctified state, more than it is possible for us exactly to define. I have always thought the lowest degree of the latter implies the having but one desire and one design. I have no doubt but in that general outpouring of the Spirit God did give this degree of salvation, neither did it ever appear to me that had lost it; rather seemed to stand just on the threshold of Christian perfection, and I apprehend nothing would be more likely to hurt the soul than undervaluing the grace already received. Without any sin we may be in a sense pleased with the approbation of those we esteem and love. But here we have need of much prayer, lest this should degenerate into pride or vanity. I still say to you, as to an almost new-born babe, 'Dare to believe; on Christ lay hold!' Without being solicitous about the name of what you have, ask and expect all you want! Is it not nigh, even at the door

The knowledge of ourselves is true humility; and without this we cannot be free from vanity, a desire of praise being inseparably connected with every degree of pride. Continual watchfulness is absolutely necessary to hide this from stealing in upon us. But as long as we steadily watch and pray, we shall not enter into temptation. It may and will assault us on every side; but it cannot prevail.

To John Fletcher

[9]

BIRMINGHAM, March 20, 1768.

DEAR SIR,--Yesterday Mr. Easterbrook informed me that you are sick of the conversation even of them who profess religion, 'that you find it quite unprofitable if not hurtful to converse with them three or four hours together, and are sometimes almost determined to shut yourself up as the less evil of the two.'

I do not wonder at it at all, especially considering with whom you have chiefly conversed for some time past--namely, the hearers of Mr. Madan and Mr. Romaine (perhaps I might add of Mr. Whitefield). The conversing with these I have rarely found to be profitable to my soul. Rather it has damped my desires, it has cooled my resolutions, and I have commonly left them with a dry, dissipated spirit.

And how can we expect it to be otherwise For do we not naturally catch their spirit with whom we converse And what spirit can we expect them to be of, considering the preaching they sit under Some happy exceptions I allow; but, in general, do men gather grapes of thorns Do they gather constant, universal self-denial, the patience of hope, the labour of love, inward and outward self-devotion, from the doctrine of Absolute Decrees, of Irresistible Grace, of Infallible Perseverance Do they gather these fruits from Antinomian doctrine or from any that borders upon it Do they gather them from that amorous way of praying to Christ or that way of preaching His righteousness I never found it so. On the contrary, I have found that even the precious doctrine of Salvation by Faith has need to be guarded with the utmost care, or those who hear it will slight both inward and outward holiness. I will go a step farther: I seldom find it profitable for me to converse with any who are not athirst for perfection and who are not big with earnest expectation of receiving it every moment. Now, you find none of these among those we are speaking of, but many, on the contrary, who are in various ways directly or indirectly opposing the whole work of God; that work, I mean, which God is carrying on throughout the kingdom by andres agraumatoi kai idiwtai.[ Acts iv. 13: 'unlearned and ignorant men.'] In consequence of which His influence must in some measure be withdrawn from them.

Again, you have for some time conversed a good deal with the genteel Methodists. Now, it matters not a straw what doctrine they hear, whether they frequent the Lock or West Street. They are (almost all) salt that has lost its savour, if ever they had any. They are throughly conformed to the maxims, the spirit, the fashions, and customs of the world. Certainly, then, Nunquam ad eos homines ibis quin minor homo redebis. [A Kempis's Imitation, i. 20: 'One said, As oft as I have gone among men, I returned home less a man.']

But, were these or those of ever so excellent a spirit, you converse with them too long. 'Three or four hours'! One had need to be an angel, not a man, to converse four hours at once to any purpose. In the latter part of such a conversation we shall doubtless lose all the profit we had gained before.

But have you not a remedy for all this in your hands In order to truly profitable conversation, may not you select persons clear both of Calvinism and Antinomianism, not fond of that luscious way of talking, but standing in awe of Him they love--persons who are vigorously working out their salvation, persons athirst for full redemption, and every moment expecting if not already enjoying it Though, it is true, these will commonly be poor and mean; seldom possessed of either riches or learning, unless there be now and then a rara avis in terris, [Juvenal's Satires, vi. 165: 'A bird rarely seen on earth.'] a Miss March or Betty Johnson. [See headings to letters of March 4, 1760, and Dec. 15, 1763.] If you converse with these humbly and simply an hour at a time, with prayer before and prayer after, you will not complain of the unprofitableness of conversation or find any need of turning hermit.

As to the conference at Worcester on lay-preaching, do not you observe almost all the lay preachers (1) are connected with me (2) are maintainers of universal redemption Hinc illae lacrymae! [Horace's Epistles, 1. xix. 41:'Hence these tears.'] These gentlemen do not love me, and do love particular redemption. If these laymen were connected with them, or if they were Calvinists, all would be well. Therefore I should apprehend you will have two things to do: (1) urge the argument the strength of which I believe is in the second Appeal, and above all in the Letter to a Clergyman [See Works, viii. 136-200; and letter of May 4, 1748.]; (2) apply to the conscience, You do not love Mr. Wesley enough, you dove your opinions too much; otherwise this debate would never have arisen. For it is undeniable these quacks cure whom we cannot cure, they save sinners all over the nation. God is with them, God works by them, and has done so, for near these thirty years. Therefore the opposing them is neither better nor worse than fighting against God.--I am

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Robert Costerdine

MANCHESTER, March 28, 1768.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Be not discouraged. Go on in faith, and you will gain more subscriptions before the Conference. [For the debts of the Connexion, see letters of Nov. 24 and Dec. 2, 1767, to him.]

If God permit, I shall be at York on Friday, June 24; Mond. the 27, Pateley Bridge; Tu. 28, Skipton; W. 29, Otley; Th. 30, Parkgate; Sat. July 2, Keighley; Su. 3, Haworth; Mond. 4, Bradford. This is the best way I could think of to spend a few days. [This fills out the entry in the Journal, v. 277. He left Newcastle on June 13, and 'in the residue of the month visited most of the Societies in Yorkshire.'] But I can preach sometimes at noon.-- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

I commonly preach at six in the evening.

To Mr. Costerdine, At Mr. Colbeck's, In Keighley, Yorkshire.

To Dr. Rutherforth

[10]

To Christopher Hopper

[11]

MANCHESTER, March 29, 1768.

DEAR CHRISTOPHER,--I see no help for it. What must be must be. You must go point-blank to York, Leeds, and Bradford. Our rich men subscribe twenty shillings a year. And neither Brother Boardman, Brisco, Bumstead, nor Oliver can move them. They want a hard-mouthed man. Get you gone in a trice. Show them the difference. I beg of you either mend them or end them. Let this lumber be removed from among us.--I am

Ever yours.

To Ann Bolton

LIVERPOOL, April 7, 1768.

Indeed, my dear sister, the conversation I had with you at London [See letter of Jan. 25, 1770, where he speaks of another visit.] much increased my affection for you and my desire that you should not fall short of any blessing which our Lord has bought for you with His own blood. Certain it is that He loves you. And He has already given you the faith of a servant. You want only the faith of a child. And is it not nigh What is it you feel now That spark just kindling in your heart which enables you to say:

Lord, I am Thine by sacred ties,

Thy child, Thy servant bought with blood!

Look up, my sister, my friend! Jesus is there! He is ever now interceding for you! Doubt not of it! Doubt not His love! Forget yourself, a poor, vile, worthless sinner. But look unto Jesus! See the Friend of Sinners! Your Friend; your ready and strong Saviour!

It was not a small deliverance which you had in escaping the being joined to one who was not what he seemed.[See letter of Feb. 13.] If he had acted thus after you were married, it would almost have broke your heart. See how the Lord careth for you! Surely the hairs of your head are all numbered! If you can continue as you are, use it rather. If you should do otherwise, will not you consult me before you engage

As to your health, I wish you would punctually follow the directions which I formerly gave you. But tell me if you find any new symptom. Perhaps you will not stay here long; but you cannot, shall not depart hence till your eyes have seen His salvation!--My dear Nancy, adieu.

On Saturday se'nnight I expect to be at Whitehaven; on Saturday fortnight at Glasgow. Shall I not hear from you soon

To Peggy Dale

[12]

LIVERPOOL, April 7, 1768.

MY DEAR PEGGY,--I do not well understand what letter you mean. I have answered (if I do not forget) every letter which I have received. And I commonly answer either of you [Herself or Miss Molly Dale.] within a day or two. In this respect I do not love to remain in your debt. In others I must always be so; for I can never pay you the affection I owe. Accept of what little I have to give.

Mr. Law does well to insist on those sister graces, lowliness, meekness, and resignation. [A Serious Call to a Holy Life, xvi.- xxii.] These one would most importunately ask of God. And, indeed, without them love is only a name. Let your faith thus work by love, and it will make you fruitful in every good temper and word and work.

I hope to be at Glasgow on Wednesday the 19th instant; at Aberdeen the 28th; at Edinburgh May 5; at Newcastle on Friday, May 20. Peace be with your spirit!--I am, my dear Peggy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Robert Costerdine

[13]

KENDAL, April 13, 1768.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--If the debt of Colne house were given at Leeds Conference, it will be taken in of course. If it were not, I will lay Mr. Shaw's paper before the ensuing Conference. On Monday, June 27, I hope to be at Pateley Bridge (coming from Tadcaster, where I expect to preach at noon--one might meet me at Tadcaster); Tuesday, 28th, at Skipton; Wednesday, 29th, at Otley; Saturday, July 2nd, Keighley. You may have the three volumes. Do not spare to speak when you visit the classes again, and many will enlarge their subscription. --I am

Yours affectionately.

To Ann Bolton

May 9, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--How far are you from holiness Nay, rather think how near you are to it! You are no farther from it than you are from faith, than you are from Christ. And how far is He from you Is He not nigh Is He not just now knocking at the door of your heart Hark! The Master calleth you! Thou dead soul, hear the voice of the Son of God, and live! What saith He to you Woman, be of good cheer! Thy sins are forgiven thee.--I am, my dear Nancy,

Your affectionate brother.

To his Brother Charles

EDINBURGH, May 14, 1768.

DEAR BROTHER,--It is well Sally R is in peace. I have been long persuaded that if she continued to hinder him, God would, in mercy to them both, take her away.

I am glad Mr. Fletcher has been with you. But if the tutor fails, what will become of our college at Trevecca Did you ever see anything more queer than their plan of institution Pray who penned it, man or woman I am afraid the visitor too will fail.[Fletcher was the visitor.]

The archers here have sorely wounded Lord Buchan. [The Earl of Buchan died on Dec. 1, 1767, and his son succeeded him at the age of twenty-four.] But if Isaac stays with you in London, what have the Stewards of Bristol to do with him They may, then, easily find his equal; for, with regard to them, he is equal to--nothing.

I am at my wits' end with regard to two things--the Church and Christian Perfection. Unless both you and I stand in the gap in good earnest, the Methodists will drop them both. Talking will not avail. We must do, or be borne away. Will you set shoulder to shoulder If so, think deeply upon the matter, and tell me what can be done. Age, vir esto! nervos intendas tuos. ['Come, be a man! Stretch your nerves.' The last three words are from Terence's Eunuchus, II. iii. 19.] Peace be with you and yours! Adieu.

To the Rev. Mr. Plenderlieth

[14]

NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, May 23, 1768.

REVEREND AND DEAR SIR,--Some years ago it was reported that I recommended the use of a crucifix to a man under sentence of death. I traced this up to its author, Dr. Stennett, an Anabaptist teacher. He was charged with it. He answered, 'Why, I saw a crucifix in his cell' (a picture of Christ on the cross); 'and I knew Mr. Wesley used to visit him: so I supposed he had brought it.' This is the whole of the matter. Dr. Stennett himself I never yet saw; nor did I ever see such a picture in the cell: and I believe the whole tale is pure invention.

I had for some time given up the thought of an interview with Mr. Erskine, when I fell into the company of Dr. Oswald. He said, 'Sir, you do not know Mr. Erskine. I know him perfectly well. Send and desire an hour's conversation with him, and I am sure he will understand you better.' I am glad I did send. I have done my part, and am now entirely satisfied.

I am likewise glad that Mr. Erskine has spoke his mind. I will answer with all simplicity, in full confidence of satisfying you and all impartial men.

He objects, first, that I attack predestination as subversive of all religion, and yet suffer my followers in Scotland to remain in that opinion. Much of this is true. I did attack predestination eight-and-twenty years ago [See letter of April 30, 1739.]; and I do not believe now any predestination which implies irrespective reprobation. But I do not believe it is necessarily subversive of all religion. I think hot disputes are much more so; therefore I never willingly dispute with any one about it. And I advise all my friends, not in Scotland only, but all over England and Ireland, to avoid all contention on the head, and let every man remain in his own opinion. Can any man of candour blame me for this Is there anything unfair or disingenuous in it

He objects, secondly, that I 'assert the attainment of sinless perfection by all born of God.' I am sorry Mr. Erskine should affirm this again. I need give no other answer than I gave before, in the seventh page of the little tract [For A Plain Account of Christian Perfection and the sermon on The Lord our Righteousness, see letter of Feb. 28, 1766, to John Newton.] I sent him two years ago.

I do not maintain this. I do not believe it. I believe Christian perfection is not attained by any of the children of God till they are what the Apostle John terms fathers. And this I expressly declare in that sermon which Mr. Erskine so largely quotes.

He objects, thirdly, that I 'deny the imputation of Christ's active obedience.' Since I believed justification by faith, which I have done upwards of thirty years, I have constantly maintained that we are pardoned and accepted wholly and solely for the sake of what Christ hath both done and suffered for us.

Two or three years ago Mr. Madan's sister showed him what she had wrote down of a sermon which I had preached on this subject. He entreated me to write down the whole and print it, saying it would satisfy all my opponents. I was not so sanguine as to expect this: I understood mankind too well. However, I complied with his request: a few were satisfied; the rest continued just as they were before.

As long as Mr. Erskine continues of the mind expressed in his Theological Essays, there is no danger that he and I should agree any more than light and darkness. I love and reverence him, but not his doctrine. I dread every approach to Antinomianism. I have seen the fruit of it over the three kingdoms. I never said that Mr. Erskine and I were agreed. I will make our disagreement as public as ever he pleases; only I must withal specify the particulars. If he will fight with me, it must be on this ground and then let him do what he will and what he can.

Retaining a due sense of your friendly offices, and praying for a blessing on all your labours,--I remain, reverend and dear sir,

Your affectionate brother and servant.

To Henry Brooke

[15]

SUNDERLAND, May 25, 1768.

MY DEAR BRETHREN,--I know not what to say; the accounts I receive from Dublin are so contradictory to each other. In my last to T. Olivers I desired he would go immediately into Waterford Circuit. I wish Mr. Hilton would give me his cool judgement concerning the late transactions.

I desire all the money subscribed in Ireland for the payment of the General Debt may be lodged in the hands of George Grant, James Martin, and James Freeman as trustees. But when this amounts to 100, let so much of the Dublin debt be paid without delay.

See that you bear one another's burthens.--I am, my dear brethren,

Your affectionate brother.

What is the present debt on Dublin house

To Mr. Henry Brooke, Stafford Street, Dublin.

To George Merryweather

[16]

NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, June 6, 1768.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I have a letter from Nathl. Smith, at Osmotherley, desiring me to preach there. But I do not see how I can. Pray consult with T. Lee or John Heslop concerning it. On Friday, 17th instant, I am to preach at Potto and Hutton; on Saturday evening at Whitby. Where is it of most importance to preach in the way At Stokesley, Guisborough, or elsewhere Fix it among you in time.-- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Ann Bolton

NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, June 7, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--As there is nothing new in your disorder only an increase of the same symptoms, I believe, if you will observe the directions I formerly gave, this will help you more than an hundred medicines. Oily medicines would kill you quickly; so would anything that loads your stomach. You must take care to have air enough at night: it would not hurt you to have the window a little open. When you have that tickling cough, chew a small bit of bark (as big as half a peppercorn), swallow your spittle four or five times, and then spit out the wood. So much bark as this I can allow you, but no more, at the peril of your life. Try if red currants agree with you; if they do, eat as many as you can.

O Nancy, I want sadly to see you: I am afraid you should steal away into paradise. A thought comes into my mind which I will tell you freely. If you go first, I think you must leave me your seal for a token: I need not say to remember you by, for I shall never forget you.

Experience shows what is the best means of grace to you. Read and think of the love of God. That is your point. Jesus loves you! He is yours. Be not so unkind as to distrust Him! Cast your soul at His feet! Prisoner of hope, be bold! Come unto Him now and take the water of life freely!

If you are able to write, write to me soon, directing to me at Mrs. Hudson's in York. I want to know everything that concerns you. For you are exceeding near to, my dear Nancy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss Bolton. At the Rev. Mr. Davis's, In Evesham, Worcestershire. Cross Post.

To his Brother Charles

NORTON, NEAR STOCKTON, June 14, 1768.

DEAR BROTHER,--I rejoice to hear from various persons so good an account of the work of God in London. You did not come thither without the Lord; and you find your labour is not in vain. [On July 16 Charles writes to his wife from London, where he is looking for a house, and tells her that 'on Thursday night the Foundery was crowded with serious hearers of every sort. My subject, " He is able to save to the uttermost all that," &c.'] I doubt not but you will see more and more fruit while you converse chiefly with them that are athirst for God. I find a wonderful difference in myself when I am among these and when I am among fashionable Methodists. On this account the North of England suits me best, where so many are groaning after full redemption.

But what shall we do I think it is high time that you and I at least should come to a point. Shall we go on in asserting perfection against all the world Or shall we quietly let it drop We really must do one or the other; and, I apprehend, the sooner the better. What shall we jointly and explicitly maintain (and recommend to all our preachers) concerning the nature, the time (now or by-and-by), and the manner of it (instantaneous or not) I am weary of intestine war, of preachers quoting one of us against the other. At length let us fix something for good and all; either the same as formerly or different from it. Errwso. ['Farewell.']

To Jane Hilton

YORK, June 25, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Your conversation gave me much satisfaction. I rejoiced to find that you was sensible of your loss, and determined by the grace of God never to rest till you had recovered all which you once enjoyed. Nay, and you will recover it with increase; you will find a deeper communion with God, and a more full self-devotion than ever. An earnest of this was given you the other day. Hold that fast, and continually expect the rest. How did you find yourself on Thursday morning Had you not again a taste of the great salvation And how have you been since Are you still happy in God, and resolved not to rest till you are all devoted to Him See that you do not fall again into evil reasonings! Be simple before God! Continue instant in prayer; and watch against whatever you know by experience to be a weight upon your mind. How soon may you then have your whole desire! How soon may your heart be all love! Why not now All things are ready! Only believe! And speak freely to, my dear Jenny,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss Hilton, In Beverley.

To Jane Hilton

GUISELEY, July 1, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You must now expect temptations. Perhaps they will assault you on every side; for all the powers of hell are enraged at you and will use every art to move you from your steadfastness. But He that is for you is greater than all that are against you: only beware of evil reasoning! Hang simply on Him that loves you, and whom you love; just as a little helpless child. Christ is yours, all yours: that is enough. Lean your whole soul upon Him! Do you find a witness in yourself that He has cleansed your heart Do you feel this always And have you a constant sense of the loving presence of God You never need lose anything that God has given, so you keep close to Him. Be little and mean in your own eyes, glorying only in the Lord. And do not cease to pray for

Your affectionate brother.

You may direct to me at Epworth, near Thorne, Yorkshire.

It is a pity but you should now read the Plain Account of Christian Perfection (I suppose you may get it at Hull) and the First Epistle of St. John.

To Miss March

July 5, 1768.

I am more inclined to congratulate you than to condole with you upon your present situation. Many circumstances concurred to expose you to the greatest of all dangers-- that of being generally commended. It is therefore a peculiarly gracious providence whereby this danger is turned aside, and that without any particular fault or even imprudence on your part. You may now experience the truth of that fine reflection, 'Nothing is more profitable for us than to suffer reproach for a good action done with a single eye.' Nevertheless you cannot be excused from speaking plain to Sarah Crosby and A[nn Foard]; and the sooner this is done the better, lest their want of judgement should produce more ill effects. Certainly you should labour to convince them that they were altogether in a fault. In any wise they should have spoke to you first; then, if you had not satisfied them, they might have gone farther. But what can be done for the poor young woman I am afraid lest she should be turned out of the way.

You will hardly need that tract for a time, as you have Mr. Brainerd's Life. There is a pattern of self-devotion and deadness to the world! But how much of his sorrow and pain had been prevented, if he had understood the doctrine of Christian Perfection! How many tears did he shed because it was impossible to be freed from sin!

As you have not the same outward trials which many have, it is highly needful you should have some inward ones; although they need not be either many or long. If you walk closely with God, He is able to give any degree of holiness, either by pleasure or pain. S[ally] [Sarah Ryan died on Aug. 17.] continues with you a little longer to quicken you in the way. Why should not a living Christian be exactly of the same spirit with a dying Christian, seeing the difference between her life and ours is nothing when compared to eternity

The last scene of life in dying believers is of great use to those who are about them. Here we see the reality of religion and of things eternal; and nothing has a greater tendency to solemnize the soul and make and keep it dead to all below. We are reasonable creatures, and undoubtedly reason is the candle of the Lord. By enlightening our reason to see the meaning of the Scriptures, the Holy Spirit makes our way plain before us.

To Walter Sellon

[17]

WAKEFIELD, July 9, 1768.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I am glad you have undertaken the Redemption Redeemed. But you must in no wise forget Dr. Owen's Answer to it; otherwise you will leave a loophole for all the Calvinists to creep out. The doctor's evasions you must needs cut in pieces, either interweaving your answers with the body of the work under each head or adding them in marginal notes.

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Jane Hilton

[18]

MY DEAR SISTER,--Coming here this afternoon, I found your welcome letter. I would have you write as often as you can. For you have need of every possible help; inasmuch as your grace is as yet young and tender, and all the powers of darkness are at work to move you from your steadfastness, But it is enough that Christ is yours; and He is wiser and stronger than all the powers of hell. Hang upon Him, and you are safe; lean on Him with the whole weight of your soul. Do you find now as clear an evidence of the invisible as of the visible world And are your thoughts continually fixed on the God of your salvation Do you pray without ceasing Does He preserve you even in your dreams Hold fast what you have, and look for more; for there is no end of His goodness.

Mr. Robertshaw is to stay with you another year; and doubt not the Lord will stay with you for ever. Think always of Him; and think sometimes of

Your affectionate brother.

To-morrow I go hence; but I expect to be here again next week, and to stay here till Monday se'nnight.

To Thomas Adam

[19]

SWINFLEET, July 19, 1768.

REVEREND AND DEAR SIR,--One of Wintringham informed me yesterday that you said no sensible and well-meaning man could hear and much less join the Methodists; because they all acted under a lie, professing themselves members of the Church of England while they licensed themselves as Dissenters. You are a little misinformed. The greater part of the Methodist preachers are not licensed at all; and several that are are not licensed as Dissenters. I instance particularly in Thomas Adams and Thomas Brisco. When Thomas Adams desired a license, one of the Justices said, 'Mr. Adams, are not you of the Church of England Why, then, do you desire a license' He answered, 'Sir, I am of the Church of England; yet I desire a license, that I may legally defend myself from the illegal violence of oppressive men.' T. Brisco being asked the same question in London, and the Justice adding, 'We will not grant you a license,' his lawyer replied, 'Gentlemen, you cannot refuse it: the Act is a mandatory act. You have no choice.' One asked the chairman, 'Is this true' He shook his head, and said, 'He is in the right.' The objection, therefore, does not lie at all against the greater part of the Methodist preachers; because they are either licensed in this form or not licensed at all.

When others applied for a license, the Clerk or Justice said, 'I will not license you but as Protestant Dissenters.' They replied, 'We are of the Church; we are not Dissenters: but if you will call us so, we cannot help it.' They did call them so in their certificates, but this did not make them so. They still call themselves members of the Church of England; and they believe themselves so to be. Therefore neither do these act under a lie. They speak no more than they verily believe. Surely, then, unless there are stronger objections than this, both well-meaning and sensible men may, in perfect consistence with their sense and sincerity, not only hear but join the Methodists.

We are in truth so far from being enemies to the Church, that we are rather bigots to it. I dare not, like Mr. Venn, leave the parish church where I am to go to an Independent meeting. I dare not advise others to go thither rather than to church. I advise all over whom I have any influence steadily to keep to the Church. Meantime I advise them to see that the kingdom of God is within them; that their hearts be full of love to God and man; and to look upon all, of whatever opinion, who are ike-minded, as their 'brother and sister and mother.' O sir, what art of men or devils is this which makes you so studiously stand aloof from those who are thus minded I cannot but say to you, as I did to Mr. Walker (and I say it the more freely because Quid mea refert I am neither better nor worse, whether you hear or forbear), 'The Methodists do not want you; but you want them.' You want the life, the spirit, the power which they have, not of themselves, but by the free grace of God; else how could it be (let me speak without reserve) that so good a man and so good a preacher should have so little fruit of his labour--his unwearied labour--for so many years Have your parishioners the life of religion in their souls Have they so much as the form of it Are the people of Wintringham in general any better than those of Winterton or Horton Alas! sir, what is it that hinders your reaping the fruit of so much pains and so many prayers

Is it not possible this may be the very thing, your setting yourself against those whom God owns by the continual conviction and conversion of sinners

I fear, as long as you in any wise oppose these, your rod will not blossom, neither will you see the desire of your soul, in the prosperity of the souls committed to your charge. I pray God to give you a right judgement in all things; and am, dear sir,

Your affectionate brother.

To John Mason

[20]

PEMBROKE, August 6, 1768.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I would advise to make a longer trial of Kinsale. I am still in hope that good will be done there. And there has been considerable good done at Bandon; and will be more if the preachers do not coop themselves up in the house. But no great good will be done at any place without field-preaching. I hope you labour to keep the bands regular in every place, which cannot be done without a good deal of care and pains. Take pains likewise with the children and in visiting from house to house; else you will see little fruit of your labour. I believe it will be best to change the preachers more frequently.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother

To the Stewards of the Foundery

[21]

PEMBROKE, August 6, 1768.

MY DEAR BRETHREN,--The thing you mention is of no small concern, and ought not to be determined hastily. Indeed, it would be easy to answer, if we considered only how to save money; but we are to consider also how to save souls. Now, I doubt whether we should act wisely in this respect were we to give up the chapel in Spitalfields. We have no other preaching-place in or near that populous quarter of the town; and a quarter which, upon one account, I prefer before almost any other--namely, that the people in general are more simple and less confused by any other preachers. I think, therefore, it would not be worth while to give up this if we could gain a thousand pounds thereby. I should look upon it as selling the souls of men for money; which God will give us in due time without this. That many who live near the Foundery would be glad of it I allow, because it would save them trouble. But neither can I put the saving of trouble in competition with the saving of souls.--I am, my dear brethren,

Your affectionate brother.

To Jane Hilton

BRISTOL, August 20, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I write often because I know you are yet weak and tender and in need of every help. I am not sorry that you have trials; they are intended to show you your own helplessness, and to give you a fuller confidence in Him who has all power in heaven and earth. You have reason to cast all your care upon Him; for He has dealt bountifully with you. When any trial comes, see that you do not look to the thing itself, but immediately look unto Jesus. Reason not upon it, but believe. See the hand of God in Shimei's tongue. If you want advice in any point, write to me without delay. And meantime stay your whole soul upon Him who will never leave you nor forsake you. Tell Him simply all you fear, all you feel, all you want. Pour out your soul into His bosom. Do you feel no pride, no anger, no desire You will feel temptations to all; and the old deceiver will tell you again and again, 'That is pride, that is anger!' But regard him not. And cast not away your confidence, which hath great recompense of reward.

Your affectionate brother.

I am to spend a month or two in and near Bristol.

To Lawrence Coughlan

[22]

[August 27, 1768,]

DEAR LAWRENCE,--By a various train of providences you have been led to the very place where God intended you should be. And you have reason to praise Him that He has not suffered your labour there to be in vain. In a short time how little will it signify whether we had lived in the Summer Islands or beneath

The rage of Arctos and eternal frost! [See Prior's Solomon, i. 264-5:'If any suffer on the polar coast The rage of Arctos and eternal frost.']

How soon will this dream of life be at an end! And when we are once landed in eternity, it will be all one whether we spent our time on earth in a palace or had not where to lay our head.

You never learned, either from my conversation or preaching or writings, that 'holiness consisted in a flow of joy.' I constantly told you quite the contrary: I told you it was love; the love of God and our neighbour; the image of God stamped on the heart; the life of God in the soul of man; the mind that was in Christ, enabling us to walk as Christ also walked. If Mr. Maxfield or you took it to be anything else, it was your own fault, not mine. And whenever you waked out of that dream, you ought not to have laid the blame of it upon me. It is true that joy is one part of 'the fruit of the Spirit,' of the kingdom of God within us. But this is first 'righteousness,' then 'peace,' and 'joy in the Holy Ghost.' It is true, farther, that if you love God with 'all your heart' you may 'rejoice evermore.' Nay, it is true still farther that many serious, humble, sober-minded believers, who do feel the love of God sometimes, and do then rejoice in God their Saviour, cannot be content with this, but pray continually that He would enable them to love and 'rejoice in the Lord always.' And no fact under heaven is more undeniable than that God does answer this prayer; that He does, for the sake of His Son, and through the power of His Spirit, enable one and another so to do. It is also a plain fact that this power does commonly overshadow them in an instant, and that from that time they enjoy that inward and outward holiness to which they were utter strangers before. Possibly you might be mistaken in this; perhaps you thought you had received what you had not. But pray do not measure all men by yourself; do not imagine you are the universal standard. If you deceived yourself (which yet I do not affirm), you should not infer that all others do. Many think they are justified, and are not; but we cannot infer that none are justified. So neither, if many think they are 'perfected in love,' and are not, will it follow that none are so. Blessed be God, though we set an hundred enthusiasts aside, we are still 'encompassed with a cloud of witnesses,' who have testified, and do testify, in life and in death, that perfection which I have taught these forty years! This perfection cannot be a delusion, unless the Bible be a delusion too; I mean, 'loving God with all our heart and our neighbour as ourselves.' I pin down all its opposers to this definition of it. No evasion! No shifting the question! Where is the delusion of this Either you received this love or you did not; if you did, dare you call it a delusion You will not call it so for all the world. If you received anything else, it does not at all affect the question. Be it as much a delusion as you please, it is nothing to them who have received quite another thing-- namely, that deep communion with the Father and the Son, whereby they are enabled to give Him their whole heart, to love every man as their own soul, and to walk as Christ also walked.

O Lawrence, if Sister Coughlan and you ever did enjoy this, humble yourselves before God for casting it away; if you did not, God grant you may

To James Morgan

[23]

ST. JUST, September 3, 1768.

DEAR JEMMY,--I have been thinking much of you; and why should I not tell you all I think and all I fear concerning you I think all that you said at the Conference [In Bristol on Aug. 16-19.] upon the subject of the late debate was right; and it amounted to no more than this,--'The general rule is, they who are in the favour of God know they are so. But there may be some few exceptions. Some may fear and love God, and yet not be clearly conscious of His favour; at least, they may not dare to affirm that their sins are forgiven.' If you put the case thus, I think no man in his senses will be under any temptation to contradict you; for none can doubt but whosoever loves God is in the favour of God. But is not this a little misstating the case I do not conceive the question turned here. But you said, or was supposed to say, 'All penitents are in the favour of God,' or 'All who mourn after God are in the favour of God.' And this was what many disliked, because they thought it was unscriptural and unsafe as well as contrary to what we had always taught. That this is contrary to what we have always taught is certain, as all our hymns as well as other writings testify. So that, whether it be true or not, it is without all question a new doctrine among the Methodists. We have always taught that a penitent mourned or was pained on this very account, because he felt he was 'not in the favour of God,' having a sense of guilt upon his conscience and a sense of the divine displeasure at the same time. Hence we supposed the language of his heart was, 'Lost and undone, for aid I cry.' And we believed he was really lost and undone till God did

Peace, righteousness, and joy impart,

And speak forgiveness to his heart.

I still apprehend this to be scriptural doctrine, confirmed not by a few detached texts, but by the whole tenor of Scripture, and more particularly by the Epistle to the Romans. But if so, the contrary to it must be unsafe, for that general reason, because it is unscriptural. To which one might add this particular reason,--it naturally tends to lull mourners to sleep; to make them cry, 'Peace, peace,' to their souls, 'when there is no peace.' It directly tends to damp and still their convictions, and to encourage them to sit down contented before Christ is revealed to them and before the Spirit witnesses with their spirits that they are the children of God. But it may be asked, 'Will not this discourage mourners' Yes, it will discourage them from stopping where they are; it will discourage them from resting before they have the witness in themselves, before Christ is revealed in them. But it will encourage them to seek Him in the gospel way--to ask till they receive pardon and peace. And we are to encourage them, not by telling them that they are in the favour of God though they do not know it (such a word as this we should never utter in a congregation at the peril of our souls), but we should assure them, 'Every one that seeketh findeth, every one that asketh receiveth.' If a man does not know the pardoning love of God for himself, I would ask, How or by what means are you to know it for him Has God given you to search the heart and try the reins of your hearers Can you infallibly know the real state of that man's mind Can you be certain that no secret sin stands between God and his soul Are you sure he does not regard iniquity in his heart I am afraid you have not been sufficiently wary in this, but have given occasion to them who sought occasion. But this is not all. I doubt you did not see the hand of God in Shimei's tongue. 'Unto you it was given to suffer' a little of what you extremely wanted--obloquy and evil report. But you did not either acknowledge the gift or the Giver. You saw only Mr. T. Olivers, not God. O Jemmy, you do not know yourself. You cannot bear to be continually steeped in poison --in the esteem and praise of men; therefore I tremble at your stay in Dublin. It is the most dangerous place for you under heaven! All I can say is, God can preserve you in the fiery furnace, and I hope He will.--I am, dear Jemmy,

Yours affectionately.

To his Wife

[24]

NEWLYN, September 5, 1768.

MY DEAR LOVE,--I can make allowances for faintness and weakness and pain. I remember when it was my own case at this very place, and when you spared no pains in nursing and waiting upon me, till it pleased God to make you the chief instrument of restoring my strength. [For this illness at Newlyn in July 1753, see Journal, iv. 77. The 'we' in the entries for July 12 and 18 evidently included his wife, to whom he had been married rather more than two years. It was apparently the beginning of the serious illness which sent him into retirement at Lewisham, where he wrote his own epitaph on Nov. 26.] I am glad you have the advice of a skilful physician. But you must not be surprised or discouraged if you do not recover your strength so soon as one might wish, especially at this time of the year. What is chiefly to be desired is that God may sanctify all His dispensations to you: that all may be means of your being more entirely devoted to Him whose favour is better than strength or health or life itself.--I am, dear Molly,

Your ever affectionate Husband.

To Lady Maxwell

[25]

REDRUTH, September 9, 1768.

MY DEAR LADY,--It is impossible for me to give you pain without feeling it myself. And yet the manner wherein you receive my plain dealing gives me pleasure too. Perhaps you never had so uncomplaisant a correspondent before. Yet I think you hardly ever had one who had a more tender regard for you. But it is this very thing which lays me under a constraint to tell you all I hear or fear concerning you, because I cannot be content that you should be a Christian after the common rate. No. I want you to have all the mind that was in Christ and in everything to walk as He walked. To live like an angel here below, unblameable in spotless love.

What a comfort it is when we can have confidence in each other! I rejoice that you can speak freely even upon so delicate a subject. You may be assured that no eye but mine shall see your letter. One cannot be too wary in things of this kind; some men are so weak, and others so wicked. I give entire credit to everything you say, particularly concerning Mr. H.['H.' is Christopher Hopper.]; and I join with you in thinking there must be some mistake in the person who informed me of that circumstance. I do not believe he uttered such a word. I cannot think him capable of it. I am now entirely easy upon that head, being persuaded that, through the power of Christ strengthening you, you will stand fast both in the inward and outward liberty wherewith He has made you free.

I am glad to hear Lady Baird [See letter of April 29, 1769.] has the courage to cast in her lot with a poor, despised people. In what instance do you apprehend Lady Baird to be in danger of enthusiasm When I know more particularly, I will take an opportunity of either speaking or writing.

I suppose a copy of the strange account of Eliz. Hobson [For the account of Elizabeth Hobson's apparitions, see letter of Sept. 12, 1782, to a Quaker.] was sent you from Newcastle from my papers. Not long after, the former half of these papers, eight pages out of sixteen, was taken away, none can tell how to this day. What I could remember, I wrote down again. But I question whether my memory served me as to every circumstance, and must therefore ask of you a copy of what was lost. If you please, Mr. Thompson [William Thompson was at this time Wesley's Assistant in Edinburgh.] can transcribe it for me. The thing is now brought, I hope, to a final issue. She has met him at Boyldon Hill, when he took his leave with, 'I shall see you no more, in time or eternity.'

How much happiness is it for us that we hope to see each other both in time and in eternity! 'Nor shorter space true love can satisfy.'

That you may be daily more athirst both for holiness and glory is the prayer of, my dear Lady,

Your affectionate servant.

I am now setting my face toward Bristol.

To George Merryweather

BRISTOL, September 26, 1768.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I have appointed Richard Boardman [Boardman was Assistant in the Dales, and took the place of Rowell at Yarm.] to supply (for the present at least) the place of Jacob Rowell. I desire John Heslop [Heslop was second preacher at Yarm in 1767. He had evidently been paying attention to a lady there. See letter of Oct.1.] may preach at Yarm no more. Quietly let him sink into nothing. And the less he preaches in other places the better till he comes again to his senses. Indeed, if anything of so notorious a kind occurs, I will thank any steward for preventing such a preacher from doing any more hurt till he has an answer from me.--I am, with love to Sister Merryweather,

Your affectionate brother.

To Jane Hilton

[26]

BRISTOL, September 30, 1768.

Indeed, Jenny, you hardly deserve to hear from me. What, put me off with a letter of two lines! See that you make me amends by the length of your next; or else I will be angry at you, if I can.

You, as it were, ask my advice. But I know nothing of the matter: you should have spoken to me when I saw you. Is the person a believer Is he a Methodist Is he a member of our Society Is he clear with regard to the doctrine of Perfection Is he athirst for it If he fails in any of these particulars, I fear he would be an hindrance to you rather than an help. Was not inordinate affection to him one cause of your losing the pure love of God before If it was, you have a great reason to be afraid lest it should again rob you of that pearl. Has it not already Have you all the life you had two months ago Is your soul still all love Speak freely, my dear Jenny, to

Your affectionate brother.

To Christopher Hopper

[27]

BRISTOL, October 1, 1768.

Truly, Christopher, I am at my wits' end. I know not what can be done. Possibly you may instruct me. The poor man is an incorrigible coxcomb. His last exploit with Mr. Oastler's niece has pinned the casket. I cannot imagine what can be done with him or how he can be trusted anywhere. He can be in no part of the South or West of England; neither my brother nor many others could suffer it. There is no vacancy in the North of England; and wherever he has been there, they are sick of him. I ask you again, Where can he be, where he will not do mischief In any part of Scotland or of Ireland If the time was come for my voyage to Ireland, I would take him with me, and drop him there.--I am, with love to Sister Hopper,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Hall

KINGSWOOD, October 6, I 768.

DEAR PATTY,--You do not consider, money never stays with me: it would burn me if it did. I throw it out of my hands as soon as possible, lest it should find a way into my heart. Therefore you should have spoken to me while I was in London, and before Miss Lewen's money flew away. [Wesley had settled some disputed points with Miss Lewen's father, and received on Nov. 2, 1767, the 1,000 legacy which she left him. See Journal, v. 226-7; Stamp's Orphan House, pp. 111-112; Tyerman's Wesley, ii. 589-90.] However, I know not but I may still spare you five pounds, provided you will not say, 'I will never ask you again,' because that is more than you can tell; and you must not promise more than you can perform.

I scarce know what to say with regard to the other affair. It is a delicate point. Is she sure of her temporal affairs Remember her whom Lawrence Coughlan [See letters of Aug. 27, 1768, and Feb. 25, 1785 (to John Stretton).] married and ruined. Let me not have another blot of the same kind. Let her take care to tread upon firm ground.

Oh how busy are mankind! and about what trifles! Things that pass away as a dream! Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, but to love and serve God.--I am, dear Patty,

Your ever affectionate.

To Jane Hilton

BRISTOL, October 8, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You need never be afraid of 'wearying my patience,' unless it be by your silence. There is no danger of your writing too often or too much; whatever comes from you is welcome. I can easily believe the description you give is just; therefore there are only two particulars remaining: First, Have you both the consent of your parents Without this there is seldom a blessing. Secondly, Is he able to keep you I mean in such a manner as you have lived hitherto. Otherwise, remember I When poverty comes in at the door, love flies out at the window.

Do you find as much as ever of the spirit of prayer and of continual watchfulness Are you always sensible of the presence of God in the greatest hurry of business Have you power over wandering thoughts And do you find as much union of spirit as ever with, my dear Jenny,

Your affectionate brother.

To Jenny Hilton, At Mr. Francis Hilton's, In Beverley, Yorkshire.

To Joseph Benson

[28]

WYCOMBE, November 7, 1768.

DEAR JOSEPH,--You have now twenty more volumes of the Philosophical Transactions. Dr. Burton's Latin and Greek Poems you have in the study.[At Kingswood School.] Malebranche [Included in the list of studies for fourth year. See History of Kingswood School, p. 66.] and some other books are coming. Logic you cannot crack without a tutor: I must read it to Peter and you, if we live to meet. It would not be amiss if I had a catalogue of the books at Kingswood; then I should know the better what to buy. As fast as I can meet with them at sales, I shall procure what are yet wanting. But beware you be not swallowed up in books: an ounce of love is worth a pound of knowledge.--I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate brother.

To Hannah Ball

[29]

LONDON, November 12, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You may always direct to me in London, and the letter will be sent to me wherever I am. There is at present a better prospect at Henley than there has been for several years; and I trust you will see more fruit at Wycombe than there has lately been. Stir up the gift of God that is in you! Willingly catch all opportunities of warning every one and exhorting every one, if by any means you may save some! Cast off every weight! Beware of everything that damps or deadens your soul! If you may be free from the cares and entanglements of another state of life, use it rather.[Referring to an offer of marriage from an ungodly young man which she had refused.] Surely you are happier if you so abide. Now you have but one care: keep yourself in the love of God, in His pure love, by growing therein. Rejoice, pray, give thanks evermore. Cleave closer to Him that loves you; and for His sake love, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse

LONDON, November 12, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I believe Mr. Rankin [Rankin had been Assistant at Epworth for two years, and was now in Cornwall.] will write soon. You did well to write to me. I am always glad to hear from you, more than from most other persons. I can hardly believe John Harrison's [Harrison was a 'Still' brother at Epworth. See Journal, iii. 5, 19.] story. Perhaps one ought not to believe it without having the accuser and accused face for face, especially if the girl has behaved well while she has been with you. It may be you did not pray for her, and then anger would easily arise.

You must trust God with Mr. Woodhouse, [See letter of Feb. 3, 1768.] and He will do all things well. There is very little danger in any sore throat if, as soon as it begins, you apply an handful of nettles boiled, and repeated if need be after six hours. I have known one cured at the beginning by drinking a pint and an half of cold water and steeping his feet in hot water. But all strong drinks are hurtful. I have not lately heard from John Standring. [Standring, then travelling in South Lancashire, appears in the Minutes in 1766. He was greatly beloved by those among whom he laboured. See Atmore's Memorial, p. 400.]

Do you now retain the love you had and the spirit of prayer And are you still able to give your whole heart to God Cleave to Him, and what can hurt you And write freely to, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse, At Mr. Hutton's, In Epworth, Near Thorne, Yorkshire.

To John Mason

[30]

LONDON, November 15, 1768.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--For one preacher to stay long at one place is neither profitable for him nor for the people. If there is only one preacher at Limerick, he must duly visit the country Societies. As David Evans is now gone over to Waterford, Brother Bourke will be at liberty. So either he or you should go without delay and relieve John Hilton at Londonderry. If any deny the witness of sanctification and occasion disputing in the select society, let him or her meet therein no more. I hope the singing goes on well.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To George Cussons

[31]

LONDON, November 18, 1768.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--When you seek God with fasting added to prayer, you cannot seek His face in vain. This has been exceedingly blessed in various parts, and the revival of God's work has begun at the very time. You would do well to have several meetings of this kind as well as frequent meetings for prayer. Undoubtedly the visits paid you by Dr. Conyers, by Mr. Venn, and Mr. King [John King, Rector of Pertonhall, Beds (1752-1800), Cowper's schoolfellow. See Journal, v. 61, 63n.] were so many answers to prayer; and He will not withhold from you any manner of thing that is good.

It is by patient continuance in well doing, in using all the grace which is already given you, that you are to seek the whole gift of God, the entire renewal of your soul, the full deliverance from sin. And do not think it far off: this is the voice of unbelief. He is nigh that sanctifieth: only believe, and feel Him near. This is what you should continually insist on, the nearness of the promise. And, indeed, if it is to be received by naked faith, by consequence it may be received now.-- I am, dear George,

Your affectionate brother.

To Jane Hilton

[32]

LONDON, November 26, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--There seems to have been a particular providence in Hannah Harrison's coming to Beverley, especially at that very time when a peace-maker was so much wanting; and it was a pledge that God will withhold from you no manner of thing that is good.

The words of our Lord Himself show us what we are to expect from 'those of our own household.' But all this likewise shall be for good. 'It is given to you to suffer' for Him; and all will turn to your profit, that you may be more largely a partaker of His holiness.

Do you feel, when you are tried in a tender point, no temper contrary to love Grief there may be; but is there no resentment or anger Do you feel invariable calmness of spirit Do you perceive nothing but pity and tender goodwill both at the time and afterwards

Write to me of the trials you meet with. You may always direct to London, and the letter will come safe. Expect more faith and love daily.

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Rankin

LONDON, December 1, 1768.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Last year Mr. H.[See letter Of Nov. 24, 1767.] was much persuaded that by means of the Yearly Subscription our whole debt of above eleven thousand pounds would be paid within two years. Many of our brethren were more sanguine still. They were persuaded that, by generously exerting themselves and giving a large sum at once, it would be paid in one year. I did not expect this; but I would not contradict, because I would not discourage them. The event was as I foresaw. By the noble effort which many of our brethren made most of the pressing debts are already discharged, amounting in the whole to near five thousand pounds.

But a debt of above seven thousand pounds remains upon us still; and what can be done with regard to this

I will tell you what occurs to my mind. Many of our brethren chose to subscribe yearly ten, five, three, two guineas or less. I doubt not but these will cheerfully pay the residue of their subscription, and perhaps some of them will add a little thereto, as they see the great occasion there is for it. A few delayed subscribing or contributing, because they 'wanted to see the event,' supposing the design to be impracticable and that nothing 'would come of it.' As it now appears that great good has come of it, that many burthens are already removed, I cannot but earnestly exhort all these now at least to set their shoulders to the work. Now at least let them exert themselves for my sake, for the gospel's sake, and for the sake of their still afflicted brethren who groan under a load which they cannot well bear and yet cannot remove without our assistance.

Several generously contributed at once in hopes of paying the whole debt; of them nothing more can be required but their prayers that others may be as open-hearted as themselves. Nevertheless, if of their own free goodwill they see good to add a little to their former benefaction, this as well as the former is lent unto the Lord, and what they lay out shall be paid them again.

Ought I not to add that there were some of our brethren who did not answer my expectations I knew they were able to assist me largely; and I flattered myself they were not less willing than able, as they owed me their own souls also, and this was the first favour of the kind which I had requested of them.

Let me be excused from saying any more of what is past. Let them now drop all excuses and objections, and show they love me and their brethren and the work of God not in word only but in deed and in truth.

Let me have joy over you, my brother, in particular. You have a measure of this world's goods. You see your brother hath need. I have need of your help, inasmuch as the burthens of my brethren are my own. Do not pass by on the other side, but come and help as God has enabled you. Do all you can to lighten the labour and--strengthen the hands of

Your affectionate brother.[An identical letter, addressed to Mr. Mark Middleton, was in the hands of Mr. George Stampe, dated Dec. 7, 1768.]

To Christopher Hopper

LONDON, December 3, 1768.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Regard not custom, but reason.[Hopper was the preacher in the Birstall Circuit.] I wish you would (1) Nowhere begin preaching later than seven in the evening; (2) Preach nowhere unless they can and will procure you a tolerable lodging; (3) Change the stewards as soon as may be, whoever is pleased or displeased; (4) Execute our discipline in every point without fear or favour; (5) Expect no thanks from Richard Taylor nor any man else for doing him good.--I am, with love to Sister Hopper,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Joseph Benson

[33]

LONDON, December 4, 1768.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I cannot yet convince you of one thing (and it is a thing of importance), that you may make greater progress in valuable knowledge by reading those books (particularly if read in that order) than you can by reading any other books which are now extant in England. It follows that your friend B-- in this respect is not your friend. For he puts you out of your way; he retards you in the attainment of the most useful knowledge. He gratifies your curiosity (a bad principle too) at the expense of your improvement. It is better for you to read these books than his; which (if they are not hurtful or dangerous at least) do not lead directly to the end you propose. Choose the best way.--I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate brother.

To George Merryweather

[34]

LEWISHAM, December 10, 1768.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--The matter is short: all things in divine worship must 'be done decently and in order.' Two must never pray at the same time, nor one interrupt another. Either Alice Brammah must take advice or the Society must be warned to keep away from her. These are the very things which were the beginning of poor George Bell's fall.--I am, with love to Sister Merryweather,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mary Bosanquet

[35]

LONDON, December 11, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I am afraid lest you should straiten yourself; and I was not in haste. Yet we have such a number round about us here that I have a ready call for what I have to spare. I am glad Brother Taylor's affair has been heard: it seems all parties are now pretty well satisfied. If we live till next autumn, the yearly Conference is to be at Leeds. It will be a little strange if you do not see me then, though it were twice three miles from Gildersome.

You have no reason to fear, but as your day so your strength shall be. Hitherto the Lord has helped you. He has delivered; and you may be assured that He will yet deliver. He gave, and He took away: but still you can praise Him, since He does not take His Spirit from you. I hope you find no shyness in Brother Lee or Hopper. If there be, you are to overcome evil with good. I shall alw

ays be glad to hear from you or Sally Crosby. I trust neither life nor death will part you from, my dear sister, Your affectionate brother.

To Miss Bosanquet, At Mr. James Rhodes's, In Leeds.

To his Brother Charles

[36]

LONDON, December 17, 1768.

DEAR BROTHER,--I thank you for your reproof; there is reason in what you say. If there was not evil, there was the appearance of evil.

[Two hours on Tuesday and four hours on Thursday I listened with both my ears. John Downes, his wife, John Jones, and William Evans vehemently accused. William Garrat answered (though interrupted an hundred times keenly enough) point by point. When the hearing was over, the strongest thing of all was, we seemed all agreed in our verdict, --(1) that he had spoken several hot and improper things; (2) that he had done wrong in leaving his master [Mr. Dear.] on so short warning; and yet (3) that there had been no dishonesty, either on the one part or the other.

['How, then, came the man to break' Why--, (1) in four years' time he earned six hundred pounds; (2) within that time he expended (including a few bad debts) about seventeen hundred and fifty.]

Matters have not been well carried out at Liverpool. But what can't be cured must be endured.

Why, you simpleton, you are cutting me out a month's work. Nay, but I have neither leisure nor inclination to write a book. I intend only (1) to leave out what I most dislike; (2) to mark what I most approve of; (3) to prefix a short preface. And I shall run the hazard of printing it at Bristol. There you yourself can read the proof-sheets.

You do well with regard to my sister Emily. What farther is wanting I will supply. I hear nothing from or of our friend [Mrs. Wesley] at Newcastle. I have no time for Handel or Avison now. Peace be with you and yours. Adieu.

I am now a mere Fellow of a college again.

To Joseph Benson

SHOREHAM, December 22, 1768.

MY DEAR JOSEPH,--You do not quite take my meaning yet. [See letter of Dec. 4.] When I recommend to any one a method or scheme of study, I do not barely consider this or that book separately but in conjunction with the rest. And what I recommend I know; I know both the style and sentiments of each author, and how he will confirm or illustrate what goes before and prepare for what comes after. Now, supposing Mr. Stonehouse, [Dr. James Stonehouse, lecturer of All Saints', Bristol. See Tyerman's Whitefield, ii. 195; and for James Rouquet, letter of March 30, 1761.] Rouquet, or any other to have ever so great learning and judgement, yet he does not enter into my plan. He does not comprehend my views nor keep his eye fixed on the same point. Therefore I must insist upon it, the interposing other books between these till you have read them through is not good husbandry. It is not making your time and pains go so far as they might go. If you want more books, let me recommend more, who best understand my own scheme. And do not ramble, however learned the persons may be that advise you so to do. This does indulge curiosity, but does not minister to real improvement, as a stricter method would do. No; you would gain more clearness and strength of judgement by reading those Latin and Greek books (compared with which most of the English are whipped syllabub) than by fourscore modern books. I have seen the proof, as none of your Bristol friends have done or can do. Therefore I advise you again, keep to your plan (though this implies continual self-denial) if you would improve your understanding to the highest degree of which it is capable.--I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate brother.

To Jane Hilton

SHOREHAM, December 22, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I do not remember that I ever found a fault in you before. But I do now. I must blame you. Why are you so short You can tell me all that is in your heart. And what should hinder you Suppose I was now sitting by you, would you need to hide anything And sometimes we can write what we cannot speak. But, either in writing or speaking, there need be no reserve between us.

You mention trials. But this is a general word. Would it not ease your mind to be more particular Are your trials mostly inward or outward Are they from those of your own household Can any one lay disobedience to your charge Or do they only say you are proud and stubborn Let them say everything they can. Still look unto Jesus! Commune with Him in your heart! Let your eye be singly fixed on Him; your whole soul shall be full of light!--I am, my dear Jenny,

Your affectionate brother.

To Jenny Hilton, At Mr. Hilton's, In Beverley.

To Hannah Ball

LONDON, December 24, 1768.

Nothing can be more certain than that God is willing to give always what He gives once, and that therefore, whatever you experience now, you may enjoy to your life's end. . . . Watch and pray, and you will not enter into temptation. . . . Be the success more or less, never be weary of well doing. In due time you shall reap if you faint not. . . .

To Mary Bosanquet

LONDON, December 28, 1768.

MY DEAR SISTER,--To hear from you is always agreeable to me; and at present there is no hindrance. In this house we have no jarring string; all is peace and harmony. [Mrs. Wesley was away from the Foundery.] Right precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. And to hear particular accounts of this kind is exceedingly helpful to those they leave behind. Therefore I wanted as particular an account as Sally Crosby or you can give. [Of the death of Sarah Ryan. See letter of Dec. 11.]

T. Lee is of a shy, backward, natural temper, as well as of a slow, cool speech and behaviour; but he is a sincere, upright man; and it will be worth all the pains to have a thorough good understanding with him. Peace be with your spirits!-- I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss Bosanquet, At Gildersome Hall, near Leeds.

To a Friend

[37]

To Dr. Brown

[1768.]

SIR,--Since I had the pleasure of waiting upon you, I [have] been often reflecting on the account given us of the Indians in Paraguay. It is about four and twenty years since I read the first account of them, translated from a French author. It then made much the same impression on my mind, which I believe it has now made on yours. Permit me, Sir, to speak my free thoughts concerning it, which I shall be glad to alter, upon better information.

I am throughly persuaded that true, genuine religion is capable of working all those happy effects which are said to be wrought there; and that, in the most ignorant and savage of the human-kind. I have seen instances of this: no Indians are more savage than were the colliers of Kingswood; many of whom are now an humane, hospitable people full of love to God and man; quiet, diligent in business; in every state content; every way adorning the Gospel of God their Saviour.

But the difficulty with me lies here. I am not persuaded, that the Romish Missionaries (very few excepted) either know, or teach, true, genuine religion. And of all their Missionaries, generally speaking, the Jesuits are the worst. They teach nothing less than the true genuine religion of Jesus Christ. They spend their main strength in teaching their converts, so called, the opinions and usages of their Church. Perhaps the most religious that ever was among them, was their 'East Indian Apostle,' Francis Xavier. And from his own Letters (four volumes of which I had) it plainly appears, that (whether he knew it himself or no) he never taught one tittle of the religion of the heart, but barely opinions and externals. Now what virtue, what happiness can possibly spring from such a root as this Allowing then, that the Paraguay converts have peace and plenty, allowing they have moral honesty, allowing they have an outward form of religion (and thus far I know not but their guides may bring them), I cannot believe they have gone one step farther, or that they know what True Religion is. Do their instructors experience the inward Kingdom of God Righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost And if not, are they likely to lead others, any farther than they have gone themselves Can they point out

The Eternal Sunshine of the spotless Mind,

Each Prayer accepted, and each Wish resigned 7

Desires composed, Affections ever even;

Tears that delight, and Sighs that waft to Heaven [Pope, Eloisa and Abelard, p. 207, quoted in Earnest Appeal, 3.]

And without this, who can be happy Who can avoid feeling many dull, heavy hours Let the Indians eat, drink, dance, play: all this will not fill up the blanks of life. Their highest enjoyments will carry them no farther than 'Sauntring Jack and Idle Joan' [An Epitaph, 1. 2: 'Without love, hatred, joy, or fear, They led-a kind of-as it were.'] in Prior. What can carry them any farther but heart-religion, 'Fellowship with the Father and with the Son'! O may you and yours always experience this better part, which alone takes away the weariness of life, which alone gives that heart-felt, that unceasing joy, the pledge and earnest of Life Eternal!--I am, sir,

Your very humble servant.