1788

DAYS OF HONOR

JANUARY 8, 1788, TO DECEMBER 26, 1789

To Adam Clarke

LONDON, January 8, 1788.

DEAR ADAM, -- I admired the spirit of young George Walker. [Despite somewhat hard treatment by his father. See letter of Dec. 18, 1787.] All the times that he spent with us I know not that he blamed any one. He did not tell anything about his father but in simply answering the questions I asked concerning him. I am in great hopes now that his marriage will not do hurt either to him or her. It is exceeding well that the storm which threatened is so well blown over. It is plain the Lord God omnipotent reigneth and that there is neither counsel nor strength against Him. But you have not sent a plain, full, distinct account of the affair of our old sister, [Mrs. Home, See letters of Nov. 9, 1787, and March 17, 1788.] specifying (1) her age; (2) on what day of the year and month did the first hair shoot out (3) on what day did she throw it into the fire (4) on what night did it grow again (5) who were eyewitnesses of these things You cannot be too particular.

I do not like your staying so long at a time in Guernsey. I advise you to change islands without fail once a quarter. Are Mr. and Mrs. De Jersey well, and my two dear maidens How are Mr. and Mrs. Amore And how does my dear Jenny Bisson go on She is a letter in my debt. I wish you all many happy years; and am, dear Adam,

Yours and Brother De Queteville's affectionate friend and brother.

 

 

To Duncan Wright

LONDON, January 9, 1788.

DEAR DUNCAN, -- You send me a comfortable account of the work of God in your circuit. I cannot doubt but a blessing redounds to you all for the sake of the poor children. I verily think these Sunday schools are one of the noblest specimens of charity which have been set on foot in England since the time of William the Conqueror. [Eight hundred poor children were taught at Bolton 'by about eighty masters, who receive no pay but what they are to receive from their Great Master.' See Journal, vii. 305-6.]

If Michael Fenwick has a mind to go to Dumfries and assist Robert Dall, [See letters of Dec. 1, 1787, and Feb. 11, 1788.] you may give him three guineas, which he must husband well. He may write to me from thence: -- I am, dear Duncan,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

 

 

To Mrs. Barton

LONDON, January 11, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- You have indeed had a series of trials one upon the back of another. It is well you know in whom you have believed; otherwise you would have been weary and faint in your mind. For it is not an easy thing always to remember (then especially when we have most need of it) that 'the Lord loveth whom He chasteneth and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.' Who could believe it, if He had not told us so Himself It is well that He never fails to give us strength according to our day; and that we know these 'light afflictions, which are but for a moment, work for us a more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.' -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Joseph Pescod

LONDON, January 13, 1788.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- Why should you sell the house Is not the yearly rent of it equal to the interest on the money you would receive for it If it wants repairing, [Pescod was Assistant in the Oxfordshire Circuit. He notes that the expense of repairing the house is 25.] the Conference will allow money to repair, and also to renew the lease whenever it expires. By-and-by we should bitterly regret the selling of it.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Jos. Pescod, At the Preaching-house,

In Oxford.

To Henry Moore

LONDON, January 18, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- This is an unprecedented thing. I never before saw or heard of such a flow of grace as was seen [in] Dublin three years together without a proportionable ebb succeeding. [See letter of April 6.] Whereas to this hour we have no ebb at all. We can only say, 'It is the Lord: let Him do what seemeth Him good.'

I am glad you have got an house in Marlborough Street. [On Feb. 19 Wesley refers to the opening of the Marlborough Street Room.] I have appointed a class to meet there. It must needs give much offense. However, give as little as possible. Behave to them with all possible tenderness and courtesy. And do nothing that you foresee will give offense, unless it be a matter of duty.

It is exceeding well that you have made a beginning at Castle Road. I wonder all the villages round Dublin have not been tried before now. My best love attends my dear Nancy.--I am, dear Henry (and Becky [See letter of Feb.] too),

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Roberts

LONDON, January 18, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, --As the matter is now decided, I hope you are able to say, 'Lord, not as I will, but as Thou wilt.' I commend you for entirely giving up the matter when you found her parents were absolutely against it. [See letters of Dec. 22, 1787, and Feb. 12, 1789.] I hope you will think of it no more, but will be now more unreservedly devoted to God than ever! -- I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

I do not see that you [should] quit the circuit.

 

 

To William Simpson

LONDON, January 18, 1788.

DEAR BILLY, -- You did exceeding well to enlarge the number of prayer-meetings and to fix them in various parts of those [places]. I do not know that any means of grace whatever has been more owned of God than this.

It is not now but at the time of Conference that children are received into Kingswood School.

I am glad Sister Moon [Mrs. Emma Moon, his old correspondent at Yarm, where Simpson was Assistant. See letter of Nov. 5, 1762; and for Mrs. Middleton, Feb. 22, 1786.] has not forgotten me. I hope Sister Middleton too thinks of me sometimes. You are welcome to the four volumes of Sermons.--I am, with kind love to Sister Simpson, dear Billy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Will. Simpson, At the Preaching-house,

Stockton-upon-Tees.

To Robert Dull. [1]

LONDON, February 11, 1788.

DEAR ROBERT, -- I allow you to build at Dumfries, providing anyone will lend a hundred guineas on interest. I hope to see you, God willing, in May. -- I am, &c.

To his Brother Charles [2]

LONDON, February 18, 1788.

DEAR BROTHER, -- You must go out every day or die. Do not die to save charges. You certainly need not want anything as long as I live. Adieu.

To William Holmes

LONDON, February 18, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Do right and fear nothing. Exclude every person that will not promise to meet his or her class, the steward in particular [Holmes (1782-1833), a native of Devonshire, was Assistant at Brecon. See letter of June 14 to Walter Churchey.] I require you to do this. You have no choice. Leave the consequences to God. I do not advise you to go to the Hay any more, unless they can and will serve you harmless. Now believe, and you shall see better days! -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

Don't regard money. We can supply that.

To Mr. W. Holmes, At Miss Williams',

milliner, In Brecon.

To James Curtie

NEAR LONDON, February 19, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Supposing we could pray in faith for the accomplishment of the promise which is given in the last chapter of St. Mark, there is no doubt it would be fulfilled now as it was seventeen hundred years ago. And I have known many instances of this both in England and elsewhere.

In fifty years we have been much molested in field-preaching, and may be so again. Those who live fifty years more will let it die and be forgotten. Nobody will be fond of following the example of Mr. Bannclark.

I doubt whether the time is come for laying out so much money in building at Northampton. Four hundred pounds, where should they come Stay till Providence opens itself. [See letters of Sept. 15, 1787, and Jan. 24, 1789, to him.] I am, dear James,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. James Currie, At Colton End,

Northampton.

To Henry Moore

NEAR LONDON, February 19, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am glad the house is opened in Marlborough Street, [The house had been a Lutheran church; but they removed to Poolbeg Street about 1725. See W.H.S. v. 68; and letter of Jan. 18 to Moore.] and that the work of God still prospers among you, particularly among the poor soldiers. [See letter of April 6.] You send me likewise good news concerning George Dice. [Dice had retired in 1786. See letter of Jan. 14 of that year.] Nurse him tenderly, and he will come to good. Dr. Coke will not fail to rejoice over him.

Not only the devices of the Evangelical Society, but no weapon formed against us shall prosper. Is Bethesda full on the Sunday evenings or half full on week days If it had been in full union with the Methodists, I am inclined to think it would have prospered. But it was not likely to stand alone -- I do not see how we can go further than to be friends at a distance.

I have referred to Dr. Coke himself in what manner he shall proceed in Dublin, and whatever he and you agree upon I shall not condemn.

With my tender love to my dear Nancy, nay, and Becky, [Moore's sister. See letters of Jan. 18 and June 7.] I am, dear Henry, Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Jane Bisson

NEAR LONDON, February 20, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- Your last letter gave me a very sensible pleasure. Indeed, so do all your letters. And I cannot but acknowledge every letter I receive from you unites you to me more than I was united before. There is something in your spirit that does me good, that softens and quickens me too: but at the same time that melancholy thought occurs, that you are at so great a distance from me, and that it is doubtful whether I shall ever have the satisfaction of taking you by the hand again. Yet I shall, if it be the will of Him that orders all things well, who orders all for our profit, that we may be partakers of His holiness. And we know He cannot deny to them that fear Him any manner of thing that is good.

Your speaking of trials makes me almost ready to cry out in the words of our poet,

Secluded from the world, and all its care,

Hast thou to joy or grieve, to hope or fear

Shut up, as you are, in your father's house, and a little, retired, quiet island, and having food to eat and raiment to put on, what can you find to try you Speak, my dear friend, speak.

Surely you will not deny me the pleasure of serving you, or at least of sympathizing with you, if I cannot help you. One of your trials I can easily foresee. With all your innocence and prudence, you cannot escape censure. In spite of all you can do, the good that is in you will surely be evil spoken of. And it is not unlikely some will join in the cry against you from whom you expected better things. But, as you are just entering into life, one would think you had hardly yet met with any who rewarded you evil for good, and gave you occasion to cry out,

Ingratitude! sharp as the viper's tooth!

However, you have one Friend that never fails and that is always near. What a comfort it is that He is about your bed and about your path, still laying His hand upon you! Does He speak to you in dreams and visions of the night or wholly in your waking hours I love to hear and to read your experience of His goodness. As soon as you have opportunity, write without reserve to, my very dear sister,

Yours most affectionately.

To Miss Jane Bisson, In St. Helier,

Isle of Jersey.

To Charles Wesley

February [20], 1788.

I have not one hour to spare from four in the morning till nine at night. But you may see me on Thursday at Mr. Griffith's, who w.ill come in his coach to fetch you.

O consent [Charles endorses this, 'Consent to be cured, Feb. 1788.'] to be cured!

 

 

To Ann Bolton

LONDON, February 23, 1788.

MY DEAR NANCY, -- You do well to write to me at all times when you are of leisure, but especially when you are in trouble. It is a just remark of Mr. Addison:

The ways of Heaven are dark and intricate,

Puzzled with mazes and perplexed with errors.

So it seems at least to our poor, weak understandings, which cannot fathom the deep counsels of God. But what He does now you will know hereafter and see that He hath done all things well. If you had not seen trouble in the years that are past, you would not have been what you are now. You have fairly profited thereby: you have not suffered so many things in vain; but you have learnt more and more obedience by the things that you have suffered.

On Thursday next I am to leave London. I hope to be at Bristol the Monday following; a fortnight after at Stroud, as usual; and then at Cirencester and Gloucester. Meet me somewhere if you can conveniently. A copy of the Magazine is not now to be had, but you may have abundance of single ones. And, indeed, you never need want anything that is in the power of, my dear Nancy, Yours most affectionately.

To Robert Carr Brackenbury [3]

LONDON, February 27, 1788.

DEAR SIR, -- I cannot exactly agree with your judgment. While there was no preacher in the islands but you, and while the work of God was but just beginning, you was undoubtedly called to spend most of your time there, and then you did right in not being disobedient to the heavenly calling. But the case is very different now. They have now able preachers in French and English; and as they do not do the work deceitfully, it prospers in their hands. Has not the Lord more work for you to do in England In June (if God permit), I purpose to spend an evening with you at Raithby. Peace be with all your spirits! --I am, dear sir,

Your very affectionate friend and brother.

To David Gordon [4]

BATH, February 29, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am glad to find that matters are not so bad as they were represented, as to preaching in the morning and meeting the leaders. I hope there has been no blame, and I trust you have not willingly neglected your circuit. It would be worth while to talk at large with that young man who neglects the Lord's Supper. But if he obstinately persists in that neglect, you can't give him any more tickets for our Society. Be exact in all things. -- I am, dear David,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. David Gordon, At the Preaching-house,

In Waterford.

 

 

To his Brother Charles

BATH, March 2, 1788.

DEAR BROTHER, -- Hitherto we have had a very prosperous journey. We were just sixteen hours upon the road. All here are in peace. The little quarrels that used to be in the Society are dead and forgotten. John Broadbent has behaved exceeding wisely, and has given less offense than could have been imagined. [For Wesley's impressions of the Work, see Journal, vii. 358-9.] The congregations here are surprisingly large. Truly the day of God's power has come. Mr. Collins is in an excellent spirit, and preaches at the chapel [Brian Bury Collins was now living at Corn Street, and preached frequently at Lady Huntingdon's Vineyards' Chapel.] three or four times a week. He did not stay to be asked, but came and offered to read Prayers for me. Many inquire after you, and express much affection and desire of seeing you. In good time! You are first suffering the will of God. Afterwards He has a little more for you to do -- that is, provided you now take up your cross (for such it frequently must be) and go out at least an hour in a day. I would not blame you if it were two or three. Never mind expense; I can make that up. You shall not die to save charges. I shall shortly have a word to say to Charles and his brother both. [See letter of March 5.]

Peace be with all your spirits!

Miss Perrot [See Jackson's Charles Wesley, i, 558 - 'poor Nancy Perrot, my companion in misery.' Mrs. Wright to C. Wesley, Oct. 4, 1745.] is gone to rest; so farewell pain.

To Susanna Knapp

BRISTOL, March 4, 1788.

MY DEAR SUKY, -- That you were at the trouble of sending me a few lines I take exceeding kindly. I was talking with Mr. Eden here [Then in Bristol. See letter of Feb. 11, 1772, n.] a day or two ago, and he heard that the roads about Broadmarston are now almost impassable. On Monday next I hope to be at Stroud, on Tuesday at Gloucester, on Wednesday and Thursday at Worcester, on Friday at Stourport, and on Saturday at Birmingham. I hope you are making the best use of the rigor of youth in running the race that is set before you. [Miss Knapp was born Sept. 17, 1770. She was greatly influenced by Wesley's visits to her home. See letter of March 4, 1784, to her.] These are precious hours; improve them to the uttermost, and you will give pleasure to all that love you; in particular to, my dear Suky,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Knapp, At Mr. Knapp's,

In Worcester.

To his Brother Charles

BRISTOL, March 5, 1788.

DEAR BROTHER, -- I hope you keep to your rule, of going out every day, although it may sometimes be a cross. Keep to this but one month, and I am persuaded you will be as well as you was this time twelve-month.

If I ventured to give you advice more, it would be this: 'Be master of your own house.' If you fly, they pursue. But stand firm, and you will carry your point. [Evidently his musician sons needed to be kept to rule. See letters of March 2 and 7.] Adieu !

To Jasper Winscom [5]

BRISTOL, March 6, 1788.

DEAR JASPER, -- As soon as possible go to the isle and acquaint Thomas Warwick with what is laid to his charge.

According to the spirit and manner wherein he receives it must our proceeding be. If you see reason to believe he is truly penitent, we may possibly try him a little longer. But if he makes light of the matter and braves it out, I am afraid we must let him drop. Send word of all that occurs to

Your affectionate brother.

 

 

To his Niece Sarah Wesley

BRISTOL, March 7, 1788.

MY DEAR SALLY, -- When my appetite was entirely gone, so that all I could take at dinner was a roasted turnip, it was restored in a few days by riding out daily, after taking ten drops of elixir of vitriol in a glass of water. It is highly probable this would have the same effect in my brother's case. But in the meantime I wish he would see Dr. Whitehead. [John Whitehead. See letter of Oct. 15, 1766.] I am persuaded there is not such another physician in England; although (to confound human wisdom) he does not know how to cure his own wife.

He must lie in bed as little as possible in the daytime; otherwise it will hinder his sleeping at night.

Now, Sally, tell your brothers from me [See letter of March 5.] that their tenderly respectful behavior to their father (even asking his pardon if in anything they have offended him) will be the best cordial for him under heaven. I know not but they may save his life thereby. To know nothing will be wanting on your part gives great satisfaction to, my dear Sally,

Yours very affectionately.

 

 

To Sarah Mallet [6]

BATH, March 11, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I should have been exceedingly glad to see you; for I have a tender affection for you, and I shall always be well pleased to hear from you and to know how your soul prospers.

I do not wonder you should have trials: you may expect them from every quarter. You tread daily on dangers, snares, and death. But they cannot hurt you whilst your heart cleaves to God. Beware of pride! Beware of flatterers! Beware of dejections! But above all beware of inordinate affection! Those who profit by you will be apt to love you more than enough; and will not this naturally lead you into the same temptation Nay, Sally, is not this the case already Is your heart filled wholly with God Is it clear of idols I think you can speak to me freely, though on so delicate a subject you can hardly speak to anyone else. Is He still the sole object of your desire, the treasure and joy of your heart Considering your age and sex and situation, what but Omnipotence can keep you in the midst of the fire

You will not take it amiss if I ask you another question. I know that neither your father nor uncle is rich; and in traveling up and down you will want a little money. Are you not sometimes straitened Only let me know, and you shall want nothing that is in the power of, my dear Sally,

Yours affectionately.

To Charles Atmore

BRISTOL, March 13, 1788.

DEAR CHARLES, -- My journeys now grow rather too long to be taken in one year. I am strongly importuned to shorten them by not attempting to journey through Scotland any more. But this I cannot comply with; only thus far: I do not purpose visiting the North of Scotland. I must move in a smaller circle. I intend with God's help to visit first Dumfries, then Glasgow and Edinburgh, and from Edinburgh to return into England, where (even if I reach Newcastle by the end of May) I shall have full as much work as I can do before I return to London to prepare for the Conference.

You must needs pay a short visit to Ayr. That little Society must not be neglected. But I cannot imagine what can be done to build up the infant Society at Dumfries. If I can find a proper person as I come along, I will bring or send them a preacher. Charles, be zealous! -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Rev. Mr. Attoore,

In Glasgow.

To Samuel Bradburn [7]

BRISTOL, March 13, 1788.

DEAR SAMMY, -- With regard to my brother, I advise you: (1) Whether he will or no (at least, if not done already), carry Dr. Whitehead [See letter of March 7.] to him. (2) If he cannot go out, and yet must have exercise or die, persuade him to use [the wooden horse [See letters of July 17, 1785, and Aug. 18, 1790.] twice or thrice a day, and procure one for him. (3) I earnestly advise him to be electrified; not shocked, but only filled with electric fire. (4) Inquire if he has made his will, though I think it scarcely possible he should have delayed it.

The tunes which Brother Rhodes left with you should be immediately printed in the cheap form. Kind love to Sophy. -- I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To his Nephew Charles Wesley

BRISTOL, March 16, 1788.

DEAR CHARLES, -- Before going down to preach I just snatch time to write two or three lines. I think your persuasion is not of man but of God. Let none reason you out of it. But, whenever it pleases God to call your father, Sammy and you while I live will find a father and friend in

Your affectionate Uncle.

To his Brother Charles

BRISTOL, March 17, 1788, between four and five.

DEAR BROTHER, -- I am just setting out on my northern journey. But I must snatch time to write two or three lines.

I stand and admire the wise and gracious dispensation of Divine Providence! Never was there before so loud a call to all that are under your roof. If they have not hitherto sufficiently regarded either you or the Lord God of their fathers, what was more calculated to convince them than to see you hovering so long upon the borders of the grave And I verily believe, if they receive the admonition, God will raise you up again. I know you have the sentence of death in yourself; so had I more than twelve years ago. [In Ireland in 1775. See letter of July 28, 1775, to James Dempster.] I know nature is utterly exhausted; but is not nature subject to His word I do not depend upon physicians, but upon Him that raiseth the dead. Only let your whole family stir themselves up and be instant in Prayer; then I have only to say to each, 'If thou canst believe, thou shalt see the glory of God!'

Be strong in the Lord and in the power of His might. Adieu!

To The Rev. Mr. C. Wesley, In Chesterfield Street, London.

To Adam Clarke

STROUD, March 17, 1788.

DEAR ADAM, -- I immediately answered the letter which brought the account of Sister Horne's case. [See letter of Jan. 8.] I am afraid they will make willful mistakes and carry your letters to the Isle of Wight.

I am glad you have spread yourselves through the islands and that Mrs. de Saumarez has had the courage to join you. I believe she has very good uprightness of heart and (if she goes on) will be a burning and shining light. You have reason likewise to praise God on account of Alderney. [See letter of Nov. 9, 1787.] There is a seed which shall not easily be rooted up. Drink largely when need be of warm lemonade, and no bilious complaint will remain long.

Our Conference Deed provided for what Dr. Jersey desires. I desire the very same thing; nay! I observe Mr. Walker too. The sooner it is done the better. Send your translation [Clarke had offered on Oct. 29 to send a translation of part or the whole of Conference de la, Fable avec L'Histoire Sainte for the January Magazine if Wesley wished.] to London. My kind love to Miss Lempriere, Jenny Bisson (who owes me a letter), and the dear family at Mont Plaisir. [The De Jerseys.] Peace be with your spirits. -- I am, dear Adam,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

Direct to me at London, and your letter will come safe.

To his Nephew Samuel Wesley

STROUD, March 18, 1788.

DEAR SAMMY, -- I have long had a great concern for you; but never more than at present. Just now you are in a critical situation, and every hour is of importance. Your father is, to all known appearances, just quivering over the grave, and ready to leave you, with all the first inexperience of youth, under your tuition. The time was when you would have taken my advice. But now Miss Freeman has taught you another lesson! [See letter of Aug. 19, 1784, to him.] Alas! What a fatal step was that l I care not at all for one opinion or another. I care not who is head of the Church, provided you be a Christian! But what a grievous loss is it to you to be cut off on any pretense whatever from that preaching which is more calculated than any other in England to make you a real scriptural Christian. O Sammy, I take upon me to say, if you had neglected no opportunity of hearing your father and me preaching, you would have been another man than you are now.

But it seems the time is past! Your father is on the wing. You are not likely to see him long; and you know not that you will see me any more. Whether you do or do not, I earnestly advise you to make a friend of Mr. Dickinson. [Peard Dickinson.] He is a sensible and a pious man, and has a tender regard for you. I commit you to Him who is able to carry you through all temptations. -- I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate Uncle.

To William Black [8]

GLOUCESTER, March 19, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am glad to find you are still going on in the glorious work to which you are called. We have need to make haste therein, to use all diligence. For the work is great, the day is short, and lonely is the night wherein no man can work!

It is a kind Providence which has placed Brother Anderson and you in one house. For you may have many opportunities of strengthening each others hands in God.

It is well that Satan is constrained to show himself so plainly in the case of those poor demoniacs. Thereby he weakens his own kingdom and excites us to assault him more zealously. In the beginning of the work in England and Ireland we had many instances of the kind. But he now chooses to assault us by subtlety more than by strength.

I wish you would do all you possibly can to keep our brethren in peace with each other. And your pains will not be lost on poor John McGeary. [See letters of Feb. 20, 1787, and Feb. 27, 1789.] There is much good in him. Indeed, he is naturally of a bold, forward temper; but I hope his zeal is now according to knowledge.

Undoubtedly you know the objections which John Hoskins makes to John Stretton. [See next letter, and that of Nov. 21, 1789.] If there is any ground for them, should you not freely and lovingly talk with Brother Stretton.

Praying that you may increase with all the increase of God, I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

 

 

To John Stretton

GLOUCESTER, March 19, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am glad the little contest between Mr. Balfour and John McGeary is come to a conclusion. It is good advice to every Christian, 'If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men.' But, of all others, the Methodists are concerned carefully to follow this advice.

We are a new people, and consequently must expect that many will be prejudiced against us. And there is no way to remove that prejudice but to overcome evil with good. [Stretton was the preacher at Harbour Grace, Newfoundland. See letter of Feb. 25, 1785, to him.] The experience of Phoebe Bland is an admirably good one, truly consistent both with Scripture and reason; and the account is well drawn up, with good sense, and in remarkably good language.

I have a confused remembrance of some objections against you last year, made, I think, by John Hoskins. [See letter of Aug. 10, 1780.] I hope, if there was once some foundation for them, it is now removed. We have need to take the utmost care that the good which is in us be not evil spoken of. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To his Niece Sarah Wesley

WORCESTER, March 20, 1788.

MY DEAR SALLY, -- Mr. Whitefield had for a considerable time thrown up all the food he took. I advised him to slit a large onion across the grain and bind it warm on the pit of his stomach. He vomited no more. Pray apply this to my brother's stomach the next time he eats. One in Yorkshire, who was dying for want of food, as she threw up all she took, was saved by the following means: Boil crusts of white bread to the consistence of a jelly; add a few drops of lemon juice and a little loaf sugar; take a spoonful once or twice an hour. By all means let him try this. If neither of these avail (which I think will not be the case), remember the lady at Paris who lived several weeks without swallowing a grain by applying thin slices of beef to the stomach. But above all let prayer be made continually; and probably he will be stronger after this illness than he has been these ten years. Is anything too hard for God On Sunday I am to be at Birmingham; on Sunday se'nnight at Madeley, near Shifnal, Salop. My dear Sally, Adieu!

To Miss Wesley, In Chesterfield Street,

Marybone, London.

To Agnes Collinson [9]

[MADELEY, March 28, 1788.]

MY DEAR MAIDEN, -- Beware of pride, beware of flattery; suffer none to commend you to your face; remember, one good temper is of more value in the sight of God than a thousand good verses. All you want is to have the mind that was in Christ and to walk as Christ walked. - I am, &c.

To Harriet Lewis [10]

MADELEY, March 29, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- You see I cannot refuse anything that you desire; so I write the first opportunity. I was much surprised at the account which you gave of what had lately befallen your friend. But in the whole course of that strange affair one may discover the hand of God. I am persuaded it was the hand of God for good both in regard to him and you: to him, that he might learn both more patience and resignation in himself, and more meekness and forbearance toward others; to you, that, being cut off from worldly hope, you might simply and nakedly hang upon the living God! You have already tasted that He is gracious. Go on! You are in His school, the school of affliction, where you will always find Him a present help. But He does not yet clearly point out the way that you should go. I was greatly pleased with your openness the other day. May there never be any strangeness between you and, my dear Harriet,

Yours most affectionately.

To Mrs. Charles Wesley

MACCLESFIELDD, Friday, April 4, 1788.

DEAR SISTER, -- Half an hour ago I received a letter from Mr. Bradburn informing me of my brother's death. [Charles Wesley died on March 29. See letter of April 12 to her.] For eleven or twelve days before, I had not one line concerning him. The last I had was from Charles, which I delayed to answer, expecting every day to receive some further information. We have only now to learn that great lesson, 'The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord!' If it had been necessary, in order to serve either him or you, I should not have thought much of coming up to London. Indeed, to serve you, or your dear family, in anything that is in my power, will always be a pleasure to, dear sister,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Henry Moore

MACCLESFIELD, April 6, 1788.

DEAR HENRY, --You send me good news. When these soldiers [See letter of Feb. 19 to him.] are removed, you must take the more pains with them henceforth. It is exceedingly strange that the work of God should not yet decay in Dublin. I have not known before a shower of grace continue so long either in Great Britain or Ireland. And it will continue if the people continue genuine Methodists, and do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God. [See letter of Jan. 18 to him.]

An organ! Non defensorbus istis tempus eget. ['The time does not need such defenders.'] This will help them just as old Priara helped Troy.

If Mr. and Mrs. Smyth are gone to England, I doubt Bethesda will droop; but Dr. Coke will be saved from some embarrassment, anti will have a smoother path to walk in. [See letter of May 6.]

I am, if possible, more fully employed than before since my brother's death. Thus far I am come in my way to North Britain, perhaps for the last time. Lately I have been threatened with blindness [He had a pearl on his eye. See letter of May 28 to Mrs. Rogers.]; but still you and I have two good eyes between us. Let us use them while the day is! -- I am, with tender love to Nancy, dear Henry,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

My brother fell asleep so quietly that they who sat by him did not know when he died.

To Mr. Moore, At the New Room,

Dublin.

To Peard Dickinson [11]

NEAR STOCKPORT, April 8, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- If Mr. Bradburn's letter of March 29 had been directed to Birmingham, where I then was, I should have taken coach on Sunday the 3oth and been with you on Monday the 3Ist. I shall not be at Manchester till the 10th instead. But all is well; by that mistake I am much further on my journey.

'Tis pity but the remains of my brother had been deposited with me. Certainly that ground is holy as any in England, and it contains a large quantity of 'bonny dust.' We have all need to stir ourselves up before the Lord and to improve by this providence; and you may improve it much in speaking to the people, as I have done several times. Betsy must accept of my friendship instead of my brother's. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

A Printed Notice.

MANCHESTER, April 12, 1788.

Great are the advantages we have reaped for many years from the continual change of preachers, but this cannot subsist any longer than the places of all the preachers are appointed by one man or body of men. Therefore wherever Trustees are to place and displace the preachers this change, which we call Itinerancy, is at an end.

It is for your sakes, not my own, that I wish this may continue, and the appointment of preachers, which now lies upon me, be afterwards executed by the Conference, not the Trustees of any of the Houses.

Is it possible that Itinerancy should be continued by any other means

JOHN WESLEY.

This is all the contest, at present, between me and our brethren at Dewsbury.

 

 

 

 

To Mrs. Charles Wesley

MANCHESTER, April 12, 1788.

DEAR SISTER, The account which Mr. Bradburn gave me of my brother's removal was very short and unsatisfactory. But the account which Sally has given me is just as it should be -- particular and circumstantial. I doubt not but the few solemn words that he spoke before he went hence will not soon be forgotten, but will prove a lasting blessing to all that heard them. [See next letter. Ten days before he died he took Samuel's hand, 'and pronounced with a voice of faith, "I shall bless God to all eternity that ever you were born. I am persuaded I shall!"'] If I may take upon me to give you a little piece of advice, it is, -- To keep little company; you have an handsome occasion of contracting your acquaintance, [See letter of April 21 to her.] and retaining only a small select number, such as you can do good to or receive good from. -- I am, my dear Sister,

Your ever affectionate friend and brother.

To his Niece Sarah Wesley [12]

MANCHESTER, April 12, 1788.

MY DEAR SALLY, -- I thank you for the account you have given me. It is full and satisfactory. You describe a very awful scene. The time, I doubt not, was prolonged on purpose that it might make the deeper impression on those that otherwise might soon have forgotten it. What a difference does one moment make!

When the soul springs out of time into eternity, what an amazing change! What are all the pleasures, the business of this world, to a disembodied spirit! Let us, therefore, be ready. For the day is at hand! But the comfort is it cannot part you long from, my dear Sally,

Yours invariably.

To Miss Wesley, In Chesterfield Street,

Marybone, London.

To Peard Dickinson

CHESTER, April 15, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- My brother never knew the value of Dr. Coke while he lived. [Charles Wesley was afraid that Dr. Coke was leading his brother to take steps which involved separation from the Church of England.] I wish I had an hundred preachers like him. If you expected me to die within the year, you should not have printed so large editions. For you know not who will buy them when I am gone. [A new edition of the four volumes of Wesley's Sermons was published on Jan. 1, 1788, and four other volumes of sermons were in preparation. See Green's Bibliography, No. 397.] While we live let us live in earnest. I have little fear for Sally, much hope for Charles (to whom I wrote lately), and some for Sammy. He certainly fears God.

I will have the Tunes s printed as soon as may be. If the corrected copy is lost, they must be printed from the large copy; but the price must be only two shillings and sixpence. Pray consult with T. Olivers where the additional sermons may be most properly inserted. [Tunes left by Mr. Rhodes. See letter of March 13.] I have another ready for the press and two more begun. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

 

 

To Adam Clarke [13]

LIVERPOOL, April 17, 1788.

DEAR ADAM, -- Is it not a doubt whether you will be suffered to build a chapel so near the Chapel-of-Ease I should be afraid one congregation would hinder the other if ever they meet at the same hour. Then in England no house of worship must be built within so many yards of any other. I am glad you have gained Mrs. Saumarez and Miss Lempriere; and I hope Mrs. Walker, jun., is not lost. When I heard of Jenny Bisson's marriage, I was much afraid she had lost ground. I am glad to hear that you think she is still alive to God; but I shall be surprised if she be as much alive as ever. [See letter of May 20 (to Mrs. Cock).] So you are a proficient in French. If you come to the Conference, the way will be made plain for you. But if you have not your health in the islands, you must spend part of your time in England. -- I am, dear Adam,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

 

 

To Mrs. Charles Wesley

BLACKBURN, April 21, 1788.

You will excuse me, my dear sister, for troubling you with so many letters, for I know not how to help it. I had you and your family so much upon my heart, both for your own sake and for the sake of my brother.

But I am much easier now that I find you are joined with honest John Collinson, whom I know to be not only a man of probity, but likewise a man of diligence and understanding. I am therefore persuaded he will spare no pains in doing what you wish to be done. So that I shall [not] be wanted you, as he will fully supply my lack of service. [On his return to London Wesley had breakfast with Charles Wesley's family. See letter of July 6, 1788; and for Collinson, that of May 20, 1769.] I only both Charles and Sammy may follow your example and advice [See letter of April 12 to her.] in keeping little company, and those of the best sort, men sound understanding and solid piety; for such only are for the acquaintance of men of sense.

I commit you all to Him that loves you, and am, my dear Sister,

Ever yours.

To his Niece Sarah Wesley [14]

BLACKBURN, April 21, 1788.

What a comfort it is, my dear Sally, to think the Lord liveth! Nay, and that our union with our human friends will be more perfect hereafter than it can be while we are encumbered with the house of clay You did not send me those verses before. They were very proper to be his last, as being worthy of one bought by the blood of the Lamb and just going forth to meet Him!

Now, my Sally, make the best of life. Whereunto you have attained hold fast. But you have not yet received the Spirit of adoption, crying in your heart, Abba, Father! See that you do not stop short of all the promises for you! If you feel your want, it will soon be supplied; and God will seal that word upon your heart, 'I am merciful to try unrighteousness, and they sins and iniquities I remember no more.' Dear Sally, adieu!

To William Simpson

NEAR COLNE, April 26, 1788.

DEAR BILLY, -- You did well to expel those who marry ungodly persons, -- a real evil which we can never tolerate. You should speak to every believer singly concerning meeting in band. There were always some in Yarm Circuit, though not many. No circuit ever did or ever will flourish unless there are bands in the large Societies.

It is a good sign that so many of our preachers are willing to contribute to those necessary expenses. They used to be much straitened in their bowels whenever money was wanted.

You have now good encouragement to remain another year in the circuit. But you know two preachers do not remain in the same circuit more than one year. -- I am, dear Billy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

 

 

To Peard Dickinson

KEIGHLEY, April 29, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I really think it will be proper to publish something in the Magazine on that idle Popish conceit of 'Consecrated Ground.' The ground of Bunhill Fields is full as well consecrated as that of St. Luke's Churchyard. [See letter of April 8.]

You should study every means of keeping up your acquaintance with Sammy Wesley. Both Charles and he stand in much need of serious acquaintance, whether men or women. You should introduce our Betsy to Sally Wesley. They are kindred souls, and I think would soon take acquaintance with each other. If I live till the Conference, I will give her another acquaintance that will be after her own heart. Sister Showell likewise will be a fit acquaintance for her. But let her beware of new acquaintances.

I hope you have found a little house in our neighborhood. You have both need of much prayer -- Peace be with your spirits! -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Henry Moore [15]

LEEDS, May 6, I788.

DEAR HENRY, -- The Doctor is too warm. He ought to have paid more regard to so respectable a body of men as applied to him. I am a Church-of-England man; and, as I said fifty years ago so Isay still, in the Church I will live and die, unless I'am thrust out.~ We must have no more service at Whitefriar's in the church hours. Leave off contention before it be meddled with.

Follow after peace. -- I am, with kind love to Nancy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Henry Moore

WHITEHAVEN, May 11, 1788.

DEAR HENRY, -- Still, the more I reflect the more I am convinced that the Methodists ought not to leave the Church. I judge that to lose a thousand, yea ten thousand, of our people would be a less evil than this. [See letters of Jan. 16, 1783, and William Whitestone.] But many found much comfort in this.' So they would in any nev thing. I believe Satan himself would give them comfort herein; for he knows what the end would be. Our glorying has hitherto been not to be a separate body: Hoc Ithacus velit. But whatever Mr. Smyth does, I am for the old way. [See letters of May 6 and 16 (to May 20 to Dr. Coke).] I advise you to abide in it till you find another new event, although, indeed, you may expect it every day -- namely, the removal of

Your affectionate friend and brother.

With dear love to Nancy.

To Dr. Coke [16]

GLASGOW, May 16, 1788.

DEAR SIR, -- I came hither this morning. There is a fair opening at Dumfries and a prospect of much good. I like your proposal concerning Joseph Cownley, and will talk with him about it if I live to see Newcastle.

As I said before, so I say still, I cannot, I dare not, leave the Church, for the reasons we all agreed to thirty years ago in the conference at Leeds. Thus far only I could go. On condition that our people would receive the Lord's supper once a month either at St. Patrick's or their own parish church (the reasonableness of which should be strongly and largely explained), -- on this condition I would allow Henry Moore to read the morning service at Whitefriar's on the other Sundays.

I wonder at the imprudence of Mr. Edward Smyth to say nothing of his unkindness. You did well in changing the stewards at Waterford. -- I am, dear sir,

Yours most affectionately.

To Henry Moore

GLASGOW, May 16, 1788.

DEAR HENRY, -- I allow two points: (1) that while Dr. Coke is in Dublin he may have service at eleven on Sunday as before; (2) that, on condition that our brethren will attend St. Patrick's one Sunday in four, you may read prayers the other three in the room. [] When Dr. Coke returns from Dublin, he should immediately send me word who is proper to succeed you there. I shall be glad, if I can contrive it, to have Nancy and you at Bristol next year. It is not unlikely I may finish my course there; and if so, I should love to have her to close my eyes. My brother said I should 'follow him within the year.' But, be that as it may, by God's help I will live to-day. Love to Nancy. -- I am, dear Henry,

Ever yours.

See previous letter and that of May 20 (to William Whitestone).

To Mrs. Cock (Jane Bisson)

EDINBURGH, May 20, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- From my long delay to answer, you might conclude I had forgotten you; but that is impossible. I shall not easily forget the agreeable conversations I had with you at Mont Plaisir and the plain and artless account which from time to time you have given me of your experience. I shall be glad to know how you have found your soul since you altered your condition. You must needs have abundantly more care now than you had in a single life. And are you able still, among all these cares, to attend upon the Lord without distraction Does nothing make you unattentive to His presence Is there no intermission of your communion with the Father and the Son When you have leisure, you will send an answer to, [See letters of April 17 and June 26 to Adam Clarke.] my dear sister,

Yours very affectionately.

You may direct to London.

To William Whitestone

EDINBURGH, May 20, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- From one of Dr. Coke's letters I concluded that you was quite reconciled to the step which he had taken, and I myself can go so far but no further. I will not leave the Church. But on condition that our friends will attend St. Patrick's one Sunday in the month, on the other three I will allow that there should be service at the New Room. [Whitestone was one of the Dublin Methodists. See letters of May 16 and 28 (to Mrs. Rogers).] -- I am, dear Billy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Rogers

May 28, 1788.

MY DEAR HETTY, -- My not hearing from you for so long a time would have given me concern, but I knew it was not from want of affection. I am glad to hear you prosper in your soul; rest in nothing you have attained, but press on till you are filled with all the fullness of God. In this day of God's power I hope many of the backsliders in Cork will be brought back; there are great numbers of them in and about the city, and many are of the. genteeler sort. It seems you have a particular mission to these; perhaps they will hear none but you. I hope you have already found out Mrs. Forbes (Captain Forbes's wife), and that now she is more than almost persuaded to be a Christian. The pearl on my eye is but just discernible, and dulls the sight a little, but not much. As it grows no worse, I do not much regard it. [See letter of April 6.]

Mr. Smyth's society, I verily believe, will do us no harm [At Bethesda, Dublin. The controversy about Methodist services in church hours. See previous letter and that of June 7 to Henry Moore.]: and every one may speak of me as he will. I am just flying away as a shadow. It more than makes me amends that James and you still love and pray for, my dear Hetty,

Your most affectionate.

To Jasper Winscorn

NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, May 28, 1788.

DEAR JASPER, -- It seems to me the most proper Assistant for the Sarum Circuit (only do not talk of it yet) will be Jasper Winscom. [He was received on trial at the Conference, and appointed to the Sarum Circuit, but not as Assistant. See letter of Oct. 20, 1775, to him.] I am convinced the person whom I had intended for it is not the proper person. It is exceeding well that the warning was given me before the Conference. We have found it so difficult to drive Calvinism out from among us that we shall not readily let it in again. -- I am, dear Jasper, Yours affectionately.

To his Niece Sarah Wesley

NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, May 29, 1788.

MY DEAR SALLY, -- How often does our Lord say to us by His adorable providence, 'What I do thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter'! And how unspeakable is our gain if we learn only this, To trust God further than we can see Him! But this is a stroke that you have long expected. One of fourscore has lived out his date of years; and it is not strange that he is taken away, but that I am still left! The great lesson which you have now to learn is, 'Take no thought for the morrow.' If you do, your fault brings its own punishment. You are to live to-day; you have still a friend, the medicine of life! And you have your great Friend always at hand. There is a role for you; 'When I am in heaviness, I will think upon God.' And it is not lost labor. May the peace of God rest upon you! So prays

Yours in tender affection.

To the Millbourn Society

SUNDERLAND, May 31, 1788.

MY DEAR BRETHREN, -- All that you desire (unless I mistake) is the very thing that I desire and design to do. I desire that your house shall be just as the other, and our preachers shall meet the Society, hold lovefeasts, and keep watch-nights in them alternately. If in anything I should give the preference to either, certainly I would to the house in Millbourn Place. [See letters of Jan. 20, 1787, and in Oct. 1788 (to Peter Mill).] What do I want but to do you all the good I can in my few remaining days We have loved one another long, and God forbid that anything should now part you and

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Blachford [17]

SUNDERLAND, June 3, 1788.

MY DEAR MRS. BLACHFORD, -- You state the case clearly and fairly; and when this is done there is no great difficulty in it. Many other objections and plausible ones might be made to the proposal; hut certainly those two are the strongest of all and the most difficult to be answered: first, her youth and little experience in the things of the world; and secondly, his little experience in the things of God. He has made a good beginning. He has set on well. But who can tell what the end will be By reason of the time we cannot suppose him to be much established yet; and if he should afterwards relapse into his former state, what an insupportable trial must it be to her! In a strange country and separate from all her religious friends! Upon the whole, therefore, I cannot but subscribe to your judgment, that you must do nothing suddenly. -- I am, my dear sister,

Yours most affectionately.

To Christopher Hopper [18]

NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, June 3, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I said nothing, less or more, in Bradford Church concerning the end of the world, neither concerning my own opinion. What I said was that Bengelius had given it as his opinion, not that the world would then end, but that the Millennial reign of Christ would begin in the year 1836. I have no opinion at all upon that head. I can determine nothing about it. These calculations are far above, out of my sight. I have only one thing to do, to save my own soul and those that hear me. -- I am, with kind love to Sister Hopper,

Yours affectionately.

To Henry Moore

NEAR NEWCASTLE, June 7, 1788.

DEAR HENRY, -- I incline to think the battle's over, [See letter of May 28 to Mrs. Rogers.] and you will have peace, provided that none of you return railing for rafting, but contrariwise blessing. Beware of showing any coolness to Arthur Keene. You must conquer him by love. I am glad you have not lost Mrs. Blachford. [See letter of June 3.] She is one of our jewels. I love her much. Only you will excuse me if I do not love her so well as Nancy and Becky Moore. [See letter of Feb. 19 to Moore.]

Now use all your influence in prevailing on our people to attend on the sacrament at St. Patrick's monthly. -- I am, dear Henry, yours and my Nancy's

Affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Taylor [19]

NEAR NEWCASTLE, June 7, 1788.

DEAR TOMMY, -- I have no time to spend on controversy about the Church, unless I had leisure to write a folio. You did well in sending your daughters to Cork. It will very probably re-establish their health.

It is no wonder that every one should be ruined who concerns himself with that execrable bill trade. In London I expel every one out of our Society who has anything to do with it. Whoever endorses a bill {that is, promises to pay) for more than he is worth is either a fool or a knave. I hope this affliction at Manchester will be the means of saving many souls. Peace be with you and yours! -- I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Fletcher

LONDON, June 9, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I am sincerely glad that you have found an opportunity of transmitting those valuable papers to Mr. Benson. I know no one in England who is more capable of preparing them for the public view, [See letters of March 10, 1787, and Sept. 17, 1788.] as there is scarcely any one who better understands the whole subject of debate. And now I am in hopes both the points will be carried. On the one hand, Mr. Ireland will be satisfied (who seems to have, though I cannot tell why, an insuperable prejudice to me); and on the other, justice will be done to the memory of blessed Mr. Fletcher. If I live a month or two longer, I shall see you and your relation, of whom I rejoice to hear so good an account. [Wesley met 'young Mr. Fletcher, much alive to God, and Swiftly growing up into the spirit of his uncle,' on March 23, 1789. See Journal, vii. 480.] Who knows what good things God had in store for him, and for what purposes He has brought him to England

Committing you to His care who has kept you from your youth up, I am, my dear sister,

Most affectionately yours.

To Mrs. Freeman

WHITBY, June 13, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- If all the members of our Society could be persuaded to attend St. Patrick's Church, we should not need the Sunday service at the New Room. [See letter of May 20, 1789.] I wish you would always attend the church, except when I am in Dublin; unless you choose to make another -- namely, when Dr. Coke is in Dublin. I commend you and yours to Him that loves you; and am, my dear Jenny,

Your affectionate brother.

To Walter Churchey

WHITBY, June 14, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Yours of May 24 overtook me here this morning. But I have not received the parcel [Of his Poems. See letter of July 22 to him.] which you say was sent by the coach; and probably I shall not receive it, unless it pleases God to bring me back to London.

Health is wonderfully continued. Only I am in the fashion: I have a little of the rheumatism.

The case of that old woman was very remarkable. It is a true saying, 'None are ruined while they are out of hell.' One would be sorry for the death of George Jarvis, only that we know God does all things well. If Mr. Holmes [See letter of Feb. 18 to him.] has any money of mine in his hands, I desire he would give you a guinea for the widow. Peace be with you and yours! -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. ------ [20]

WHITBY, June 14, 1788.

SIR, -- I am afraid there will not be much contributed by the poor congregation at Derby. However, I propose to do what I can in favor of so excellent a charity.

Therefore I hope to preach there for the benefit of the General Hospital in my return to London--namely, at five in the evening, on Friday, the 11th of July. That morning I am to come from Sheffield, and on Saturday to be at Nottingham. -- I am, sir,

Your obedient servant.

To Henry Moore

SCARBOROUGH, Monday, June 16, 1788.

DEAR HENRY, -- On Saturday next and on Saturday se'n-night I expect to be at Epworth, near Thorne, Yorkshire [sic]; on Monday, July 7, at Doncaster, Yorkshire; and on Monday the 14th at London.

These Meetings will do you no harm at all. Only go quietly on your way. There should be no delay in enlarging the house if you can get a good title to the ground. [See letter of Aug. 8 to Arthur Keene.] As far as is possible I should advise you to take no notice, good or bad, of the warm men. Let them say what they will and do what they can. Neddy Smyth [Edward Smyth, of Bethesda, and his brother William, one of the Dublin Methodists who objected to services in Church hours. Bethesda had been built at his cost.] wrote lately to me, and I to him, but without a word of dispute. Probably I shall see Mr. W. Smyth; but if I do, I will not dispute with him. I am a man of peace.

Peace be with you and yours.--I am, dear Henry,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Henry Brooke [21]

HULL, June 21, 1788.

Of the Methodists and the Church I think as you do: they must not leave the Church -- at least, while I live; if they leave it then, I expect they will gradually sink into a formal, honorable sect.

Dear Harry, adieu!

To Peard Dickinson

THIRSK, June 24, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I do not know any little piece of news which has given me more satisfaction than this, that my Sister Hall has taken a lodging in Th. Philip's house. I hope to see her and you in about a fortnight, that I may have time to prepare for the Conference. [Held at London on July 29.]

You do well not to indulge your thirst after books, but to confine yourself to a very few. I know no commentator on the Bible equal to Bengal. His Gnomon is a jewel; so is his Ordo Temp [His Gnomon 'as a brief and suggestive commentary on the New Testament remains unrivalled.' McClintock and Strong's Cyclopodia. Ordo temporum a principio per periodos conomio, divino, 1753.]: the finest system of chronology that ever appeared in the world. Now consider with yourself and [set] down whatever relates to the Conference. Peace be with both your spirits I -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Rev. Mr. Dickinson, In the City Road,

Near Moorfields, London.

To Walter Churchey

YORK, June 26, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I answered your last. By what means my letter miscarried I cannot tell. [See letters of June 14 and July 22 to him.] Above half of that paragraph (which has traveled over most of the kingdom) is very true. The other half is a blunder. What I spoke was a citation from Bengelius, who thought, not that the world would end, but that the Millennium would begin about the year 1836. [See letter of June 3 to Christopher Hopper.] Not that I affirm this myself, nor ever did. I do not determine any of these things: they are too high for me. I only desire to creep on in the vale of humble love. Peace be with you and yours I -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Adam Clarke [22]

YORK, June 26, 1788.

DEAR ADAM, -- I really think the temper and behavior of the Bailiff is little less than miraculous. I will give you ten pounds. Follow those little advices in building which are set down in the Large Minutes. [See letters of April 17 and Nov. 5.] So you stole a match! Mrs. Cooke's not opposing did, indeed, remove the grand hindrance. I pray do not suffer my dear Molly to be idle; let her active spirit have full employment. But what becomes of Jenny Bisson [See letters of May 20 and Oct. 12 to Mrs. Cock.] --that was I fear your bewitched boy will prove an arrant cheat; if not, the French convert too. -- I am, dear Adam,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

 

 

To John Mann [23]

LONDON, June 30, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER -- I am greatly concerned for the prosperity of the work of God in Nova Scotia. It seems some way to lie nearer my heart than even that in the United States. Many of our brethren there are, we may hope, strong in the Lord and in the power of His might; but I look upon those in the northern provinces to be younger and tender children, and consequently to stand in need of our most anxious care. I hope all of you that watch over them are all of one mind and of one judgment; that you take care always to speak the same things and to watch over one another in love.

Mr. Wray is a workman that need not be ashamed. I am glad to hear of his safe arrival. Although he has not much learning, he has (which is far better) uprightness of heart and devotedness to God. I doubt not but he and you will be one and go on your way hand in hand.

Whatever opposers you meet with--Calvinists, Papists, Antinomians, and any other--have a particular care that they do not take up too much either of your time or thoughts. You have better work: keep to your one point, Christ dying for us and living in us. So will you fulfill the joy of, my dear brethren,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

 

 

To his Niece Sarah Wesley

GRIMSBY, June 30, 1788.

MY DEAR SALLY, -- Hemlock I do not approve of. It is a very dangerous medicine. I doubt whether sea-bathing would reach an internal complaint; I cannot conceive how it should. Although quicksilver compounded with salts is a very strong poison, yet unmixed it is as innocent as milk, especially when an ounce of it is taken in the morning and ten drops of elixir of vitriol in a glass of water at three or four in the afternoon. You may safely use this or the diet drink prescribed in the Primitive Physick for 'scorbutic sores.'

The Sunday schools have been of great use in every part of England, and to assist in any of them is a noble employment. But perhaps one less fatiguing would suit you better. Perhaps the being the leader of a little class, if I can find a few agreeable young women.

God does not expect us to be sticks or stones. We may grieve and yet not murmur. It is very possible to feel and still resign. And this is Christian resignation.

On Monday, July 14, I expect to be in town. [See next letter.] If I can I will endeavor to be in Chesterfield Street on Tuesday.

My dear Sally, adieu!

To Miss Wesley, At the Rev. Mr. Dickinson's,

City Road, Moorfields, London.

To Samuel Bradburn [24]

Epworth, July 6, 1788.

DEAR SAMMY, -- To-morrow evening I hope to be at Doncaster; on Wednesday at Sheffield; and to-morrow se'nnight at London, bringing my daughter with me. That evening I should not object to preaching at West Street. On Tuesday morning I would breakfast in Chesterfield Street if my sister will be ready at eight o'clock. Then I must hide myself till Sunday. I will preach at one or the other chapel for Kingswood. Peace be with you and yours! -- I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Bradburn, at the New Chapel,

Near Moorfields, London.

 

 

To Henry Moore [25]

LONDON, July 16, 1788.

DEAR HENRY, -- Take your choice. Either let my dear Nancy Moore come with you hither or follow you to Bristol. If not here, I would fain see her there, because I expect to finish my course within a year, probably either here or there; but to have her with me at the close would be one of the greatest comforts I could have next to the favor and presence of God. -- I am, my own Henry,

Your ever affectionate.

To Mrs. Ward

LONDON, July 16, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER. [Mrs. Ward was one of the leading Methodists in Cork, where James Rogers was Assistant. Several of her letters to Wesley are in Arminian Mag. 1788, 326; 1790, 442, 601, 666; 1791, 553.] -- You do well in writing freely to me upon whatever occurs to your mind, and you should lose no time, for probably the time is at hand when I shall be called to 'arise and go hence.' I hardly expect to see another May, or perhaps the end of another March; but be that as God pleases.

My remnant of days I spend to His praise,

Who died the whole world to redeem;

Be they many or few, my days are His due,

And they all are devoted to Him.

For upwards of fifty years my language respecting the Church has been just the same as it is now. Yet, whenever I am removed, there can be no doubt but some of the Methodists will separate from it and set up independent meetings: some will accept of livings: the rest (who will, I trust, be the largest third) will continue together on the itinerant plan; and if they abide by their old rules, God will give them His blessing.

It has been the glory of Methodists to assist all parties without forming any. In so doing, God has abundantly blessed them. What could He have done more for them than He has done Do not they know when they are well Mr. Rogers should do all that is in his power to quiet the minds of our people.

Your son Richard goes on well. He will be a preacher, either regular or irregular. I think we can make room at Kingswood for the children you mention.

Peace be with you and yours. -- I am, my dear sister,

Yours most affectionately.