1782

To Joseph Benson ()

LONDON, January 5, 1782.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- It gives me pleasure to hear that you are not weary in well doing, but are diligent in advancing the cause of religion. There is one means of doing this in which it will be worth your while to take some pains; I mean in recommending the Magazines. If you say of them in every Society what you may say with truth, and say it with an air of earnestness, you will produce several new subscribers. -- I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ellen Gretton

LONDON, January 5, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- It is a true word, ‘Gold is tried in the fire, and acceptable men in the furnace of affliction.’ But we know the exhortation, ‘Despise not thou the chastening of the Lord’; count it not an insignificant or accidental thing: ‘neither hint when thou art rebuked of Him,’ but receive it as a token of His love.

I do not despair of seeing you again in Lincolnshire [See letter of Nov. 19, 1781, to her.] and taking another little journey with you. This will be if it is best, and it is not impossible that I shoed see you in London. Perhaps it may be (if we shoed live so long) at the time of the Conference. That might be of particular service to you if Providence should make a way for you. In the meantime let Brother Derry [A conspicuous Methodist in Grantham for many years. In his house the meetings were first held. For an account of the persecution of Methodists in Grantham, and especially of Mr. Derry, see Cocking’s Methodism in Grantham, pp. 153-62.] and Sister Fisher [See Conference Handbook for 1925.] and you do all the good you can. -- I am, dear Nelly,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss Gretton, At Mr. Derry’s,

In Grantham, Lincolnshire.

To James ------

LONDON, January 6, 1782.

DEAR JAMES, -- You may meet with Brother Alderman, Highland, or any other leader you choose. But I am willing to hear what objection you have to James Dewey and the two other leaders you refer to. You may know them better than I do. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Hester Anne Roe

LONDON, January 7, 1782.

My DEAR HETTY, -- You should always have in readiness that little tract The Plain Account of Christian Perfection. There is nothing that would so effectually stop the mouths of those who call this ‘a new doctrine.’ All who thus object are really (though they suspect nothing less) seeking sanctification by works. If it be by works, then certainly these will need time in order to the doing of these works. But if it is by faith, it is plain a moment is as a thousand years. Then God says (in the spiritual as in the outward world), Let there be light, and there is light.

I am in great hopes, as John Sellars [See letter of Jan. 18.] got his own soul much quickened in Macdesfield, he will now be a blessing to many at Chester. A few witnesses of pure love remain there still; but several are gone to Abraham's bosom. Encourage those in Macclesfield who enjoy it to speak explicitly what they do experience, and to go on till they know all that ‘love of God that pusseth knowledge.’

Give all the help you can, my dear Hetty, to them, and to

Yours most affectionately.

To Mr. -----

LEWISHAM, January 9, 1782.

1. Last summer I received a letter from Yorkshire [See letter of Nov. 19, 1781.] signed by several serious men, who proposed a difficulty they were under, wherein they knew not how to act. And, indeed, I did not well know how to advise them. So I delayed giving them a determinate answer till I could lay the matter before our brethren at the ensuing Conference.

2. Their difficulty was this: ‘You advise all the members of our Societies constantly to attend the service of the Church. We have done so for a considerable time. But very frequently Mr. R., our minister, preaches not only what we believe to be false, but dangerously false, doctrine. He asserts and endeavors to prove that we cannot be saved from our sins in this life, and that we must not hope to be perfected in love on this side eternity. Our nature is very willing to receive this; therefore it is very liable to hurt us. Hence we have a doubt whether it is our duty to hear this preaching, which experience shows to weaken our souls.’

3. This letter I laid before the Conference, and we easily perceived the difficulty therein proposed concerned not only the Society at Baildon but many others in various parts of the kingdom. It was therefore considered at large, and all our brethren were desired to speak their sentiments freely. In the conclusion they unanimously agreed, first, that it was highly expedient all the Methodists (so called) who had been bred therein should attend the service of the Church as often as possible; but that, secondly, if the minister began either to preach the Absolute Decrees or to rail at and ridicule Christian Perfection, they should quietly and silently go out of the church, yet attend it again the next opportunity.

4. I have since that time revolved this matter over and over in my own mind; and the more I consider it, the more I am convinced this was the best answer that could be given. I still advise all our friends, when this case occurs, quietly and silently to go out. Only I must earnestly caution them not to be critical; not to make a man an offender for a word -- no, nor for a few sentences, which any who believe the decrees may drop without design. But if such a minister should at any time deliberately and of set purpose endeavor to establish Absolute Predestination or to confute Scriptural Perfection, then I advise all the Methodists in the congregation quietly to go away.

To Hester Ann Roe [1]

LONDON, January 17, 1782.

MY DEAR HETTY, -- In the success of Mr. Leach’s preaching we have one proof of a thousand that the blessing of God always attends the publishing of full salvation as attainable now by simple faith. But there is a danger here which is to be carefully guarded against--namely, lest the other preachers should be jealous of his success. This has been a very common case. And you can hardly conceive what a grievous hindrance it has always been to the work of God. Both he himself, therefore, and all that love him should do everything that is in their power to prevent it; he especially, by an humble, condescending, obliging behavior to his fellow laborers. And it will be prudent for you all not to speak too strongly in commendation of him in their hearing; for, you know, ‘the spirit that is in us lusteth to envy.’

I have never at all repented of my late journey to Chester [In April 1782. See Journal, vi. 313.]; a flame was kindled both there and at Wrexham, which I trust will not soon be put out. I do not know that I have spent a day at Chester with so much satisfaction for many a year.

This afternoon I was agreeably surprised by a letter from our dear Miss Ritchie. [See his reply on Jan. 19.] It really seems as if God, in answer to many prayers, has lent her to us yet a little longer. He bringeth down to the grave and bringeth up again. Wise are all His ways!

I am not assured that there is not something preternatural in those pains which you frequently experience. Not improbably they are caused by a messenger of Satan, who is permitted to buffet you. But all is well; you find in this and all things His grace is sufficient for you. -- I always am, my dear Hetty,

Most affectionately yours.

To John Valton

LONDON, January 18, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I have received the first two sheets of your Life. Be not afraid of writing too much; I can easily leave out what can be spared. It pleased God to lead John Haime and you a long way through the wilderness. Others He leads through a shorter and smoother way; and yet to the same point: for we must not imagine that such a degree of suffering is necessary to any degree of holiness. In this God does certainly act as a Sovereign; giving what He pleases, and by what means He pleases. I believe the holiest man that ever lived was the Apostle John; yet he seems to have suffered very little.

You should take care never to write long at a time, and always to write standing; never on any account leaning on your stomach. God gives me just the strength I had thirty years ago. I cannot allow John Sellars [See letter of Jan. 7.] to be any longer a leader; and if he will lead the class, whether I will or no, I require you to put him out of our Society. If twenty of his class will leave the Society too, they must. The first loss is the best. Better forty members should be lost than our discipline lost. They are no Methodists that will bear no restraints. Explain this at large to the Society. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Davenport

LONDON, January 19, 1782.

DEAR SIR, -- Many years ago I saw a condemned person in the Castle at Oxford two or three hours before his execution. When I asked him, ‘Whither are you going’ he said, ‘To hell, to be sure.’ And on my remarking, ‘But you seem to have no fear, no sorrow, no concern,’ he coolly replied, ‘I have none at all. And why should I tell a lie’ I said, ‘I cannot understand this.’ He said, ‘I will tell you how to understand it. Some told me five months ago, “Mr. Pope, make the best of your time; for the day of grace may end, before the day of life ends.” And so it is with me.’

But it is not so with you. If it was, you would have no fear, no trouble, no uneasiness, but would be just as easy and careless and unconcerned as that poor creature was.

It is, I believe, near forty years ago that a friend recommended to me Mr. Marshall's Gospel Mystery of Sanctification. [See Journal. v. 239-40.]

A few passages I found scattered up and down which I thought leaned towards Antinomianism. But in general I approved of it well, and judged it to be an excellent book. The main proposition, that inward and outward holiness flow from a consciousness of the favor of God, is undoubtedly true. And it is a truth that should always be before our eyes.

I commend you to Him that loves you more than you are sensible of; and am, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Rev. Mr. Davenport, At Allexton,

Near Uppingham, Rutlandshire.

To Elizabeth Ritchie [2]

LONDON, January 19, 1782.

It seemed a little strange to me, my dear Betsy, that I did not hear from you for so long a time. But I imputed your silence to your bodily weakness, of which several of our friends sent me word.

From our brethren in various parts of England and Ireland I have very pleasing accounts of the uncommon blessings which many received at the time of renewing their covenant with God. I am glad to hear that you at Otley had your share.

That point, entire salvation from inbred sin, can hardly ever be insisted upon, either in preaching or prayer, without a particular blessing. Honest Isaac Brown [The preacher at Keighley. He is named in the Deed of Declaration, and is one of four to whom Wesley left any money found in his pockets and bureau after his death.] firmly believes this doctrine, that we are to be saved from all sin in this life. But I wish, when opportunity serves, you would encourage him (1) to preach Christian perfection, constantly, strongly, and explicitly; (2) explicitly to assert and prove that it may be received now and (3) (which indeed is implied therein) that it is to be received by simple faith.

In every state of mind, in that of conviction or justification or sanctification, I believe every person may either go sensibly backward, or seem to stand still, or go forward. I incline to think all the persons you mention were fully sanctified. But some of them, watching unto prayer, went on from faith to faith; while the others, being less watchful, seemed to stand still, but were indeed imperceptibly backsliding. Wishing you all may increase with all the increase of God, I am

Ever yours.

To Francis Wolfe

LONDON, January 24, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You have much reason to bless God both on your own account and on account of the people. Now see that you adorn in all things the doctrine of God our Savior. See that your conversation be in grace, always seasoned with salt, and meet to minister grace to the hearers; and let none of you preachers touch any spirituous liquors upon any account! I am sorry for poor Joseph Belten. The loss of that excellent woman will be a loss indeed! But there is One who is able to turn all to good. -- I am, dear Franky,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Francis Wolfe, In Redruth,

Cornwall.

To Samuel Bardsley [3]

LONDON, January 25, 1782.

DEAR SAMMY, -- I am glad you had no reason to complain of our Northern brethren. Many of them are as sincere and affectionate as any in England. And the way to do them good is to observe all our Rules at Inverness just as you would at Sheffield; yea, and to preach the whole Methodist doctrine there as plainly and simply as you would in Yorkshire. But you have not sent me (neither you nor Peter Mill) any plan of the circuit. This should be done without delay. See that you both do all you can for a good Master ! Lose no time Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Sam. Bardsley, At Mr. McLomie’s,

In Inverness.

To Thomas Hanson

LONDON, January 30, 1782.

DEAR TOMMY, There were certainly false [numbers]. This ought to be observed if we live to see another Conference.

I never was fond of multiplying circuits without an absolute necessity. Your remark is unquestionably true, that this is oftener proposed for the ease of the preachers than the profit of the people. But it is clear to me that many of the preachers have already rather too little exercise than too much. [Hanson was Assistant at Colne.]

If you are not yet recovered from the disorder in your mouth, I wish you would consult the Primitive Physick or John Floyd. [The second preacher at Bradford. See letter of March 15, 1777.] --I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Alexander Surer

LONDON, February 9, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You see the wisdom of that advice, ‘O tarry thou the Lord's leisure!’ And there is great reason that we should trust the Invisible God farther than we can see Him.

There will need the greatest care and attention possible both in you and John Moon at Exeter. [Moon and Suter were the preachers at Tiverton.] For Satan will surely endeavor to lay stumbling-blocks in the way of the people. It is your part to prevent or remove them as quick as possible. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Ellen Gretton

LAMBETH, February 12, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- If it pleases God to visit us with adversity, undoubtedly He will send a blessing with it. It will be for our profit, a means of weaning us from the world and uniting us more closely to Him. And if afterwards He changes it for prosperity, this also will be for good. It is our wisdom to improve the present state, be it one or the other. With what will be we have nothing to do. We need take no thought for the morrow.

As yet I do not see my way clear, but wait for farther evidence, before I can determine whether I should put out toward Ireland or Scotland. If I do set out for Ireland and am driven back again, [As he had been in April 1781. See letter of May 8 of that year.] I shall say, Good is the will of the Lord.

‘With good advice make war.’ Do not hastily engage in anything so far that you cannot retreat. One would be particularly wary in that circumstance, which, as Prior observed,

Slay or strife,

Is all the color of remaining life. [Prior’s Solomon, ii. 234-5: ‘Love Why ’tis joy or sorrow, peace or strife; ‘Tis all the color of remaining life.’]

Concerning this especially be much in prayer, and the unction of the Holy One will guide you. -- I am, my dear Nelly,

Yours very affectionately.

My kind love to Sister Fisher and Brother Derry. [See letter of Jan. 5 to Miss Gretton.]

To John Bredin

LONDON, February 20, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- It was a good providence that none of your bones were broken. God gave His angels charge over you. So far the old murtherer could go, and no farther.

’Tis well if these headstrong Volunteers [See Journal, vi. 188.] do not soon get their own necks into an halter. The Southern Volunteers have absolutely refused to join them in any such measures.

This is not my year for Ireland; but whether I shall go westward or northward, I have not yet determined. You say ‘Pray deliver the enclosed’; but you do not say to whom. I suppose you mean to Mr. Abraham. [John Abraham. See letters of May 8, 1781, and April 25, 1783 (to Charles Wesley).] -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Joseph Benson [4]

LONDON, February 22, 1782.

DEAR JOSEH, -- Who Mr. Tyndall is I know not; but he is just as sound a divine as Mr. Madan. I regard no authorities but those of the Ante-Nicene Fathers; nor any of them in opposition to Scripture. And I totally deny that (supposed) matter of fact that polygamy was allowed among the primitive Christians or that the converts ‘ who had many wives were not required to put any of them away.’ I have not yet time to read over the MS. When I do, I must read it all in a breath.

Having talked with my friends, I judge it will be expedient to visit the North this year. I expect to be at Manchester on Wednesday, the 10th of April, and in Yorkshire in the beginning of May.

I have no objection to your printing a few copies of those two sermons [Benson’s Two Sermons on Sanctification (text, I Thess. v. 23-4) were printed by J. Bowling, Leeds, in 1782. ‘An Extract from Leighton’s Rules for an Holy Life’ is appended.] to oblige your friends in the neighborhood. I doubt we are not explicit enough in speaking on full sanctification either in public or private. -- I am, with kind love to Sister Benson, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate brother.

To William Wafters [5]

LONDON, February 22, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- YOU send me an agreeable account of the work of God in America. It is amazing that any good should be done in a time of so much hurry and confusion when one would imagine man would think of nothing but the works of the devil. I wish you would send me whenever you have an opportunity a particular account of what is doing throughout the province. Formerly we had some Societies in North Carolina and likewise in Maryland. I hope they still subsist and are growing in grace as well as increasing in number. It is a great blessing that there is an end of that unhappy dispute, which otherwise would have torn you all in pieces. Again and again it has been set on foot in England and Ireland, But it never came to any height. We always took care to suppress it at the very beginning, so that it could not do much mischief.

I hope Mr. Jarrett is not weary of well doing, but goes on with his labor of love. Now and then I suppose you can contrive to send a letter to New York and thence to your friends in England. The word of God has free course throughout these kingdoms and sinks deep into many hearts. I have pleasing accounts from various parts where many are justified and many sanctified, and so it is wherever our preachers strongly and explicitly exhort all the believers to go on to perfection.

Peace be with all your spirits. -- I am, my dear brother,

Your affectionate brother.

To a Respectful Reader [6]

LONDON, February 23, 1782.

To Mr. Wesley

February 23, 1782.

REVEREND SIR, -- I am, as you are, an Arminian. I am well acquainted with your religious tenets, and have read most, if not all, of your Works; and though I do not entirely fall in with you in every article of your creed, yet I have much respect to your character, great reverence for your principles in general, and an entire affection for your person. Depending upon the acknowledged candor of your disposition and your uniform zeal for the truth, I expect your attention and answers to the following questions: --

Is it your wish that the people called Methodists should be or become a body entirely separate from the Church

Answer. No.

If not, when, that is how often, and where, I mean upon what description of teachers of the Establishment, are they to attend

A. I advise them to go to church.

More particularly, if the fall, the corruption, and natural impotence of man, his free and full redemption in Christ Jesus through faith working by love, should be taught and inculcated and offered to the attention of all at the church of the parish where they reside, are they then in your opinion bound in conscience to hear, or may they at their own option forbear

A. I do not think they are bound in conscience to attend any particular church.

Or, if they are at liberty to absent themselves, are they at liberty, that is, have they a Christian privilege, to censure this doctrine in the gross, to condemn such teachers, and boldly to pronounce them ‘blind leaders of the blind’

A. No; by no means.

Lastly. Whenever this happens, is it through prejudice or rational piety Is it through bigotry or a catholic spirit Is it consistent with Christian charity Is it compatible with a state of justification Or is it even allowable in the high habit of evangelical perfection

A. I think it is a sin.

Your unequivocal answers to these interesting queries, in the Arminian Magazine, will oblige, reverend sir,

A RESPECTFUL READER.

I have answered simply to your questions, whether they be proposed out of good or ill will.

To Joseph Algar

LONDON, February 24, 1782.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- Your builders should consider (1) that the Conference can allow them nothing, and (2) that they cannot expect to collect anything in the circuit. Then, if they will build, let them observe the advices given in the Minutes of the Conference.

Barely by not ‘going on to perfection’ all believers will grow dead and cold; and then they are just ripe for levity, tattling, and evil-speaking, which will soon destroy all the life of God out of their souls. Therefore you have need on this very account to preach perfection in the most strong and explicit manner possible. Without this you can never lift up the hands that hang down and strengthen the feeble knees.

And what you preach to others you have particular need to apply to your own souls. Fly on, and take the prize. It is received by simple faith. Believe, and enter into rest! -- I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Joseph Algar, At Mr. Henry

Jones’s, In Swansea, South Wales.

To Ambrose Foley

LONDON, February 26, 1782.

DEAR SIR, -- On Saturday, March 23, I hope to be at Birmingham to open the new chapel [He opened Cherry Street Chapel letters of June 19, 1781, and Feb. 24, on July7. See Journal, vi. 360; and 1783.] and to spend a few days there. About the middle of the ensuing week I shall be willing to give you a sermon at Quinton. I am glad to hear that our labor there has not been in vain and that you are not ‘ashamed of the gospel of Christ.’ It will be a particular pleasure to me to see Mrs. Foley, and I hope to see her happier than ever she has been yet.

Peace be with your spirits. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Ambrose Foley, At Quinton,

Near Birmingham.

To Mrs. Knapp

 

 

 

LONDON, February 27, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- If ever I observe you in any fault, I shall certainly tell you of it, because I love you much; and I am persuaded you would not be angry but rather pleased with my plain dealing. I wrote word to Brother Knapp that I hoped to be with you on the 20th of March. I am pleased with any opportunity of spending a little time with you; and when I am at Worcester, let me have a few minutes with you alone, that you may be able to speak freely. I want you to be ‘all praise, all meekness, and all love.’ You know that’s your calling. -- I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Bradburn [7]

LONDON, February 28, 1782.

MY DEAR BETSY, -- You did exceeding well to write. You should always permit those you love to share both in your joys and your sorrows. The account you give brings strongly to my mind the words of the Angel to the Hermit [Parnell’s The Hermit.]:

To all but thee in fits he seemed to go, --

And 'twas my ministry to deal the blow.

I am much inclined to think this was an instance of the same kind. Our Lord saw good to take the little one into Abraham’s bosom; His angel came with a commission to fetch him. But it was not seen good to remove him at one stroke, lest you should be swallowed up of over much sorrow. A reprieve was given for a few days, that you might be more prepared for the great trial and more determined to say, ‘It is the Lord: let Him do what seemeth Him good.’

I expect to be at Manchester on the 12th of April and about the beginning of May in Yorkshire. But I believe I had better take Blackburn, Preston, and Colne (to save time) in my way thither.

Sammy Bradbum does right in giving himself directly to the work of God. It is far better and more comfortable for him than to sit mooning at home. May God enable him and you to do and to suffer His holy and acceptable will! So prays, my dear Betsy,

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Robert Costerdine

LONDON, March 2, 1782.

DEAR ROBERT, -- I have now before me a particular account of the behavior of W. Gill toward Stephen Proctor and others. I am greatly surprised at the partiality of Brother Harper. [Harper was Assistant at Leicester, and Costerdine the second preacher. For Gill, see letters of Jan. 6, 1780 (to Thomas Carlill), and March 22, 1782; and for Proctor, Oct. 12, 1780, and June 7, 1782.] Besides, he had no authority to administer an oath to any one. I forbid William Gill to preach any more in any of our Societies. And I beg of Joseph Harper not to say anything in his defense either in public or private. Brother Whitehouse informs me you have heard the case at large and do not lay any blame on Stephen Proctor. -- I am, dear Robert,

Your affectionate brother.

To Ann Bolton [8]

BRISTOL, March 8, 1782.

MY DEAR NANCY, -- I came hither from Bath this afternoon, and just snatch time to write two or three fines. It gave me pleasure to see your letter dated from Caerleon, as I know your spending a few days there would not be in vain. You will give and receive a blessing. Iron sharpeneth iron, and the countenance of a man his friends--not only the conversation, but the very countenance, as I have often found when I looked upon you. But much more your words shall (by the grace of God) convey health to the soul. You will comfort and quicken my dear Sally, and not suffer her hands to hang down. I can say nothing of Sir Charles Grandison, because I never read a page of his. On Monday the 18th instant I hope to have the pleasure of meeting you at Stroud. On Tuesday I have promised to dine with that amiable woman Mrs. Wathen [Mrs. Wathen, the wife of a rich clothier at Thrupp, Stroud. See W.H.S. v. 251-3.] at New House. But I should not desire it unless you was there.

Peace be with all your spirits.mI am, my dear Nancy,

Yours most affectionately.

To Robert Cart Brackenbury [9]

BRISTOL, March 9, 1782.

DEAR SIR, -- The letter you refer to as giving me an account of Mrs. Brackenbury’s illness I have never seen. I did not hear anything of it till I received Mr. Collins’s letter from Raithby. What a comfort it is that we know the Lord reigneth, and that He disposes all things in heaven and earth in the very manner which He sees will be most for His own glory and for the good of those that love Him. I am firmly persuaded the present dispensation, severe as it may appear, will be found in the event a means of greater blessings than any you have yet received. Even already you find the consolations of the Holy One are not small with you. And He enables you to make the right use of this providence by devoting yourself more entirely to His service.

I am glad you have such a friend as Mr. Collins [Brian Bury Collins. See letter of June 14, 1780.] with you. I will write to Dr. Coke and desire him to look out for such a family near London as you want. I am not afraid of your speaking too little, but of your speaking too much. Stay! A thought just comes into my mind. On April the 4th I expect to be at Manchester, in order to visit the Societies in Lancashire, Cheshire, Yorkshire; and thence to proceed (if God permit) to Scotland. Perhaps it would be of use if you took part of the journey with me. You may let me know your thoughts by a line directed to Manchester. Let Mr. Collins and you strengthen each other's hands in God.

It is exceeding clear to me, first, that a dispensation of the gospel is committed to you; and, secondly, that you are peculiarly called to publish it in connection with us. It has pleased God to give so many and so strong evidences of this, that I see not how any reasonable person can doubt it. Therefore, what I have often said before I say again, and give it under my hand, that you are welcome to preach in any of our preaching-houses, in Great Britain or Ireland, whenever it is convenient for you. I commend you for preaching less frequently where you find less liberty of spirit (because no necessity is laid upon you with regard to this or that particular place), and for spending most time in those places where you find most probability of doing good. We have need to work while it is day. -- I am, dear sir,

Your ever affectionate friend and brother.

To Robert C. Brackenbury, Esq., Raithby,

Near Spilsby.

To Ann Loxdale

BRISTOL, March 9, 1782.

MY DEAR MISS LOXDALE, -- ‘Gold is tried in the fire, and acceptable men in the furnace of adversity.’

You say, ‘I know not whither I am going.’ I will tell you whither. You are going the straight way to be swallowed up in God. ‘I know not what I am doing.’ You are suffering the will of God and glorifying Him in the fire. ‘But I am not increasing in the divine life.’ That is your mistake. Perhaps you are now increasing therein faster than ever you did since you were justified. It is true that the usual method of our Lord is to purify us by joy in the Holy Ghost and a full consciousness of His love. But I have known several exempt cases, and I am clearly satisfied yours is one; and

Far, far beyond thy thought

His counsel shall appear,

When fully He the work hath wrought

That caused thy needless fear. [See Wesley's translation of Gerhardt's poem, verse 14.]

If it be possible, meet me at Madeley on Saturday [He was at Madeley on March 23.]; then you may talk more largely with, my dear Miss Loxdale,

Yours most affectionately.

To Hannah Ball

BRISTOL, March 10, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I would not willingly grieve you. I love you too well, and have done for many years. I was disappointed both last year and this. Last year your preachers did less than I expected, and this year they have done more than I expected. [1780-1, George Story, John Accutt; 1781-1, Richard Rodda, Thomas Warwick. See letter of Nov. 17, 1781.] Yes, and I trust you shah see greater things than these. The work of God has wonderfully revived in many parts of the nation. And I do not know why it should not revive among you also. Certainly you should look and ask for it.

I am glad to hear so good an account of your sister; the more active she is the more her soul will live. I wanted to know what was become of those little maidens, [Her Sunday scholars. She began her Sunday school in 1769. See Memoir, p. 84.] and trust some of them will bring forth fruit to perfection. As you have a peculiar love for children and a talent for assisting them, see that you stir up the gift of God which is in you. If you gain but one of them in ten, you have a good reward for your labor. -- I am, my dear sister,

Yours affectionately.

To Thomas Brisco [10]

BRISTOL, March 12, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- On Thursday, April 4, I expect to be at Manchester. The plan of my journey through Yorkshire I have sent to Brother Mather, from whom you may have a copy if you have it not already. I desire no better lodging than either that at Birstall or Dawgreen.

You have done well in changing the hours of preaching at Morley. I would encourage all persons to go to church as much as they possibly can. The meeting the children, whenever there is an opportunity, is a point of the utmost importance. By earnest exhortation we may prevail upon their parents in all our larger Societies to send them, and some of them will second the advices which their children receive from the preachers.

I hope you give Sister Brisco full employment. She may be of great use. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Robert Costerdine

WORCESTER, March 22, 1782.

DEAR ROBERT, -- I think you have acted exceeding right in the case of William Gill. [See letter of March 2.] I cannot in any wise consent to his preaching in any of our Societies. But does not one more thing lie upon you--namely, to talk plainly and fully with Joseph Harper Otherwise I cannot say that you are clear of his blood. -- I am, dear Robert, Your affectionate brother.

 

 

To Joseph Benson

MACCLESFIELD, March 30, 1782.

DEAR SIR, -- Many have inferred, from my not answering Mr. Madan’s book, that I was of the same judgment with him. [Benson’s criticisms (on ‘Polygamy and Marriage’) were published in the Magazine. See letters of May 21, 1781, and Feb. 22, 1782, to him.] But it was owing to another cause -- my want of time. I am glad you have supplied my lack of service; and that you have done it with temper, though not with that complaisance, which is quite unseasonable on such an occasion. I have read over your remarks with attention, and believe they will satisfy any impartial reader. I commend you and your labors to the God of truth and love. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Rutherford [11]

[March 1782.]

DEAR TOMMY, -- Write to Hugh Moore in my name and tell him, ‘I desire he would change places with you for six weeks or two months.’ The being near her relations at the time of her lying in may be a means of saving your wife's life. I doubt not of Bro. Moore’s willingness to oblige either you or me in a matter of such importance. Probably more persons will buy the History of the Church when they see it. Peace be multiplied upon you both! I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Carlill [12]

NEAR M.ANCHESTER, April 3, 1782. DEAR TOMMY, -- Be of good courage. You have had a token for good at Lynn, where it was supposed the case was desperate; and I do not doubt but you will see good days in and about Fakenham, though the people yet do not know much of discipline--and no wonder, if they have never yet had the Rules of our Societies. First explain them at large, and afterwards enforce them, very mildly and very steadily. Molly Franklin and Sister Proudfoot are good women. Deal very gently with them, and lovingly labor to convince those whom it concerns of the evil of buying or selling on the Lord’s Day. -- I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To John Atlay [13]

STOCKPORT, April 4, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I think two thousand more of the Hymns for the Nation may be printed as soon as is convenient, leaving out the 2nd, 3rd, 8th, 12th, 16th, 21st, and 22nd. When these seven are omitted (which are not of so general use), the remainder will be large enough for a threepenny book. Five hundred of these I would have sent to Sheffield (over and above the five hundred sent to Leeds), and five hundred to Newcastle-upon-Tyne. I hope they will be at Sheffield before the 9th of May.

I am poorly provided with fellow travelers. To save John Broadbent’s life I take him with me for a month while George Whitfield supplies his place. But he and T. Simpson together are but half a man. So that it is well I have learnt to serve myself. Do not boast of your riches to T. Olivers. It is enough to make him stark mad. [See letter of April 13.] -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

[On the back of the letter Wesley adds:]

If you print 2,000 Estimates of the Manners of the Times for ed. and send me 500 of them to Leeds as soon as you can, and 500 to Sheffield with the Hymns, I can sell them.

[Atlay endorses the latter, ‘Mr. Wesley, April 8, 1782.’]

To Francis Wrigley [14]

MANCHESTER, April 4, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I have no objection to the judgment of the rector of Trowbridge; and it seems this would stand between you and blame, as no one could condemn you without first condemning him.

I do not know anything that is amiss in the behavior either of Brother Fowler or his wife. But I do not know that he is called to preach. Certainly he should not go where they are not willing to hear him. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Francis Wrigley, At the Preach-

ing-house, In Bradford, Wilts. [Wrigley (who was Assistant) was not appointed to Bradford-upon-Avon until the Conference in August. He was probably there earlier.]

To John Bredin

MANCHESTER, April 6, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- It is probable I shall be able to hold a little Conference in Dublin before the middle of July. But you will hear more before that time. The four volumes of Sermons with the Notes on the New Testament (small edition) are the best books for Mr. Haslett. Any other of our books you may give to him or Mr. Dillon in my name. If Adam Clarke [See letters of Oct. 19, 1781, and July 9, 1782.] can come to London at the Conference, I will send him to Kingswood directly. You may take those three volumes of Magazines with as many as make up the set. You may likewise have the History of England and of the Church.

John McKenny [John McKenny (whose son was one of the first missionaries in Ceylon) was a friend and classmate of Adam Clarke’s.] must take his choice. If he will refrain from going to that house, it will remove the offense. But if he will go, he does thereby put himself out of our Society. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To John Bredin, In Coleraine,

Ireland.

To Samuel Mitchell [15]

MANCHESTER, April 6, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Joseph Pilmoor did not let me know that you had sent a plan of the circuit to Dublin. Otherwise George Whitfield need not have wrote. It is very probable I may get as far as Dublin, in order to hold a little Conference, about the beginning of July. As it was so greatly wanted and the people were so willing, you did well to begin the preaching-house, and as far as circumstances will admit let it be built accordingly to the directions laid down in the Minutes. If you strongly and explicitly encourage all the believers in every place to expect present and full salvation from all sin, the work of the Lord will prosper in your hands. -- I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

You will contrive to send Brother Foster’s letter to him.

To Mr. Sam. Mitchell, In Clones,

Ireland.

To John Bredin

LIVERPOOL, April 10, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I have a letter from Mrs. Davenport, informing me that Hugh Moore has offered marriage to Kitty Davenport without the consent of her parents. [Evidently Hugh Moore, preacher at Londonderry. See the letter of Aug. 4 to Bredin.] Pray write to him strongly upon the head, and show him the sinfulness of such a proceeding: reminding him withal that, if he married a person without the consent of her parents, he would thereby exclude himself out of the Methodist Connection. Let him remember the exemplary behavior of John Prickard on a like occasion. If he will seriously promise entirely to drop the affair, he may come to Coleraine as usual. If he will not, he must come thither no more. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ann Loxdale

LIVERPOOL, April 12, 1782.

MY DEAR MISS LOXDALE, -- I advised formerly my dear Jenny Cooper, [See letter of Sept. 11, 1765.] and so I advise you, frequently to read and meditate upon the 13th chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthians. There is the true picture of Christian perfection! Let us copy after it with all our might. I believe it might likewise be of use to you to read more than once the Plain Account of Christian Perfection. Indeed, what is it more or less than humble, gentle, patient love! It is undoubtedly our privilege to ‘rejoice evermore,’ with a calm, still, heartfelt joy. Nevertheless this is seldom long at one stay. Many circumstances may cause it to ebb and flow. This, therefore, is not the essence of religion, which is no other than humble, gentle, patient love. I do not know whether all these are not included in that one word resignation. For the highest lesson our Lord (as man) learned on earth was to say, ‘Not as I will, but as Thou wilt.’ May He confirm you more and more!

Yours most affectionately.

To Thomas Taylor [16]

LIVERPOOL, April 12, 1782.

DEAR TOMMY, -- I find the difference between us is very small, for most of what you say I subscribe to. That ‘the war has been ill-conducted,’ that ‘millions of money and thousands of lives have been thrown away,’ that ‘numerous families have been ruined, trade much hurt,’ that we are ‘in danger of losing all North America, if not the East Indies too,’ ‘that our commanders both by sea and land love robbing and plundering far better than fighting,’ are melancholy truths which no man that has any knowledge of public affairs can deny. But you do not know half yet. If we live to meet, I can tell you stranger things than all these.

I have changed the plan of my journeys: from Leeds I go to Lincolnshire, and thence by Hull and Scarborough to Newcastle. So that I shall not be at York [Taylor was Assistant there.] till the latter end of June. -- I am, with love to Sister Taylor, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To John Atlay

LIVERPOOL, April 13, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- By all means send what remains of the former edition of the Hymns before you send the new. You may likewise send to Sheffield an hundred of each of Mr. Galloway’s tracts. Let us shut the stable door, though the steed is stolen.

As T. Olivers has the interest of five hundred pounds besides my allowance, I do not see how he can possibly be in want, unless there be a marvellous want of economy. However, be it as it may. I am at a point: I will give him forty pounds a year and no more. [See letters of April 4, 1782, and Aug. 15, 1789.] -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Zachariah Yewdull

OTLEY, May 1, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I see no reason yet why you may not spend the next year in Cork and Bandon. [Yewdull was now in the Waterford Circuit. He became Assistant at Cork at the following Conference.] If nothing unforeseen prevent, I shall be at Dublin the beginning of July.

If you desire to promote the work of God, you should preach abroad as often as possible. Nothing destroys the devil's kingdom like this. You may have the History of the Church: money is nothing between you and me. Be all in earnest! -- I am, dear Zachary,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Nuttal [17]

LEEDS, May 7, 1782.

DEAR MRS. NUTTAL, -- When I was at Preston, [He had been there on May 24, 1781.] I was much pleased with your spirit, and found a tender concern for you. I saw you had real desire to be a Christian, and this endeared you much to me. I saw likewise a good deal of affection in your behavior, which united me to you the more. But as you are weak and inexperienced you have need of much prayer and much watchfulness. And you have great need that others who have more experience should watch over you in love. Therefore it is highly advisable for you to join the Society. Yet do not imagine that all in the Society are angels. They are weak, fallible creatures the same as yourself. But such as they may be helpful to you. -- My dear Mrs. Nuttal,

Your affectionate servant.

 

 

To Mrs. Taylor

THORNE, May 14, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I will certainly rather encourage than discourage the sale of Mr. Taylor’s Concordance. [A Concordance to the Holy Scriptures. Thomas Taylor was a diligent student of Greek and Hebrew and a busy writer. York was a quiet circuit then. See Wesley’s Veterans, vii. 64-5, 70.] And I have no objection to recommend it as far as I can upon a slight perusal; but I have by no means time to read it over. I hope to be at York about the middle of June, but I cannot fix the day yet. Peace be with you and yours! -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Martha Chapman
SUNDERLAND, May 25, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, --Some fault we may allow to be in the heart of that poor creature. But undoubtedly the main fault lies in her head. It is as manifest a case of insanity as ever came under my notice. With regard to you, it is the wise providence of God. For the present it is not joyous, but grievous; yet by-and-by you will find all these things working together for good. I advise you all to let her say whatever she has a mind to say. But answer her not one word either bad or good. -- I am, my dear Patty,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss Patty Chapman, At Warledon,

Near Nettlebed, Oxfordshire.

To Captain Webb [18]

SUNDERLAND, May 25, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Explain to our brethren wherever you go your conversation with Colonel Barr, and enforce the proposal as far as you can. Then you will the better be able to judge what number of soldiers you may reasonably expect to raise among the Methodists.

I wish you would tell Mr. Moore [The preachers in Bristol in 1781 were John Pawson, John Murlin, and William Moore. Alexander M’Nab had been Pawson’s predecessor in 1779, and had caused much trouble at Bath. See letter of Jan. 18, 1780.] I desire he would not converse at all with the Separatists at Bath. If he does, I shall look upon it as an open declaration that he has no regard for me.

If twenty people pledge themselves for Mr. Walker, [John Walker was now at Gloucester, and next Conference ‘desists from traveling.’] they may. But I have nothing more to do with him. I will give him one more guinea, and that is all. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Charles Attoore [19]

ALNWICK, May 28, 1782.

DEAR CHARLES, -- Agues this year spread all over the kingdom, and they are far more stubborn than usual. If you have not tried Dr. Sander's pills, you should (after taking a little vomit). They are entirely safe, as has been proved in a thousand instances. Take, -- Castile soap, two scruples; arsenicum album, two grains. Mix thoroughly, and make into' eight pills. Take one every four hours between the fits. It very seldom fads. I am considered at present an invalid too; yet I trust we shall both recover our strength. -- I am, dear Charles,

Your affectionate brother.

To his Brother Charles [20]

ALNWICK, May 28, 1782.

DEAR BROTHER, -- The history of the matter is this: When I was at Dawgreen, near Birstall, the trustees for Birstall house brought me a deed, which they read over and desired me to sign. We disputed upon it about an hour. I then gave them a positive answer that ‘I would not sign it’; and, leaving them abruptly, went up to my room.

About noon I preached at Horbury. In the evening I preached and met the Society at Wakefield. [He was at Wakefield on April 10, 1780.] At night, a little before I went to bed, the trustees came again, got round, and worried me down. But I think they cannot worry you. May not you very properly write to Mr. Valton – ‘If the trustees will settle the Birstall house on the Methodist plan, I will sign their deed with all my heart; but if they build an house for a Presbyterian meeting-house, I will not, I dare not, have anything to do with it.’ I never yet sent a letter of attorney on such an occasion, nor wrote in any other form than this, ‘Its receipt shall be your discharge.’ If the executor says, ‘I will not pay it on such a receipt,’ then I will send a letter of attorney.

The beginning of Rodney’s account is utterly unfashionable. [News arrived early in May of Rodney’s great victory over the French Navy near the island of Dominica on April 12.] I wonder how it entered into his head. We ‘get God on our side’ by the continual prayer of thousands. You may send me Cicero, and Fabritius, and the American War, together with the next Magazines, to York. I expect to be ten or twelve days in and near Edinburgh, and about the 17th of June at Newcastle.

Peace be with you all! Adieu!

To Mrs. Clark [21]

NEAR EDINBURGH, June 1, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I am glad to hear that the Select Society increases, and that you meet it constantly. The prosperity of the whole society greatly depends on that little number. If these continue steadfast and alive to God, they will enliven the rest of their brethren. I love your little maidens, and wish they knew how well our Savior loves them.

If they did, they would certainly love Him ! And then, how happy they would be! -- I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Clark, At Mr. Knapp’s,

Glover, In Worcester.

To Samuel Bradburn

ABERDEEN, June 7, 1782.

DEAR SAMMY, -- Cannot you give part of J. Hodgson’s class to the other leader Let each person meet with which he chooses. Let Henry Atkinson and Thomas Haigh be the stewards for the ensuing year.

I see no reason why Brother Proctor should not remain in the circuit till the Conference. [Stephen Proctor, the Assistant at Glamorgan, ceased to ‘travel’ at the Conference in August.] But whenever you have the opportunity earnestly exhort him to be serious and to be jealous for God.

Whoever is pleased or displeased, the preaching at Greetland and at Halifax must remain as it is. Our yea is yea, and our nay is nay.

I have little objection to John Oliver’s [The preachers at Bradford were Samuel Bradburn, John Floyd, and John Oliver, who moved to Chester in August.] request -- it seems reasonable enough.

I am glad to hear my poor Betsy [See letter of Feb. 28.] gathers strength. I love her well. Peace be with both your spirits! -- I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Jonathan Hern

ALNWICK, June 16, 1782.

DEAR JONATHAN, -- I have made all the haste from the North of Scotland which I reasonably could. But still my time fails short. I shall not be able to reach York before the 27th instant. And I shall then have all the Midland Societies to visit; so that I cannot get any time for Ireland this summer. For before I have well done my business in the country the Conference will call me to London. Peace be with you and yours! Be zealous for God! -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Jon. Hern, At the Octagon,

In Chester.

To Hester Ann Roe [22]

DARLINGTON, June 25, 1782.

MY DEAR HETTY, -- It is certain there has been for these forty years such an outpouring of the Spirit and such an increase of vital religion as has not been in England before for many centuries; and it does not appear that the work of God at all decays. In many places there is a considerable increase of it; so that we have reason to hope that the time is at hand when the kingdom of God shall come with power, and all the people of this poor heathen land shall know Him, from the least unto the greatest.

I am glad you had so good an opportunity of talking with Mr. Sellars. Surely, if prayer was made for him, so useful an instrument as he was would not be suffered to lose all his usefulness. I wish you could make such little excursions oftener, as you always find your labor is not in vain. Many years since, Madame Bourignon’s Works were put into my hands, particularly the treatises Mr. Sellars so strongly recommends, with her Exterior and Interior Life, written by herself. It was easy to see she was a person dead to the world and much devoted to God; yet I take her to be very many degrees beneath both Mr. De Renty and Gregory Lopez -- nay, I do not believe she had so much genuine Christian experience as either David Brainerd or Thomas Walsh. What makes many passages both in her life and in her writings so striking is that they are so peculiar -- they are so entirely her own, so different from everything which we have seen or heard elsewhere! But this is in reality not an excellence, but a capital defect. Her expressions naturally tend to give a new set of ideas: they will set imagination at work, and make us fancy we saw wonderful things, but they were only shadows. I avoid, I am afraid of, whatever is peculiar, either in the experience or language of any one. I desire nothing, I will accept of nothing, but .the common faith and the common salvation.

This afternoon I was agreeably surprised by a letter from our dear Miss Ritchie. It seems as if God, in answer to many prayers, has lent her to us yet a little longer. ‘He bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up again. Wise are all His ways!’

Take particular care, my dear Hetty, of the children: they are glorious monuments of divine grace; and I think you have a particular affection for them and a gift to profit them. -- I always am, my dear friend,

Yours most affectionately.