
1788

 

 

 

To Jasper Winscorn [1]

LONDON, July 16, 1788.

DEAR JASPER, -- If all our Society at Portsmouth or elsewhere separate from the Church, I cannot help it. But I will not. Therefore I can in no wise consent to the having service in church hours. You used to love the Church; then keep to it, and exhort all our people to do the same. If it be true that Brother Hayter is used to talk against the other preachers, as well as against Thomas Warwick, Brother Hayter and I shall not agree. Of dividing circuits we may speak at the Conference. -- I am, dear Jasper,

Your affectionate brother.

 

 

To Francis Wrigley [2]

LONDON, July 16, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You judge rightly. There is a snake in the grass. Some of the preachers are at the bottom of this senseless opposition to that excellent Deed. [The Deed of Declaration, 1784.] If it be possible, find out who they are. But if you do, your name shall never be brought into question concerning it.

You are right likewise concerning this continual dividing and subdividing of circuits. This likewise will come naturally into consideration if we should live till the Conference.

Sister Dutton has no claim to anything from our Fund. She knows it well. But we commonly make her a present once a year. -- I am, dear Franky,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Wrigley, At the Preaching-house,

In Blackburn, Lancashire.

To Richard Whatcoat [3]

LONDON, July 17, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I am never so busy as not to spare a little time to remember my friends. I have not heard of your taking any step which I disapprove of. It was not your fault that you did not reach the office which I assigned you. Brother Casey is very desirous of being stationed either in the English or Irish circuit, and I believe it will be every way for his good. He will be both more holy and more happy than in his American living.

In various parts of England as well as in America God has lately revived up many young men, who are full of life and fire and have spread the fire of love wherever their lot was cast. It was not well judged by Brother Asbury to suffer, much less indirectly to encourage, that foolish step in the late Conference. Every preacher present ought both in duty and in prudence to have said, 'Brother Asbury, Mr. Wesley is your father, consequently ours, and we will affirm this in the face of all the world.' It is truly probable the disavowing me will, as soon as my head is laid, occasion a total breach between the English and American Methodists. They will naturally say, 'If they can do without us, we can do without them.' But they will find a greater difference than they imagine. Next would follow a separation between themselves. Well, whatever may fall out to-morrow, let you and I live to-day! -- I am, dear Richard,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Rev. Mr. Whatcoat, At Philip Rogers, Esq.

In Baltimore, Maryland. Post to New York.

To Walter Churchey [4]

NEAR LONDON, July 22, 1788.

My DEAR BROTHER, -- I am glad you spoke to Mr. Cowper. What pity is it that such talents as his should be employed in so useless a manner! [The reference is to The Task. See letters of Sept. 20, 1786, and Sept. 27, 1788.]

Mr. Bradburn delivered your papers to me a few days ago. [See letters of June 26 and Aug. 8 to Churchey.] But this is so busy a time that I had not time to go through them till to-day. In the translation of The Art of Painting [This poem, translated from the Latin of Alphonse du Fresnoy, with notes by R. Graham, fills 98 pages. See letter of Aug. 8.] there are many very good lines; but there are some that want a good deal of filing, and many that are obscure. This is the general fault. The sense is so much crowded that it is not easy to be understood. For many years I have not had any bookseller but Mr. Atlay, and my Assistants. I doubt whether any bookseller will buy Fresnoy. Some of the shorter copies are good sense and good poetry. My brother has left a translation of the Book of Psalms, and verses enough to make up at least six volumes in duodecimo. [He left three small 4to volumes of hymns and poems, a poetic version of a considerable part of the Book of Psalms (afterwards inserted with short notes in the Arminian Magazine), and five 4to volumes of hymns on the Four Gospels and the Acts. See Poetical Works of J. and C. Wesley; Jackson's Charles Wesley, ii. 451.] I could but ill spare him now I am myself so far declined into the vale of years. But it is the Lord; let Him do what seemeth Him good. Our time is now short. Let my dear Sister Churchey and you and I make the best of it. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

 

 

 

 

To W. H. Kilburn

LONDON, July 22, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am glad to receive a letter from you on any account; because I love you, and always did. I think you will have reason to praise God for your preachers [Conference began on July 29. The Norwich appointments were John Poole, Richard Reece, and Thomas Kelk.] the ensuing year. And we shall not be unwilling to help you a little further. By-and-by you will be able to help yourselves. Only love one another and serve God in earnest--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. W. H. Kilburn, At the Preaching-house,

In Norwich.

To Kitty Warren

NEAR LONDON, July 22, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- Our Conference is to begin on the 20th instant, and will continue till the middle of the next month. [ 'Week.' It closed on Aug. 6.] I purpose, if God continues my life and health, to leave London the Monday following -- namely, August 4. But I must go round by Portsmouth in order to open the new preaching-house.

So that I expect my little journey through Wales will runs thus:

Friday, August 8, Monmouth; Saturday, 9th, Breton; Monday, 18th, Carmarthen; Tuesday, 12th, Llangwain [Llwynygwair. See Journal, vii. 426-7.]; Wednesday, 13th, Haverfordwest; Saturday, 16th, Pembroke; Monday, 18th, Carmarthen; Tuesday, 19th, Swansea; Wednesday, 20th, Cowbridge.

I do not wonder, if Mr. Dufton [William Dufton was Assistant at Pembroke. The appointments were William Palmer, C. Bond, and Francis Truscott. Joseph Cole, who had been at Plymouth, went to Ayr and Dumfries.] disliked the people, that the people should dislike him; and in that case the work of God must needs be hindered. But I am entirely of your opinion that it will soon revive if you have acceptable preachers. If he does not much object, I will appoint Josh. Cole for one. Perhaps you could meet me at Llangwain. Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am, my dear sister,

Yours very affectionately.

 

 

To Alexander Suter

NEAR LONDON, July 23, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- As your life is in danger, I think the sooner you are with your mother the better. And whenever your health will permit, you need not be idle: there is plenty of employment for you in England. [In the Minutes for 1788 Surer appears as a supernumerary in London, but in July 1789 he is appointed to St. Ives. See letter of May 21, 1789.] Eat as many red currants as ever you can. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Charles Wesley

CITY ROAD, July 25, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- You know well what a regard I had for Miss Gwynne before she was Mrs. Wesley; and it has not ceased from that time till now. I am persuaded it never will. I find you and your family much upon my heart, both for your own sakes and the sake of my brother. Therefore I will speak without reserve just what comes into my mind.

I have sometimes thought you are a little like me. My wife used to tell me, 'My dear, you are too generous. You don't know the value of money.' I could not wholly deny the charge. Possibly you may sometimes lean to the same extreme. I know, you are of a generous spirit. You have an open heart and an open hand. But may it not sometimes be too open, more so than your circumstances will allow.

Is it not an instance of Christian (as well as worldly) prudence, 'To cut our coat according to our cloth' If your circumstances are a little narrower, should you not contract your expenses too I need but just give you this hint, which I doubt not you will take kindly from, my dear Sally,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To John Crook [5]

LONDON, July 27, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Is it not enough that I am alive to-day Let God take thought for what is to come.

Ten pounds will be allowed for Brother Barrowclough and you; six for you, and four for him. You did well in sending the collections to the Conference according to our rules. You see you are no loser by it.

If my life is prolonged, I shall probably set out for Ireland at the usual time--namely, the latter end of March. But how much grace may we receive and how much good may we do before that time! -- I am, with kind love to Sister Crook,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Trustees of Dewsbury [6]

LONDON, July 30, 1788.

MY DEAR BRETHREN, -- The question between us is, 'By whom shall the preachers sent from time to time to Dewsbury be judged' You say, 'By the trustees.' I say, 'By their peers -- the preachers met in Conference.' You say, 'Give up this, and we will receive them.' I say, 'I cannot, I dare not, give up this.' Therefore, if you will not receive them on these terms, you renounce connection with

Your affectionate brother.

To Sarah Mallet

LONDON, August 2, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- Let me know any time what books you wish to have, and I will order them to be sent to you. [See letters of March 11 and Dec. 26.] It is a pleasure to me if I can show in anything the regard which I have for you, as I am firmly persuaded that you have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward man. I do not doubt but you have given God your heart, and do in all things wish to do His holy and acceptable will. But if so, it is no wonder that you should meet with crosses, both from the devil and his children, especially as you believe you are called of God to bear a public testimony against him. But you are in far greater danger from applause than from censure; and it is well for you that one balances the other. But I trust you will never be weary of well doing. In due time you shall reap if you faint not. Whoever praises or dispraises, it is your part to go steadily on, speaking the truth in love. I do not require any of our preachers to license either themselves or the places where they preach. [For the Act, see Tyerman'a Wesley, iii. 512.] Indeed, a forward young man in Northamptonshire brought some trouble on himself by preaching in church time, and so near the church as to disturb both the minister and the congregation. But that need not fright any other of our preachers. They are just as safe as they were before. Go on, therefore, and fear nothing but sin. And let me know if there be anything wherein I can assist you, which will be a pleasure to, dear Sally,

Yours affectionately.

To our Societies in England and Ireland [7]

LONDON, August 2, 1788.

Fifty years ago and for several years following all our preachers were single men, when in process of time a few of them married. Those with whom they labored maintained both them and their wives, there being then no settled allowance either for the one or the other. But above thirty years ago it was found most convenient to fix a stated allowance for both; and this was found by the circuits where they were stationed, till one year some of the circuits complained of poverty. Dr. Coke and I supplied what was wanting. The next year, the number of wives increasing, three or four of them were supplied out of the Contingent Fund. This was a bad precedent, for more and more wives were thrown upon this fund, till it was likely to be swallowed up thereby. We could think of no way to prevent this, but to consider the state of our Societies in England and Ireland, and to beg the members of each circuit to give us that assistance which they can easily do without hurting their families.

Within these fifty years the substance of the Methodists is increased in proportion to their numbers. Therefore, if you are not straitened in your own bowels, this will be no grievance, but you will cheerfully give food and raiment to those who give up all their time and strength and labour to your service.

 

 

To Ann Taylor

LONDON, August 2, 1788.

MY DEAR NANCY,--I was well pleased when I heard you were gone to spend a little time in Cork, [See letter of June 7.] where you will have an opportunity of conversing familiarly with Sister Ward [See letters of July 16 and Aug. 2 to her.] and with that blessed woman Sister Rogers. I do not doubt but you will make the best use of these blessed opportunities. Now, my dear maid, is the time when you may improve your understanding and (what is far better) your heart. Now pray earnestly that you may be enabled to give your whole heart to Him who alone is worthy of it. -- I am, my dear Nancy,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Ward

LONDON, August 2, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- The thing has been wholly misrepresented. Dr. Coke never designed any separation; but they urged him to say 'he wished for such a thing,' and then faced him down that he designed it. [See letter of May 6.] He and I have had much conversation together, and he is now as fully persuaded as I am that a general separation from the Church either in England or Ireland would be greatly obstructive of the work of God. I am exceedingly glad that the Dean of Waterford now sees the Methodists in a true light. It would be a great pity that anything should impair the good opinion which he now entertains of them. I have therefore wrote to James Deaves, [Condy was Assistant at Waterford. See letter of Feb. 28, 1789 (to Tegart); and for Deaves, that of Nov. 13, 1785.] and desired him to bear with the little oddities of Richard Condy and to advise all our people in my name to keep close to the Church and Sacrament. I make little doubt but they will take my advice. -- I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Frances Godfrey

LONDON, August 5, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- YOU have indeed escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler; the snare is broken, and you are delivered. Certainly you have great reason to praise Him who has brought you to the knowledge of His truth; and not only given you to know but to experience the truth as it is in Jesus. I felt a love for you from the first time I saw you, when you was under those grievous trials. [See letters of July 31, 1784, and Aug. 2, 1789.] Now that you have recovered some measure of health and strength, employ it all to the glory of Him that gave it. Now go on to perfection! Hunger and thirst after righteousness, till you are satisfied therewith; then you will be more and more near to, my dear Fanny,

Yours affectionately.

My love to your mother.

To Mrs. Charles Wesley [8]

NORTH GREEN, August 7, 1788.

DEAR SISTER, -- As the Conference ended yesterday afternoon, my hurry is now a little abated. I cannot blame you for having thoughts of removing out of that large house. If you could find a lodging to your mind, it would be preferable on many accounts, and perhaps you might live as much without care as you did in the great mansion at Garth. I was yesterday inquiring of Dr. Whitehead whether Harrogate would not be better for Sally than the sea water. [Sally went to Ramsgate. See letter of Sept. 1.] He seems to think it would; and I should not think much of giving her ten or twenty pounds to make a trial. But I wish she could see him first, which she might do any day between seven and eight in the morning. Some of the first moneys I receive I shall set apart for you [See letter of Dec. 21.]; and in everything that is in my power you may depend upon the willing assistance of, dear Sally,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Wesley, In Chesterfield Street,

Marybone.

To Walter Churchey [9]

LONDON, August 8, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTER, -- I think you know that I love you and that I should rejoice to do anything for you that is in my power. And one allowed proof of love is plain dealing. Therefore I will speak to you without any reserve. There are many good lines, and some very good, both in the ode and in the translation of The Art of Painting. And I really think you improve in versifying: you write a good deal better than you did some years ago. You express your sense with more perspicuity than you used to do, and appear to have greater variety of words as well as more strength. But there is nothing (to use the modern cant word) sentimental in either the ode or the translation. There is nothing of tender or pathetic, nothing that touches the passions. Therefore no bookseller would venture to buy them, as knowing they will not sell. And they lie utterly out of the way of the Methodists, who do not care to buy or even to read (at least the generality of them) any but religious books. I do not believe all my influence would induce them to buy as many copies as would suffice to pay for the printing.

I have not yet seen my brother's translation of the Psalms. Neither, indeed, could I as yet have time to read it, were it put into my hands.

If any had asked my advice, they would not have thrust out the account of George Lukins [Lukins had been exorcised in the Vestry of Temple Church, Bristol. See Journal, vii. 362.] into the world so prematurely. It should have been fully authenticated first. I am, with love to Sister Churchey,

Your affectionate brother.

I expect to be at Brecon on Sunday se'nnight.

To Arthur Keene

LONDON, August 8, 1788.

MY DEAR ARTHUR, -- Even at this busy time I must snatch a few minutes to write. You have now an easy way to show your affection for me and your willingness to be advised by me. It is the belief of many that you will see me in Ireland no more. But if I should live till spring, I shall endeavor to visit Dublin at the usual time, about the end of March. [He arrived in Dublin for his last visit on March 29, 1789.] If then you have a real regard for me, see that your preaching-house [In Whitefriar Street. See letter of June 16.] be enlarged without delay.

Forward the building that it may be ready when I come. Do this, and I shall know that you have a love for, my dear Arthur,

Your ever affectionate brother.

My kind love attend Bella and all the little ones.

 

 

To Lady Maxwell

LONDON, August 8, 1788.

MY DEAR LADY, -- It is certain many persons both in Scotland and England would be well pleased to have the same preachers always. But we cannot forsake the plan of acting which we have followed from the beginning. For fifty years God has been pleased to bless the itinerant plan, the last year most of all. It must not be altered till I am removed; and I hope will remain till our Lord comes to reign upon earth.

I do not know (unless it unfits us for the duties of life) that we can have too great a sensibility of human pain. Me-thinks I should be afraid of losing any degree of this sensibility. I had a son-in-law (now in Abraham's bosom) who quitted his profession, that of a surgeon, for that very reason; because he said it made him less sensible of human pain. [Was this Noah Vazeille] And I have known exceeding few persons who have carried this tenderness of spirit to excess. I recollect but one who was constrained to leave off in a great measure visiting the sick because he could not see any one in pain without fainting away. Mr. Charles Perronet was the first person I was acquainted with who was favored with the same experience as the Marquis De Renty ['I bear in me ordinarily an experimental verity and a plenitude of the most Holy Trinity, which exalts me to a simple view of God.' (Wesley's Extract of the Life of Monsieur De Renty). See letter of Oct. 3, 1731.] with regard to the ever-blessed Trinity, Miss Ritchie was the second, Miss Roe (now Mrs. Rogers) the third. I have as yet found but a few instances; so that this is not, as I was at first apt to suppose, the common privilege of all that are 'perfect in love.' [Compare letters of June 11 1777 (to Hannah Ball), and July 4, 2787, and Lady Maxwell's letters to Alexander Mather in her Life, pp. 359-61.]

Pardon me, my dear friend, for my heart is tenderly concerned for you, if I mention one fear I have concerning you, lest, on conversing with some, you should be in any degree warped from Christian simplicity. O do not wish to hide that you are a Methodist! Surely it is best to appear just what you are. I believe you will receive this as a proof of the sincerity with which I am, my dear Lady,

Your ever affectionate servant.

 

 

To Ann Bolton

BRECON, August 15, 1788.

DEAR NANCY, -- Last night I received yours at Monmouth. The same complaint which you make of not receiving an answer to your letter another person had just been making. But I had answered you both. I cannot therefore but conclude that both my letters had some way or other miscarried. Since I saw you a young slender girl just beginning to seek salvation I do not remember that you ever offended in anything. But you was always exceeding dear to me. So you are still. And I would show it effectually if my power were equal to my will. I love you the more because you are a daughter of affliction. I suppose you are still in God's school. But you still remember He loveth whom He chasteneth. If you love me still, write freely to, my dear Nancy, Yours very affectionately.

To Miss Bolton, In Witney,

Oxfordshire.

To John Atlay [10]

PEMBROKE, August 23, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- If you are persuaded that such a promise (which is the whole and sole cause of the breach at Dewsbury) is binding, &c., you must follow your persuasion. You will have blame enough from other persons; my hand shall not be upon you. If I can do you good, I will; but I shall certainly do you no harm. George Whitfield is the person I choose to succeed you. I wish you would teach him as much as you can without delay. -- I am, with kind love to Sister Atlay,

Your affectionate brother.

To Elizabeth Baker [11]

CARMARTHEN, August 26, 1788.

MY DEAR BETSY, -- Since I had the pleasure of seeing you I have been thinking much on what you said concerning your loving others too much. In one sense this cannot be; you cannot have too much benevolence for the whole human race: but in another sense you may; you may grieve too much for the distresses of others, even so much as to make you incapable of giving them the relief which otherwise you should give them. So I know one that, when he sees any one in strong pain, directly faints away. [See letter of Aug. 8 to Lady Maxwell.] It is something like this which you mean by feeling too much for others You can give me two or three instances of it, and then I shall be better able to judge.

Have you a constant witness of the pardoning love of God And do you find an abiding love to Him Have you yet been enabled to give Him your whole heart If so, at what time and in what manner did you receive this blessing

I think you can speak with all freedom to

Yours very affectionately.

To John Atlay [12]

BRISTOL, August 31, 1788.

I pray, Brother Atlay, do not serve me so. If you will not serve me yourself, do not hinder others from serving me. Do not fright George Whitfield from it; but encourage him to it, and instruct him as quick as possible. My death is nothing to the purpose. I have now nothing to do with the Dewsbury people: go with them and serve them. But I am still

Your affectionate brother.

To his Niece Sarah Wesley

BRISTOL, September 1, 1788.

MY DEAR SALLY, -- I received yours yesterday in the afternoon. As Ramsgate [See letters of Aug. 7 and Sept. 8.] is more private, I am not sorry that you are there, and that you have so suitable a companion.

I think it would be expedient for you to bathe every day, unless you find yourself chilled when you come out. But I do not advise you to drink any sea water. I am persuaded it was never designed to enter any human body for any purpose but to drown it.

The great comfort is that you have a good and wise physician always ready both to advise and to assist. Therefore you are assured health you shall have if health be best. That all things may work together for your good is the prayer of, my dear Sally,

Your ever affectionate Uncle.

To John Atlay [13]

BRISTOL, September 4, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I was once afraid that you had dissuaded George Whitfield from taking charge of the books; but I can take your word. Now I am fully satisfied that you did not; and I believe you will teach him everything relating to that charge. But one thing is much upon my mind: I wish you would hire one or two proper persons, and take an inventory of all the books that are either in the shop or under the chapel. This will be worth all the pains. Then George will know what he has to do. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. John Atlay, New Chapel,

London.

To Thomas Cooper

BRISTOL, September 6, 1788.

DEAR TOMMY, -- I will not send any other person into the Derby Circuit if you will be there in two or three weeks. [Cooper, who had been stationed at Birmingham, and was down in the Minutes for Plymouth, had been changed to Derby. He was appointed to Wolverhampton in 1789.] Otherwise I must, or the work of God might suffer in a manner not easy to be repaired. You should have told me at first what your disorder was, and possibly I might have saved you from much pain. -- I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Thos. Cooper, In Cherry Lane,

Birmingham.

To his Niece Sarah Wesley [14]

BRISTOL, September 8, 1788.

MY DEAR SALLY, -- You shall have just as many friends as will be for your good; and why should not my Betty Ritchie be in the number I must look to that, if I live to see London again, which will probably be in three weeks.

If sea water has that effect on you, it is plain you are not to drink it. [See letters of Sept. 1, 1788, and Sept. 17, 1790.] All the body is full of imbibing pores. You take in water enough that way. If your appetite increases, so does your strength, although by insensible degrees.

I have seen John Henderson several times. I hope he does not live in any sin. But it is a great disadvantage that he has nothing to do. I hope we shall find him something.

I have a work in hand that will give you pleasure: I have begun to write my brother's Life. [This work he never accomplished. He died before he had made much progress in collecting material. See Jackson's Charles Wesley, ii. 454; and letter of Sept. 26.] Now, in this you may assist me much. You knew as much of him as most people; and you have the pen of a ready witness. Set down everything you can recollect concerning him. I think between us we shall be able to make something out. You may set down everything you can think of; I can select such a portion as is most proper. You have now leisure for it and for doing good to any whom Providence delivers into your hands. Peace be with your spirit! -- I am, my dear Sally,

Yours in tender affection.

To Elizabeth Baker

BRISTOL, September 16, 1788.

MY DEAR BETSY, -- One would be apt to imagine that there could be no ill consequence of the deepest concern for the sin and misery of our fellow creatures. But dear, indisputable experience shows the contrary to a demonstration. Lucretia Smith [See letter of Oct. 21, 1757.] (to mention only one instance), a young gentlewoman of our Society here, who found remission of sins long ago and was unblameable in her whole behavior, reasoned on that question, 'Why does not the God of love make every one as happy as me' till she lost all her happiness, all her peace, which she never recovered since. Beware, therefore, of reasoning on those points which are far too high for you. Such knowledge is too wonderful for us; we cannot attain unto it. His ways are unsearchable and His judgments a great deep. What He doeth thou knowest not now; it is enough that thou shalt know hereafter. I hope you never will be weary of well-doing. Herein your sister Sally is a pattern. She has done unspeakable good since she came to Cowbridge. [Wesley had been there in August. See letters of Aug. 26, 1788, and Oct. 5, 1789.] God sent her thither to revive His work there. When I first heard of her removal from Monmouth, I could not but be troubled at not seeing by what possible means the want of her could be supplied. But it is done already. God has raised you to supply her place. And He will supply all your wants out of the riches of His mercy in Christ Jesus. In what sense do you see God Are you always sensible of His loving presence How do you 'rejoice evermore' and 'pray without ceasing and in everything give thanks' It is certain this is the will of God concerning you in Christ Jesus. Adieu!

To Joseph Benson

BRISTOL, September 17, 1788.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- I congratulate you upon the happy increase of your family. [A daughter had been born on Sept. 3.] And I am glad you have determined to correct Mr. Fletcher's Letters. [See letter of June 9.] You will observe that it is dangerous on such subjects to depart from Scripture either as to language or sentiment. I believe that most of the controversies which have disturbed the Church have arisen from people's wanting to be wise above what is written, not contented with what God has plainly revealed there. And, Joseph, do not you yourself immediately forget this; and immediately move out in a curious metaphysical disquisition about what God has not plainly revealed What have you or I to do with that difficulty I dare not, will not, reason about it for a moment. I believe just what is revealed, and no more. But I do not pretend to account for it, or to solve the difficulties that may attend it. Let angels do this, if they can. But I think they cannot. I think even these would find 'no end, in wandering mazes lost.' [Paradise Lost, ii. 561.] Some years since, I read about fifty pages of Dr. Watts's ingenious treatise upon the glorified humanity of Christ. [See letter of June 8, 1780.] But it so confounded my intellects, and plunged me into such unprofitable reasonings, yea dangerous even, that I would not have read it through for five hundred pounds. It led him into Arianism. Take care that similar tracts (all of which I abhor) have not the same effect upon you. [Benson was 'busy reading some chapters on the Godhead of Christ to perfect Mr. Fletcher's MSS. On that subject.' His son says in the manuscript Life, ii. 1644, that while writing 'a material change took place in his mind as to the previous existence of the human soul of Christ.'] Pursue that train of reasoning as far as it will go, and it will surely land you either in Socinianism or Deism. I like your thoughts upon Materialism, as, I doubt not, I should those on the Separate Existence of the Soul. It will be best to print at Hull or York, if you can print almost as cheap and can have as good paper. Should there not be a thousand copies Then you will reserve an hundred of them for yourself.

The matter of Dewsbury you mistake totally. When I met the trustees at Dewsbury they all promised me to settle the house according to the deed then read. They flew off from this, not I; I desired no more from the beginning to the end. The sum of all was, If any one accuses a preacher whom I send, I, not the accuser, will be his judge. And this I cannot give up. [See letter of July 30.] -- I am, with love to Sister Benson, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

But hold! Does not Mrs. Fletcher consider this impression as her property

To Francis Asbury [15]

LONDON, September 20, 1788.

[MY DEAR BROTHER], -- There is, indeed, a wide difference between the relation wherein you stand to the Americans and the relation wherein I stand to all the Methodists. You are the elder brother of the American Methodists: I am under God the father of the whole family. Therefore I naturally care for you all in a manner no other persons can do. Therefore I in a measure provide for you all; for the supplies which Dr. Coke provides for you, he could not provide were it not for me, were it not that I not only permit him to collect but also support him in so doing.

But in one point, my dear brother, I am a little afraid both the Doctor and you differ from me. I study to be little: you study to be great. I creep: you strut along. I found a school: you a college! [Cokesbury College, so called after its founders Coke and Asbury, was twice burnt down.] nay, and call it after your own names! O beware, do not seek to be something! Let me be nothing, and 'Christ be all in all!'

One instance of this, of your greatness, has given me great concern. How can you, how dare you suffer yourself to be called Bishop I shudder, I start at the very thought! Men may call me a knave or a feel, a rascal, a scoundrel, and I am content; but they shall never by my consent call me Bishop! For my sake, for God's sake, for Christ's sake put a full end to this! Let the Presbyterians do what they please, but let the Methodists know their calling better.

Thus, my dear Franky, I have told you all that is in my heart. And let this, when I am no more seen, bear witness how sincerely I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

 

 

To Henry Moore

BRISTOL, September 20, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I have taken place in the mail coach for Sunday se'nnight in the afternoon, so that I shall probably be with you on Monday morning.

Pray tell George Whitfield to settle himself in the Book-Room without delay, as John Atlay has appointed to leave it on the 25th instant. [See letters of Sept. 4 and 24.] I beg of Brother Rankin and you to advise and assist him to the uttermost of your power. Many croakers, no doubt, will strive to discourage him; therefore strengthen his hands all you can.--I am, with much love to my Nancy, dear Henry,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. -----

BRISTOL, September 20, 1788.

MY DEAR FRIEND, -- The question properly refers (when we speak of a separation from the Church) to a total and immediate separation. Such was that of Mr. Ingham's people first, and afterwards that of Lady Huntingdon's; who all agreed to form themselves into a separate body without delay, to go to church no more, and to have no more connection with the Church of England than with the Church of Rome.

Such a separation I have always declared against; and certainly it will not take place (if ever it does) while I live. But a kind of separation has already taken place, and will inevitably spread, though by slow degrees. Those ministers (so called) who neither live nor preach the gospel I dare not say are sent of God. Where one of these is settled, many of the Methodists dare not attend his ministry; so, if there be no other church in that neighborhood, they go to church no more. This is the case in a few places already, and it will be the case in more; and no one can justly blame me for this, neither is it contrary to any of my professions.

To Mrs. Charles Wesley [16]

BRISTOL, September 22, 1788.

DEAR SISTER, -- As John Atlay has deserted me and George Whitfield is but just come into his place, I do not yet know anything of my own circumstances. But I hope to be in town on Monday; and, either for the sake of you or my dear Sally, I shall certainly do anything that is in the power of, dear sister,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

 

 

To John Atlay [17]

BRISTOL, September 24, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- From the time that you gave me warning of quitting my service and informed me you was determined to stay no longer with me (unless upon impossible conditions) than the 25th instant, I resolved to say nothing more or less about it, but to let the matter go as it would go. Whether you made a wise choice in preferring your present to your former station we shall see, if you and I should live two or three years longer. Meantime I am as ever

Your affectionate brother.

PS. -- I say nothing about you to the people of Bristol.

To his Niece Sarah Wesley

BRISTOL, September 26, 1788.

DEAR SALLY, -- The reading of those poisonous writers the Mystics confounded the intellects of both my brother and Mr. Fletcher and made them afraid of (what ought to have been their glory) the letting their light shine before men. Therefore I do not wonder that he was so unwilling to speak of himself, and consequently that you knew so little about him. [See letter of Sept. 8.]

The same wrong humility continually inculcated by those writers would induce him to discontinue the writing his Journal. When I see those detached papers you speak of, I shall easily judge whether any of them are proper to be published.

On Monday I expect to be in town; but I shall leave it again on Wednesday and set out for Norfolk and Suffolk. Afterward I shall visit {if God permit) the other northern circuits till the end of October. Then I visit the classes the first two weeks in November. So that I shall not reach Canterbury before November 24. But do not you want money [See letter of Sept. 22.] You can speak freely to, my dear Sally,

Yours most affectionately.

 

 

To Walter Churchey

BRISTOL, September 27, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- To-morrow evening I am to set out for London. So I still creep up and down, as I would fain do a little work before the night cometh wherein no man can work. I commend you much for not suffering your daughter to go you know not where. What would it profit her to gain a thousand pounds and then lose her soul which could scarce fail to be the consequence of placing her in an ungodly family. I do not know anything in Bristol that would suit; but very probably I may find something in London.

I should be glad if I could have a conversation with Mr. Cowper. I verily think there would be no great difference between us. [See letters of July 22 and Dec. 6 to Churchey.]

September 27, LONDON.

I think it is a pity to burn the poems. There are many good lines in them. [See letter of Aug. 8 to him.] So there are in the Dedication, which I thought I had sent you with the rest. I will send two of the Prayer-Books by the first opportunity. Peace be with you and yours.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Chutehey, Near the Hay, Brecon.

To Lady Maxwell [18]

LONDON, September 30, 1788.

My DEAR LADY, -- For many years a great person professed and I believe had a great regard for me. [The Countess of Huntingdon.] I therefore believed it my duty to speak with all freedom, which I did in a long letter. But she was so displeased that she said to a friend, 'I hate Mr. Wesley above all the creatures upon earth.'

I now believe it my duty to write freely to you. Will it have the same effect Certainly I would not run the hazard, did I not regard your happiness more than your favor. Therefore I will speak. May God enable you not only to pardon it, but to profit thereby! Indeed, unless you profit by it, I do not expect you to forgive.

Be pleased to observe I do not affirm anything; I only beg you calmly to consider, Would it be fight for me to propagate a doctrine which I believed to be false particularly if it were not only false but dangerous to the souls of men, frequently hindering their growth in grace, stopping their pursuit of holiness

And is it fight in you to do this You believe the doctrine of Absolute Predestination is false. Is it, then, right for you to propagate this doctrine in any kind or degree, particularly as it is not only false but a very dangerous doctrine, as we have seen a thousand times Does it not hinder the work of God in the soul, feed all evil and weaken all good tempers, turn many quite out of the way of life and drive them back to perdition

Is not Calvinism the very antidote of Methodism, the most deadly and successful enemy which it ever had 'But my friend desired that I would propagate it, and lodged money with me for this very purpose.' What then May I destroy souls because my friend desired it Ought you not rather to throw that money into the sea O let not any money or any friend move you to propagate a lie, to strike at the root of Methodism, to grieve the holiest of your friends, and to endanger your own soul!

Living or dying, I shall always be, my dear Lady,

Your most affectionate servant.

To Jasper Winscon

LONDON, September 30, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- The Conference cannot and will not bear the expense of that foolish law suit. I can conceive but one way to pay it. The hundred pounds which you borrowed of me you may pay to the attorney, and his receipt in full shall be your discharge. [See letters of Sept. 13, 1785, and June 17, 1786.] -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Walter Griffith () [19]

LONDON, October 10, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- It is certain you cannot preach the truth without offending those who preach the contrary. Nevertheless, you must preach it, only in the mildest and [most] inoffensive manner the thing will admit of. And beware that you never return evil for evil or railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing.

You cannot constrain any one to go to church; you can only advise them to it, and encourage them by your example.

My kind love to your wife. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To James Bogie [20]

LONDON, October 11, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- It is an excellent plan. The sooner you put it in execution the better; only see that you be all punctual to follow one another exactly. Let not a little hindrance or inconvenience put you out of your way; -- suppose a shower of rain or snow. Press on! Break through! Take up your cross each of you and follow your Master; so shall the world and the devil fall under your feet. -- I am, dear Jemmy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Cock

LONDON, October 12, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- It gives me much pleasure to find you are still happy in God, leaning upon your Beloved. O may you increase therein more and more! May you be more and more holy, and you will be more and more happy! [See letters of June 26 (to Adam Clarke) and Dec. 27. ] This I long for, even your perfection, your growing up in all things into Him that is our Head. O may you never endeavor

Love's all-sufficient sea to raise

By drops of creature happiness!

I sent you a little book or two by Mr. Clarke. If I can be of any service to you in anything, it would be an unspeakable satisfaction to, my dear sister,

Yours affectionately.

To Joseph Cownley

LONDON, October 12, 1788.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- I really think you have hardly had so much scandal as one might expect would fall to your share. I have heard very few faults found with you for above these forty years, and I think you and I have not had one quarrel yet. So it is very probable we never shall.

What relates to expense we can set right. But the other evil is more hard to be remedied, because many of the preachers, especially in Scotland, are got above my hand. I never desired them to have service thrice a day; I knew it would be too hard for most of them. I never advised them to symbolize [To agree in belief or practice. Heal says of Hooper: 'To continue the use of their garments was in his opinion to symbolize with Anti-christ' (History of the Puritans, i. 69).] with the Scots. I told them over and over. It was needless. We might have done in Scotland just as we did in England. Dr. Hamilton was already convinced of it. What can be done now I cannot tell. But certainly the preachers must not kill themselves. Retrench what part of the Sunday service you please, and I will not blame you. I do not see why the collection may not be made at six, with a little preamble telling them the real case. This may answer just as well. Lay it upon me. Say, 'Mr. Wesley charges me not to murder myself.'

Dr. Coke did forget, but is now writing your letters of Orders. -- I ever am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

Rev. Mr. Cowriley, Minister of the Methodist Church,

Leith-Wind, Edinburgh.

To the Rev. Mr. Heath

LONDON, October 20, 1788.

DEAR SIR, -- I am of the same mind with you that it will be well for you to return to your native country. [See letters of Aug. 6, 1787, and Dec. 2, 1788.] If you was here, I think we would hardly part again as long as I lived. I have no doubt of finding you employment in England. All the difficulty is how to get over. Dr. Coke is not pleased with a letter sent to Mr. Asbury and transmitted to him wherein you are charged with neglect of the children; but you have an opportunity of answering for yourself. Perhaps you was so unhinged and discouraged by finding things otherwise than you expected that you had not the heart to apply yourself to anything as diligently as you was used to do. However that be, I should be right glad to see you well landed in England: and that God may bring you in the full blessing of the gospel of peace is the prayer of, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Rev. Mr. Heath, At Cokesbury College.

To be left at Philip Rogers, Esq.,

In Baltimore, Maryland.

To Edward Jackson

LONDON, October 24, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I commend you for denying tickets to all that have neglected meeting their classes, unless they seriously promise to meet them for the time to come. You cannot be too exact in this. You do well likewise to exhort all the believers that are in earnest or would be in earnest to meet in band. But the bands in every place need continual instruction; for they are continually flying in pieces. [See letter of Jan. 6, 1781] But the grand means of the revival of the work of God in Sheffield [Jackson was Assistant there.] was the prayer-meetings. There were then twelve of them in various parts of the town every Sunday night. Keep up these, and you will keep up the flame. -- I am, with love to Sister Jackson, dear Edward,

Your affectionate friend and brother. To Mr. Jackson, At the Preaching-house, In Sheffield.

To William Stephens [21]

LONDON, October 31, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You do well to write without disguise. Otherwise I should not be able to judge. As you state the matter I cannot but agree with you that you are called to marry. But 'tis pity that you had not told me these things as plainly before the Conference. Then I could have made the way plain for you which now will be attended with some difficulty. -- I am, dear Billy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Will. Stephens, At the Preaching-house,

In Cardiff.

To John Valton

LONDON, October 31, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Whoever they were written by the rules are excellent rules; and I should have no objection to your printing them in the manner you mention. One thing is certain, that it would be some advantage to the poor printer; and it is probable that the rules would be useful to a serious reader.

I think if you used decoction of nettles every morning (if you have not done it already) it might restore your strength. --I am, with love to Sister Valton,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Peter Mill [22]

[October 1788.]

DEAR PETER, -- Alter that vile plan of yours so that the poor people at [Haworth] may have preaching every Sunday morning at nine; and put down the chanting at Shields; and show that you regard

Your affectionate friend and brother.

 

 

To Thomas Carlill [23]

[Noveraber 1788.]

DEAR TOMMY, -- We have suffered much inconvenience by taking in more preachers than we were able to keep, or indeed to employ, without their staying in one place longer than was good either for them or for the people. And this is a wrong time of year to send out young preachers, especially into the fens of Lincolnshire. You must therefore make the best shift that you can till towards spring.

I am glad to hear that you go on in love and peace with each other.

All our brethren should pray fervently and continually for the King. Nothing but the mighty power of God can restore him. -- I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

 

 

To Peter Mill [24]

LONDON, November [3 or 4], 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- My humor was as much out of the question as my stature. My objection to the chanting the Psalms was, we have no such thing among the Methodists. But when I was informed they were not the reading Psalms which were chanted but only the hymns in the morning and evening service, my objections of course fell to the ground. But as this little dispute is now at an end, there will be no need of saying any more, only that courtesy and brotherly love require it. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Adam Clarke [25]

LONDON, November 5, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER am always well pleased to hear from you. I am glad you visit Guernsey. You must in no wise confine yourself to Jersey. It would be a sin against God and the people. You ought not to spend more than twice as much time in Jersey as you do out of it. It would have been quite wrong to have made a collection for Dr. Coke at this critical time. The Doctor is often too hasty. He does not maturely consider all circumstances. If you have any money in your hands, you may expend what I subscribed and draw upon me for it. Probably at the Conference your sphere of action will be enlarged. I hope in the meantime you will not suffer Sister Clarke to be unemployed. See that she fulfill the office of a deaconess. Peace be with all your spirits! I think it will be well to sell the old chapel. [See letter of June 1, 1789.] -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Benjamin Rhodes

LONDON, November 6, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am glad to hear that Sister Rhodes begins to recover her strength. It has been observed for many years that some at Redruth were apt to despise and very willing to govern their preachers. But I commend you for standing in your place, and changing both general and particular stewards. [See letter of Jan. 7, 1789.]

The case of Rd. Phillips I refer wholly to you. But if his gifts be tolerable (as we at London thought), let him not be oppressed. [Benjamin Rhodes, Samuel Bardsley, and Richard Phillips (who had been admitted on trial at the London Conference in August) were appointed at Redruth.] -- I am, with love to Sister Rhodes,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To John Blunt [26]

CITY ROAD, November 7, 1788.

BROTHER BLUNT, -- I am constrained to tell you you use me ill. Be you ever so great a man and I ever so little, you owe it to me to give me an account at the stated times of those souls I have entrusted you with, for whom I am to give an account to God.

Now I am speaking (perhaps the last time), friendship compels me to speak plain. Of all the men I have conversed with in London or in England, I think you have the most pride, you are above measure self-conceited and full of yourself. Whereas you are by no means equal even in sense to those whom you despise -- Mr. Bradbum, Moore and John Edwards, for instance. Their natural understanding is stronger than yours, and is likewise far better improved.

O humble yourself before God and man! Despise no man but yourself! Learn to say from your heart, 'Lord, I am not high-minded! I have no proud looks!' Then you will give as much pleasure as you have frequently given pain to

Your affectionate brother.

 

 

To Robert Carr Brackenbury

LONDON, November 7, 1788.

DEAR SIR, -- I snatch a few minutes from visiting the classes to answer your acceptable letter. I exceedingly approve of your spending the winter at Bath. [Brackenbury's health was poor, and he finally retired from the Channel Islands in 1789. See letter of Sept. 15, 1790.] I believe God will make you of use to many there, who are more ripe for your instructions than ever they were before. And I am persuaded you will yourself profit as much if not more by the conversation of a few in Bristol, Mr. Valton and Miss Johnson [See letter of Dec. 12, 1786.] in particular, as by that of any persons in Great Britain. Aim at the cheerfulness of faith. -- I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Charles Bland [27]

LONDON, November 8, 1788.

DEAR CHARLES, -- The Notes on the New Testament and the Appeals will come with the next Oxford Magazines. If you all exert yourselves, the work of God will prosper throughout the circuit. I pray remember two things; first, Bear with Mr. Jaquis: there is honesty at the bottom. Secondly, let none of you ever omit the morning preaching at Wycombe, Oxford, or Witney. -- I am, dear Charles,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. C. Bland, At the Preaching-

house, In High Wycombe.

To Jasper Winscom

LONDON, November 8, 1788.

DEAR JASPER, -- William Cashman [Probably William Ashman, who was now at Tiverton. See letter of Oct. 23, 1786.] advised you like an heathen. Mr. Valton deserves pay as well as you do. [Valton was now a supernumerary at Bristol, and was able to accept invitations to preach in other circuits. See Wesley's Veterans, vi. 104.] But he does not want it, and therefore scorns to take it, knowing the poverty of the land.

I am glad to hear so good an account of the isle. The work of God will flourish there if it be steadily pursued. No preacher ought to stay either at Portsmouth, or Sarum, or any other place a whole week together. That is not the Methodist plan at all. It is a novel abuse.

I hope you have finished the matter with the attorney [See letter of Sept. 30.]; and am, dear Jasper,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Jasper Winscorn, At the

Preaching-house, Near Sarum.

To William Smith [28]

LONDON, November [10], 1788.

DEAR BILLY, -- How is this Do you owe E. Coates money, or does he owe you money, that you will not break off with that rogue, that knave that is cheating me out of my property I insist upon your never darkening his doors more, or renounce all connection with your brother John Wesley. And at the same time give positive orders for the preachers to be withdrawn from Millbourn Place.

 

 

To Mrs. Crosby

LAMBETH, November 13, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I thank you for your account of the death of Miss Corkle, which is highly remarkable. It ought not to be hid under a bushel; so I shall order it to be inserted in the Magazine.

It is very remarkable that, as Brother Peacock has been growing in grace for some years, so God has been increasing his gifts and has been giving him more and more favor among the people to whom he was sent. I know no reason why he may not spend another year at Leeds.

I have had more pain (chiefly rheumatical) within these few months than I had for forty years before, and in September my strength swiftly decayed. But it has pleased God now to restore it, and I am nearly as I was twenty years ago. Probably, if I live, I shall see you at Leeds in summer. Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am, my dear sister,

Your ever affectionate brother.

 

 

To Joseph Taylor

LONDON, November 16, 1788.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- I take knowledge of your spirit, and believe it is your desire to do all things right. Our friends at Newark should not have forgotten that we have determined over and over 'not to leave the Church.' Before they had given you that foolish advice they should have consulted me. I desire you would not wear the surplice nor administer the Lord's supper any more. [Taylor had been ordained for Scotland. See letters of Nov. 11 1786, and Feb. 11 1789, to him.] -- I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Edward Coates

LONDON, December 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I have all my life been a lover of peace, and am not less so now than I was fifty years ago. Therefore, as to warm words spoken to you or any other, let them pass; they are not worth rehearsing. There is only one charge which is of consequence, that you will not settle the house on the Methodist plan. This is exactly the case of the Dewsbury house; and if you persist in the resolution, you will constrain us to proceed in the same manner. [See letters of November 1788 to William Smith, and April 11, 1789, to Peter Mill.] -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Henry Moore

CHATHAM, December 2, 1788.

DEAR HENRY, -- You will seal and put Mr. A. G----'s [Name illegible.] letter into the post. And pray write strongly to Dr. Coke, begging him to beware of being imposed upon again, as it is plain he has been hitherto. Remind him also that he and I took Mr. Heath from his livelihood, and (whether he has behaved well or ill) are obliged in honor and in conscience to bring him home. I will give fifty pounds towards it. [See letters of Oct. 20, 1788, and June 26, 1789.] Tell him of 'Caesar and Pompey.' -- I am, dear Henry,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

Direct to Dr. Coke, Charleston, South Carolina.

To Walter Churchey [29]

LONDON, December 6, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am glad you wrote to poor Mr. Henderson: for certainly he stands in great need of comfort; and he must now needs seek it in God, for all other streams are cut off.

I cannot learn anything concerning the manner of John Henderson's death, whether it was with or without hope; as I cannot find that any of his religious friends were near him at that important season.

The Methodists in general have very little taste for any poems but those of a religious or a moral kind; and my brother has amply provided them with these. Besides those that are already printed, I have six volumes of his poems in manuscript. However, if you furnish me with the proposals, I will do you what little service I can.

I should be glad to see or hear from Mr. Cowper [See letters of Sept. 27, 1788, and Feb. 22, 1791.]; but I have no means of access to him at all. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Peter Mill

LONDON, December 20, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- It does not appear to me that you have taken any wrong step with regard to North Shields. I think (as you do) that our friend whom you mention is prejudiced in favor of those warm men. As to T. Gibson, you are a little prejudiced against him. He is not a turbulent man. But he sees blots, and would fain cure them if he could. I pray, talk with him alone. You do not know him. However, for the present, the General Stewards may stand as they are. But see that they do their duty.--I am, with love to Sister Mill, dear Peter,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Mill, At the Orphan House,

Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

To Mrs. Charles Wesley

CITY ROAD, December 21, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- It is undoubtedly true that some silly people (whether in the Society or not, I cannot tell) have frequently talked in that manner both of my brother and me. They have said that we were well paid for our labors. And, indeed, so we were; but not by man. Yet this is no more than we were to expect, especially from busybodies in other men's matters. And it is no more possible to restrain their tongues than it is to bind up the wind. But it is sufficient for us that our own consciences condemned us not and that our record is with the Most High.

What has concerned me more than this idle slander is a trial of another kind. I supposed, when John Atlay left me, that he had left me one or two hundred pounds beforehand. [See letter of Sept. 4.] On the contrary, I am one or two hundred pounds behindhand, and shall not recover myself till after Christmas. Some of the first moneys I receive I shall set apart for you. And in everything that is in my power you may depend upon the willing assistance of, [His Diary for 1788 shows that he gave 210 to his brother's family and 81 10s. to Mrs. Hall and his nieces. See Journal, vii. 464; and letter of Dec. 20, 1790.] dear Sally,

Your affectionate friend and Brother.

To Sarah Mallet

LONDON, December 26, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I answered your letter long ago, and desired Mr. Whitfield to send my letter with the Magazines which he was sending to Norwich, desiring withal that the next preacher who went to Long Stratton would give it you. But for the time to come whenever I write I will send the letter by post, and I can easily make up the expense. [He had given it to his Book Steward to be forwarded, so that Miss Mallet might not be put to expense, as she was poor. See letters of Aug. 2, 1788, and Feb. 21, 1789, to her.]

I am well pleased to find that you have regard for me; so have I for you. And it is therefore a pleasure to me to serve you in anything that is within my power. Indeed, I could not so well send the Notes on the Old Testament, as the edition is nearly sold off, and we have very few of them left, which are reserved to make up full sets. But any other books are at your service. I want to forward you in all useful knowledge, which indeed lies in a very narrow compass. You do not expect to go through life without crosses; and some will fall upon you on my account; for my taking notice of you may bring envy upon you. But in your patience possess your soul. Please God, and it is enough. Go steadily and quietly on in the way wherein Providence leads you, and in every temptation He by His Spirit will clear a way for you to escape. If any particular difficulty or trim comes upon you, do not fail to let me know. None can be more ready to assist you than, my dear Sally,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Cock

LONDON, December 27, 1788.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I was glad to receive a few lines from you. From the time I saw you first, and indeed before I saw you, I could not but feel a strong affection for you. And I pray that nothing may abate our affection for each other till we meet in a better world.

When I heard of your marriage it gave me pain. I was afraid least you should have suffered loss. [See letter of Oct. 12.] Do you feel as much union with God as ever As close fellowship with the Father and the Son And is it as constant as ever Are you as happy as you was once And do you ever think of, my dear Jenny,

Your affectionate brother