1778

THREE CROWDED YEARS JANUARY 6, 1780, To MARCH 12, 1780

To Mr. -- [1]

[1780.]

DEAR BROTHER, - -You are indeed out of your place, for you are reasoning when you ought to be praying. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Rose [2]

MY DEAR SISTER, - It has pleased God to prove you for many years in the furnace of affliction. But He has always been with you in the fire, that you might be purified, not consumed. You have therefore good reason to trust Him. Do not reason, but believe! Hang upon Him as a little child, and your eyes shall see His full salvation. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Eliz. Rose, in Sheffield.

To Thomas Carlill

LONDON, January 6, 1780.

DEAR TOMMY, - I have received a very good letter from William Gill, [Gill had been received on trial in 1778. His name does not appear on the Minutes for 1780. See letter of March 2, 1782.] who does not seem to have been much to blame. I therefore leave him entirely to you. You may employ him either as a local or a traveling preacher. I hope he will be useful; and am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Carlill, At Mrs. Cumberland's,

Near Lisburn, Ireland.

To William Church

LONDON, January 6, 1780.

DEAR BILLY, - Every quarter you are to send me a plan of your circuits. Then we can see whether we increase or decrease. Be watchful! Be zealous! Then you will save both your own soul and them that hear you. I send you a draught on Mr. Pawson. [Mrs. Church received her maintenance from the Society at Bristol, of which Pawson was Assistant in 1780. The rest of the letter was cut off and given away as an autograph.] . . .

To Mr. Will. Church, at Mr. John

Church's, In Brecon.

To the Printer of the 'Public Advertiser' [3]

CITY ROAD, January 12, 1780.

SIR, - Some time ago a pamphlet was sent me entitled An Appeal from the Protestant Association to the People of Great Britain. A day or two since, a kind of answer to this was put into my hand, which pronounces 'its style contemptible, its reasoning futile, and its object malicious.' On the contrary, I think the style of it is clear, easy, and natural; the reasoning, in general, strong and conclusive; the object, or design, kind and benevolent. And in pursuance of the same kind and benevolent design, namely, to preserve our happy constitution, I shall endeavor to confirm the substance of that tract by a few plain arguments.

With persecution I have nothing to do. I persecute no man for his religious principles. Let there be 'as boundless a freedom in religion' as any man can conceive. But this does not touch the point; I will set religion, true or false, utterly out of the question. Suppose the Bible, if you please, to be a fable, and the Koran to be the word of God. I consider not whether the Romish religion be true or false; I build nothing on one or the other supposition. Therefore away with all your commonplace declamation about intolerance and persecution in religion! Suppose every word of Pope Pius's Creed to be true; suppose the Council of Trent to have been infallible; yet I insist upon it that no Government not Roman Catholic ought to tolerate men of the Roman Catholic persuasion.

I prove this by a plain argument (let him answer it that can). That no Roman Catholic does or can give security for his allegiance or peaceable behavior I prove thus: It is a Roman Catholic maxim, established not by private men but by a public council, that 'no faith is to be kept with heretics.' This has been openly avowed by the Council of Constance; but it never was openly disclaimed. Whether private persons avow or disavow it, it is a fixed maxim of the Church of Rome. But as long as it is so, nothing can be more plain than that the members of that Church can give no reasonable security to any Government of their allegiance or peaceable behavior. Therefore they ought not to be tolerated by any Government, Protestant, Mahometan, or Pagan.

You may say, 'Nay, but they will take an oath of allegiance.' True, five hundred oaths; but the maxim 'No faith is to be kept with heretics' sweeps them all away as a spider's web. So that still, no Governors that are not Roman Catholics can have any security of their allegiance.

Again, those who acknowledge the spiritual power of the Pope can give no .security of their allegiance to any Government: but all Roman Catholics acknowledge this; therefore they can give no security for their allegiance.

The power of granting pardons for all sins, past, present, and to come, is, and has been for many centuries, one branch of his spiritual power. But those who acknowledge him to have this spiritual power can give no security for their allegiance; since they believe the Pope can pardon rebellions, high treasons, and all other sins whatsoever.

The power of dispensing with any promise, oath, or vow is another branch of the spiritual power of the Pope. And all who acknowledge his spiritual power must acknowledge this. But whoever acknowledges the dispensing power of the Pope can give no security for his allegiance to any Government. Oaths and promises are none; they are light as air; a dispensation makes them all null and void.

Nay, not only the Pope, but even a priest has power to pardon sins! This is an essential doctrine of the Church of Rome. But they that acknowledge this cannot possibly give any security for their allegiance to any Government. Oaths are no security at all; for the priest can pardon both perjury and high treason.

Setting, then, religion aside, it is plain that, upon principles of reason, no Government ought to tolerate men who cannot give any security to that Government for their allegiance and peaceable behavior. But this no Romanist can do, not only while he holds that 'no faith is to be kept with heretics,' but so long as he acknowledges either priestly absolution or the spiritual power of the Pope.

'But the late Act,' you say, 'does not either tolerate or encourage Roman Catholics.' I appeal to matter of fact. Do not the Romanists themselves understand it as a toleration You know they do. And does it not already (let alone what it may do by-and-by) encourage them to preach openly, to build chapels (at Bath and elsewhere), to raise seminaries, and to make numerous converts day by day to their intolerant, persecuting principles I can point out, if need be, several of the persons. And they are increasing daily.

But 'nothing dangerous to English liberty is to be apprehended from them.' I am not certain of that. Some time since, a Romish priest came to one I knew [Elizabeth Duchesne. See letter of Oct. 27, 1758.]; and, after talking with her largely, broke out, 'You are no heretic! You have the experience of a real Christian!' 'And would you,' she asked, 'burn me alive' He said, 'God forbid! unless it were for the good of the Church!'

Now, what security could she have had for her life, if it had depended on that man The good of the Church would have burst all the ties of truth, justice, and mercy; especially when seconded by the absolution of a priest, or (if need were) a papal pardon.

If any one please to answer this, and to set his name, I shall probably reply; but the productions of anonymous writers I do not promise to take any notice of. - I am, sir,

Your humble servant.

To Ann Bolton

LONDON, January 14, 1780.

If I could be angry at my dear Nancy for anything, I should be so for your not using me as a friend. If you believe me to be so, why do you not tell me without reserve when there is anything in which I can serve you You may judge by yourself whether this must not give me a particular satisfaction. So it always will if you suffer me to give you any assistance that is in my power.

What you speak of feeling the peace of God in the midst of the most exquisite sufferings does not surprise me at all. [See letter of Feb. 26 to her.] 'I feel my pains,' says Mr. De Renty, 'in all their extremity. But by the grace of God I give myself up to Him and not to them.' And again: 'I cannot say but my soul is deeply grieved at the sense of so great a loss; yet I feel such joy in that the will of the Lord is done, not that of a poor sinner, that, were it not for giving offence, I could dance and sing.'

I saw a stranger instance than either of these a few years ago. I saw exactly such distress in an human countenance as appears in the waxwork taken from the face of Cartouche [Louis Dominique Cartouche, head of a Paris band of robbers, broken on the wheel in 1721.] while he was breaking upon the wheel. In the morning I asked her, 'Was not you in great distress when I saw you last night' She answered, 'I was in such distress as was ready to tear my soul and body asunder; and yet at that very time I was as happy as I could well be out of heaven.' I do not wonder, therefore, that all the trials you feel do not interrupt the peace of God. They never need. His grace is sufficient to keep you in and to deliver you out of all temptations. And the unction of the Holy One which abideth with you shall guide you from time to time and enable you to east back upon his own head all the fiery darts of the wicked one.

Love me still, my dear Nancy, and know me to be

Yours invariably.

To Abraham Brames

LONDON, January 16, 1780.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - You have done exceeding well in setting that little collection on foot. [See letter of Dec. 12, 1779.] I trust it will be productive of much good. On February 6 you may expect a preacher from hence. Tell the traveling preachers whatever you think or hear concerning them, if you love either them or

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Abr. Brames, At the Preaching.

house, In Rochester.

To Lancelot Harrison [4]

LONDON, January 16, 1780.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I perceive many in your circuit do not know our Rules. You should immediately read them in every Society, and receive no new member till he has read them. Let all know what they are about.

A Plan of a Circuit should contain (1) the several Societies, (2) the number of members in each, (3) the new members, (4) the backsliders, (5) the persons in band. Then the conversions, deaths, marriages, removes, with the total number at the foot of each column. Let me have such a plan next quarter. [See letter of Feb. 16.]

You did well to recommend the Hymn-Books, and you will do still better in taking every opportunity of recommending the Magazine. [See letter of Jan. 29.]

Be zealous! Be active! Stir up the gift of God that is in you! - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. L. Harrison, At Dr. Kershaw's,

In Gainsborough, Lincolnshire.

To Thomas Taylor () [5]

LONDON, January [18], 1780.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - You seem to me not to have well considered the Rules of an Helper or the rise of Methodism. It pleased God by me to awaken, first my brother, and then a few others; who severally desired of me as a favor that I would direct them in all things. After my return from Georgia many were both awakened and converted to God. One and another and another of these desired to join with me as sons in the gospel, to be directed by me. I drew up a few plain rules (observe, there was no Conference in being!), and permitted them to join me on these conditions. Whoever, therefore, violates the conditions, particularly that of being directed by me in the work, does ipso facto disjoin himself from me. This Brother M'Nab has done (but he cannot see that he has done amiss); and he would have it a common cause-that is, he would have all the preachers do the same. He thinks 'they have a right so to do.' So they have. They have a right to disjoin themselves from me whenever they please. But they cannot, in the nature of the thing, join with me any longer than they are directed by me. And what if fifty of the present preachers disjoined themselves! What should I lose thereby Only a great deal of labor and care, which I do not seek, but endure, because no one else either can or will.

You seem likewise to have quite a wrong idea of a Conference. For above six years after my return to England there was no such thing. I then desired some of our preachers to meet me, in order to advise, not control me. And you may observe they had no power at all but what I exercised through them. I chose to exercise the power which God had given me in this manner, both to avoid ostentation and gently to habituate the people to obey them when I should be taken from their head. But as long as I remain with them the fundamental rule of Methodism remains inviolate. As long as any preacher joins with me he is to be directed by me in his work. Do not you see, then, that Brother M'Nab, whatever his intentions might be, acted as wrong as wrong could be and that the representing of this as the common cause of the preachers was the way to common destruction, the way to turn all their heads and to set them in arms It was a blow at the very root of Methodism. I could not therefore do less than I did; it was the very least that could be done, for fear that evil should spread.

I do not willingly speak of these things at all; but I do it now out of necessity, because I perceive the mind of you and some others is a little hurt by not seeing them in a true light. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Crosby

LONDON, January 20, 1780.

MY DEAR SISTER,-I should really imagine that the having more exercise than usual would increase rather than impair your health. This is the effect which it has had on all that traveled with me through north Britain.

The very richest of our brethren here do not conform to the world in dress. Our sisters do, and their daughters much more. I am often in doubt whether I should suffer them to remain in our Society

Well meaning S[ister] Ryan greatly labored to pull you down when you first went to Latonstone. It would not have been strange if that had thrown you into many doubts and fears, as you believed her to be holier than yourself, and a better judge of spiritual things. I know she by this means unsettled several, who had tasted of the pure Love of God. [See letters of Dec. 3, 1769, June 28 and Sept. 12, 1766.]

It is my design, if God continues my health and strength, tc go over to Ireland this spring. You will probably see me in autumn if I live. - I am, dear Sally,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Crosby. At

Mrs. Haigh's, In Halifax,

Yorkshire.

To Robert Carr Brackenbury [6]

LONDON, January 23, 1780.

DEAR SIR,-I am glad that it has pleased God to restore your health, and that you have been employing it to the best of purposes. It is worth living for this (and scarcely for anything else), to testify the gospel of the grace of God. You will find many in these parts who have ears and hearts to receive even the deep things of God. I believe a journey to Ireland will be of use to your soul and body. Meet me at --, and we can settle our journeys. - I am, dear sir,

Your very affectionate friend and brother.

To Alexander Knox

NEAR LONDON, January 28, 1780.

DEAR ALLECK, - It will certainly be worth your while to make a trial of that mineral water; it is highly probable God will make it a means of lessening if not removing your bodily disorder. That this is in a considerable degree scorbutic I cannot make any question; as one almost constant symptom of the scurvy is a great depression of the spirits.... I cannot advise you in the meantime to shut yourself up at home; it is neither good for your body nor your mind. You cannot possibly have bodily health without daily exercise in the open air; and you have no reason to expect the spirit of an healthful mind unless you use the means that God has ordained. You well know faith cometh by hearing; I should therefore advise you to lose no opportunity of hearing, and trust God with the event. You are not likely to be in a more uncomfortable state than you are already. And which is the greater evil of the two, even supposing the worst Certainly your having two fits is a less evil than your losing fifty precious opportunities. O break through that fear, which is a mere snare of the devil. I commend you and yours to Him that is ready to save you in soul and body; and am, dear Alleck,

Yours affectionately.

To William Tunney

LONDON, January 29, 1780.

DEAR BILLY, - You have done well with regard to the Hymn-Book. But in the meantime do not forget the Magazine. [See letter of Jan. 16 to Lancelot Harrison.] Take every opportunity of strongly recommending this both in public and in private.

All we can do is, we will have no smugglers in our Societies [See letter of March 21, 1784.]; and I think Brother Condy will convince many of them of the advantage of meeting in band. [William Tunney (who desisted from traveling in 1781) and Richard Condy were colleagues in Cornwall East.]

O watch and pray, that you enter not into temptation! - I am, dear Billy,

Yours affectionately.

To Samuel Bardsley

LONDON, January 30, 1780.

DEAR SAMMY, - I am glad to hear that your people love one another: then neither Mr. -- nor Mr. -- can hurt them. They may make a bustle and a noise for a season; but it will be only a nine days' wonder. If you take up your cross, and visit all the Societies, whenever you have time, from house to house, their profiting will appear to all men; and none will be able to stand against you. Take a little pains likewise, both Brother Shadford [George Shadford, his superintendent at Norwich.] and you, in recommending the Magazine. Urge it from love to me and to the preachers; and whatever you do do it with your might. - I am, dear Sammy,

Yours affectionately.

PS.-Everywhere exhort the believers to expect full salvation now by simple faith.

To Penelope Newman

LONDON, February 2, 1780.

MY DEAR SISTER, - Honest Richard Condy was frightened out of his senses; and it is no wonder that he frightened others. There was just as much danger of our clergymen overbearing the laymen as of their eating them up. But all this hurry sprang from Alexander M'Nab. He let out the water; and who shall gather it up

Take care you do not kill John Valton [Valton was at Bristol. See Wesley's Veterans, vi. 78; and for M'Nab, letter of Jan. 18.] I You know he is continually striving to do more than he can do. I suppose he is somewhere in your circuit; but he did not tell me where: so that I do not know how to direct to him. I am a letter in his debt.

You forgot I do not visit our Societies this year. I only touch here and there on my way to Ireland. On Monday, March 13, I hope to be at Stroud, and afterwards to call at Tewkesbury, Worcester, Evesham, and Broadmarston. This is all I can do at present. - I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss P. Newman, Cheltenham,

Gloucester.

To John Valton

LONDON, February 9, 1780.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - From that ill-advised step of poor Brother M'Nab a smoke had issued from the bottomless pit, which darkened and has bled the minds of many as well as yours, and filled them with needless doubts and fears. I am glad you are now emerged out of that darkness, and hope you will feel it no more. I am in hope likewise that those at Bath who deeply sinned on the occasion have now humbled themselves before God; and I trust He will enable you to do far more good than you have done yet at Bath as well as at Bristol. I hope to be at Bath on Tuesday the 29th instant and at Bristol a day or two after. But I cannot and dare not suffer them to be leaders any longer who will not deign to attend the preaching. On Monday, March 13, I expect to be at Stroud; on Tuesday noon at Tewkesbury, Tuesday evening Worcester. Take care you do not preach more than your health allows.

You must not offer murder for sacrifice. Pray give my kind love to Sister Newman, whom I thank for her letter, and hope to see at Stroud or Tewkesbury if it be convenient for her. - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

Why should you not give me a short account of the life of John Valton [See letter of April 21.]!

To Mr. Valton, At Mr. Lewty's,

In Leech Street, Worcester.

To Christopher Hopper

NEAR LONDON, February 16, 1780.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I do not know that there is any matter of dispute between us, unless it be whether you should do what I desire or no. You are Assistant in Colne Circuit. I desire you to send me a plan of the circuit: you send me an answer, but without the plan. I write again: you send a second answer, telling me you have been very diligent for many years; and that you was the very person who introduced plans among us. Very good; but you send me no plan still, and till this comes everything else is wide of the mark. [See letters of Jan. 16 (to Lancelot Harrison) and Dec. 31.] - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

Why should not you write an account of your life [Hopper lost no time. His autobiography appeared in the Arminian Mag. for Jan.-March 1781. See Wesley's Veterans, i. 107-74.]

Isaac Waldron, T. Lee, W. Brammah, &c. &c., were not 'strong and able men.' When any such obtrude themselves for easy circuits, speak at that time, and you do something.

Mr. Hopper, At the Preaching-house,

In Colne, Lancashire.

To Hannah Ball

DORKING, February 17, 1780.

MY DEAR SISTER, - There is nothing strange in a particular union of spirit between two persons who truly fear God. [She had lost her old friend Samuel Wells. See heading to letter of Feb. 24, 1779, to her.] It is not at all uncommon: within few years I have known many instances of the kind. And I see not any reason why this union should be destroyed by death: I cannot conceive it is. I have myself, since her death, found a wonderful union of spirit with Fanny Cooper [Miss Cooper, whom Wesley went to see at Donnington Park in 1742. See letter of May 17 of that year.]; and have sometimes suddenly looked on one or the other side, not knowing whether I should not see her. So you may remember Mr. De Renty says to his friends, 'To die is not to be lost: our union with each other shall hereafter be more complete than it can be here.' And I have heard my mother say that she had many times been 'as sensible of the presence of the spirit of my grandfather as she could have been if she had seen him standing before her face.'

So Mr. Hawes is gone: I hope in peace! Let us also be ready! - I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Elizabeth Morgan

LONDON, February 20, 1780.

MY DEAR MISS MORGAN, - As I know not when you have been so much upon my mind as for a day or two past, I was agreeably surprised last night at opening a letter and seeing your name. [See letters of Jan. x7, 1779, and March 13, 1781.] It is on Monday the 28th instant I purpose, if God permit, to set out from here. One day I expect to spend at Bath; and on Thursday, March z, to be at Bristol. The next morning, at eleven, if it be convenient for you, I will wait upon you. On Monday, March 13, I am to set out for Ireland. Before that time, as you are a ready learner, I may probably be able to give you all the assistance you will want in order to the understanding that little tract. And I am persuaded, whatever knowledge you acquire, you will endeavor to apply it to the noblest purposes. O let this be your continual care, to grow in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ and to recover that whole image of God wherein you was created! If I can in any degree assist you in this, it will be an unspeakable pleasure to, my dear Miss Morgan,

Yours most affectionately.

Miss Morgan, At Waiter King's, Esq.,

At Marsh, near Bristol.

To William Strahan

CITY ROAD, February 21, 1780.

DEAR SIR, - I want to disperse among the French prisoners fifteen hundred of the tract which I send by Mr. Olivers. Shall I beg it may be printed as soon as convenient I must likewise desire of you to advise Mr. Olivers in a little affair which he is engaged in. - I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate servant.

To Mr. William Strahan.

To Ann Bolton

LONDON, February 26, 1780.

MY DEAR NANCY, - Have you forgotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as unto children,-Despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of Him Can anything possibly occur wherein we may not say, 'This is the Lord; let Him do what seemeth Him good' In every circumstance we may adopt our Lord's words, 'The cup which My Father hath given Me, shall I not drink it' In your patience possess your soul. Watch against all unprofitable reasonings. Hold that fast, whatever instruments are employed, - Sufferings are the gift of God to you! [See letters of Jan. 14 and June 22.] And they are all intended for your profit, that you may be a partaker of His holiness.

I believe volatile tincture of guaiacum would ease the pain in your face. I do not remember if I mentioned it before or no. Drop a teaspoonful on a lump of sugar, and take this in a glass of fair water four times a day. But it would be likewise well to steep your feet in warm water for some minutes before you go to bed.

On Monday next I am to set out for Bristol. On Monday fortnight, March 13, I hope to be at Stroud. If it be possible, let me see you there.

No person will be more welcome to, dear Nancy,

Yours most affectionately.

To Samuel Bradburn

LONDON, February 26, 1780.

DEAR SAMMY, - I think you have reason to be exceeding thankful for an honest and sensible fellow laborer. [John Bredin was his colleague at Cork. See letter of Nov. 9, 1779, to him.] The good fruit of it appears already in your deliverance from that troublesome man. If your opponents cannot provoke you to return evil for evil, they can do you no harm. In patience possess ye your soul, and all those things shall work together for good.

I hope to be in Dublin about the end of March, [He did not get there till April 13, I783.] and probably in Cork before the middle of May. If you are at Bristol by-and-by (to which I have no great objection), we must hire a lodging for you near the room. [See letter of April 2.] Peace be with your spirits! - I am, with kind love to Betsy, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Crosby

BRISTOL, March 3, 1780.

MY DEAR SISTER, - You did well to stay with Mrs. Swaine in her distress, and you certainly cannot leave her till she returns to her father. I wish Mr. Mather would immediately appoint a Women's Class at Halifax. Many persons would meet with a woman leader, who will not meet with a man.

Here and in London I have visited the Classes myself, and I do not know that I have given a band-ticket to any one who does not observe the rules of the band. That respecting Raffles in particular, I wish Mr. Mather would do just as I do herein.

Sister Briscoe is a good leader, either for a band or a class. On Monday s'ennight I am to set out hence for Ireland. Peace be with all your spirits! - I am, dear Sally,

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Wride [7]

BRISTOL, March 9, 1780.

DEAR TOMMY, - I take nothing ill that is meant well. Therefore I take nothing amiss in your letter, because I am fully persuaded you mean well even where you judge ill. Part of what you say I believe, part I do not. But I know you patently believe it. Still, however, you must think and let think. I must act by my own conscience, not yours. And I really have a conscience. And I labor to have a conscience void of offence toward God and toward man. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To William Church

BRISTOL, March 12, 1780. DEAR BILLY, - You should be thoroughly satisfied that the person at Neath whom you speak of lives in no known sin. If you are, you may safely readmit him into the Society.

Probably I shall cross over to Dublin from Liverpool about the end of this month. [See letter of Feb. 26.] You may send the plan of the next quarter to Bristol. - I am, dear Billy,

Yours affectionately.

To Mr. Will. Church, At Mr. John Evans',

In Cowbridge, Glamorganshire:

To William Sagar [8]

BRISTOL, March 12, 1780.

MY DEAR BROTHER,-To-morrow morning I am to set [forth] from hence. I expect to be in Manchester on Good Friday, at Bolton on Easter Eve, at Warrington on Easter Day, at Liverpool on Easter Monday. If I go to Ireland (concerning which I am not fully determined), I shall then set sail as soon as possible. If I do not, I shall have time to visit our friends at Colne, which would give me a particular satisfaction.

If we are zealous and active, our Societies will increase; otherwise they will molder away. - I am

Your affectionate brother.