1779

To Mr. -- [1]

LONDON, January 4, 1779.

SIR, - In September last a gentleman near Bristol showed me a letter which he had received from the Rev. Mr. Fletcher at Paris. I desired him to give a transcript of one part of it, which he immediately did. It was as follows:

Mr. Voltaire sent for Mons. Tonchin, first physician to the Duke of Orleans (one of his converts to infidelity), and said to him, 'Sir, I desire you will save my life. I will give you half my fortune if you will lengthen out my days only six months. If not, I shall go to the devil and carry you with me.'

This is the man to whom a crowned head pays such a violent compliment! Nay, this is the man whose works are now publishing by a divine of our own Church; yea, a chaplain to His Majesty! Pity but the King should know it!

I set my name at length on purpose; and if the publisher of that poor wretch's works writes a panegyric upon him or them, I shall think it my duty to go a little farther and show the real value of those writings. - I am, sir,

Your humble servant.

To the Society at Keighley [2]

LONDON, January 11, 1779.

I have a few questions which I desire may be proposed to the Society at Keighley.

Who was the occasion of the Methodist preachers first setting foot in Leeds William Shent.

Who received John Nelson into his house at his first coming thither William Shent.

Who was it that invited me and received me when I came William Shent.

Who was it that stood by me while I preached in the street with stones flying on every side Williaam Shent.

Who was it that bore the storm of persecution for the whole town and stemmed it at the peril of his life William Shent.

Whose word did God bless for many years in an eminent manner William Shent's.

By whom were many children now in paradise begotten in the Lord and many now alive William Shent.

Who is he that is ready now to be broken up and turned into the street William Shent.

And does nobody care for this William Shent fell into sin and was publicly expelled the Society; but must he be also starved Must he with his grey hairs and all his children be without a place to lay his head Can you suffer this O tell it not in Gath! Where is gratitude Where is compassion Where is Christianity Where is humanity Where is concern for the cause of God Who is a wise man among you Who is concerned for the gospel Who has put on bowels of mercy Let him arise and exert himself in this matter. You here all arise as one man and roll away the reproach. Let us set him on his feet once more. It may save both him and his family. But what we do, let it be done quickly. - I am, dear brethren,

Your affectionate brother.

To Kitty Warren

LONDON, January 14, 1779.

MY DEAR SISTER, - Let poor Charles Maund's follies die and be forgotten! It is well you have no more to do with him. It seems to me the great sin you (the Society) are now guilty of is poverty. And though you do repent of it, you do not forsake it. The question is, By what means can you either lessen your expense or increase your income We are here at our wits' end how to pay for the new chapel, as many of our workmen are unpaid still. For riches the Calvinists beat us altogether. However, by-and-by we must help you as we can. Trust in God, and all will be well! Grace and peace be with you! - I am, my dear Kitty,

Yours in tender affection.

To Jasper Winscom

LONDON, January 14, 1779.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - Ours are traveling preachers; therefore I can never consent that any of them should remain for a month together in the island. [The Isle of Wight.] If you can contrive that the additional preacher have full employment, then we can inquire where one can be found.

It seems to me that you take the matter exactly right with regard to the Portsmouth preaching-house, and that the only thing to be done is to get the mortgage out of Mr. Pike's hands. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Elizabeth Morgan [3]

LONDON, January 17, 1779.

It gives me much pleasure to hear that my dear Miss Morgan is still studious of redeeming the time, and that you have had so fair an opportunity of improving it while you were absent from Bristol.

I was indeed full of fears concerning you lest you should be less usefully employed than you might. But the account you give me of the help provided for you in your retirement has dispelled my fears, and I have a strong hope you will improve to the uttermost all the talents which God has entrusted you with.

But on how slippery ground do you tread I It is unquestionably your duty to cultivate your understanding in the best manner you are able. And yet how difficult is it to do this without either thinking of yourself more highly than you ought to think, or laying too great a stress upon knowledge, as if it is a road upon a level with love. We allow it is of great value in its place - that is, in subordination to holiness as the handmaid of love. But still, I trust your heart says:

To love is all my wish!

I only live for this!

To this let everything minister! This one thing let us do! Let us follow after pure and spotless love!

What a blessing is it that God has given you a measure of it already! But does not your soul cry out, -

A glimpse of love cannot suffice;

My soul for all Thy presence cries

That He may give you an whole desire is the continual wish of, my dear Miss Morgan,

Yours most affectionately.

To Miss Morgan, At Miss Chapman's, In Caroline Court, Bristol.

To George Gidley [4]

LONDON, January 25, 1779.

MY DEAR BROTHER, Any house is ipso facto licensed, if the demand is made either at the Bishop's Court, the Assizes, or the Quarter Sessions. The Act of Parliament licenses, not the Justices; they can neither grant nor refuse. If you have witnesses, your house is licensed: you need trouble the Sessions no farther. If they trouble you, the Lord Chief Justice will do you right. You should mildly and respectfully tell them so. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

PS. - I have wrote to the Chancellor, and hope he will trouble you no more.

To Samuel Wells

LONDON, January 18, 1779.

DEAR SAMMY, - According to the Act of Toleration, - 1. You are required to certify to the Registrar of the Bishop's Court or the Justices the place of your meeting for divine worship. This is all you have to do. You ask nothing at all of the Bishop or Justices. 2. The Registrar or Clerk of the Court is 'required to register the same, and to give a certificate thereof to such persons as shall demand the same; for which there shall be no greater fee or reward taken than sixpence.'

I advise you to go once more to the Sessions, and say, 'Gentlemen, we have had advice from London: we desire nothing at all of you; but we demand of your clerk to register this place and to give us a certificate thereof, or to answer the refusal at his peril.'

Answer no questions to justices or lawyers but with a bow, and with repeating the words, 'Our business is only with your clerk: we demand of him what the Act requires him to do.'

If you judge proper, you may show this to any of the Justices. [Wells was Assistant at Tiverton, to which circuit Exeter belonged.] What I have written, I am ready to defend.

PS. - You led the Justices into the mistake by your manner of addressing them. Beware of this for the time to come; you have nothing to ask of them.

To Mr. Samuel Wells, At Mr. Gidley's,

Officer of Excise, Exeter.

To Elizabeth Padbury

LONDON, February 10, 1779.

MY DEAR BETSY, - A letter from you is always agreeable. I feel a sincere affection for you; so much the more because you are free and unreserved, both when you write and when we converse together. I am glad you think of me when you do not see me. Distance need not be any bar to affection. It is good that you should be tenderly concerned for those of your own household; but so as always to hold that anchor fast, 'Not as I will, but as Thou wilt.' And you have great reason to hope that sooner or later prayer will prevail for them. But the time God has reserved in His own hand, and we know 'His manner and His time are best.'

Whether you have a longer or a shorter time to praise Him on earth is of no great moment. It is enough that you shall have an eternity to praise Him in heaven! Let this be ever in our eye! And never forget, my dear Betsy,

Yours most affectionately.

To Miss Padbury, At Whittlebury,

Near Towcester.

To Mrs. Barton

LONDON, February 11, 1779.

MY DEAR SISTER, - This is our comfort - that we know our Lord has all power in heaven and in earth; and that, whensoever He willeth to deliver, to do is present with Him. He did, indeed, very remarkably interpose in your behalf by raising up those friends in time of need. You have reason to praise Him, and you have reason to trust Him. He will withhold from you no manner of thing that is good.

I am glad to hear that at length there is likely to be a day of visitation even for poor Beverley. If you have two or three that are strong in faith, they will wrestle with God in mighty prayer and bring down a blessing on all that are round about them. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Charles Delamotte [5]

LONDON, February 11, 1779.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I am agreeably surprised with a letter from my old friend, whom I long desired to see; and how I missed of seeing you when I was last at Barrow I cannot yet comprehend.

It is very probable I shall have some more work to do with regard to that wretched infidel. For if Dr. Bealey, the publisher of his Works, prefixes to them a flaming panegyric, I shall think it my duty to deal exceeding plainly both with the author and the translator.

I am now in my seventy-sixth year, and am by the wonderful mercy of God in at least as good health as I was in my twenty-sixth, and in some respects better. So when it pleases Him

He bids the sun of life stand still

And stops the panting soul.

I am glad you speak a word to your brethren on behalf of our good Master. This is worth living for. - Believe me to be, as ever, dear Charles,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Delamotte, At Barrow, Near Barton, Lincolnshire.

To Hester Ann Roe

LONDON, February 11, 1779.

MY DEAR HETTY, - It is a great mercy that, on the one hand, you have previous warning of the trials that are at hand; and, on the other, are not careful about them, but only prep. ared to encounter them. We know, indeed, that these (as well as all things) are ordered by unerring Wisdom, and are given us exactly at the right time and in due number, weight, and measure. And they continue no longer than is best; for CHANCE has no share in the government of the world. [See letter of Aug. 12, 1731, to Mrs. Pendarves.] 'THE LORD REIGNETH,' and disposes all things strongly and sweetly for the good of them that love Him. I rejoice to hear that you have now less hindrances in the way and can oftener converse with His people. Be sure to improve every one of those precious opportunities of doing and receiving good.

I am often grieved to observe that, although on His part 'the gifts and calling of God are without repentance'; although He never repents of anything He has given us, but is willing to give it always; yet so very few retain the same ardor of affection which they receive either when they are justified or when they are (more fully) sanctified. Certainly they need not lose any part of their light or love. It may increase more and more. Of this you are a witness for God; and so is our dear Miss Ritchie. [See letter of Oct. 6, 1778, where the full assurance of hope is discussed.] You have not lost anything of what you have received; your light has never grown dim nor your love grown cold since the moment God first visited you with His great salvation. And I hope also you will ever retain the same affection for

Yours most tenderly.

To Elizabeth Ritchie

LONDON, February 12, 1779.

MY DEAR BETSY, - The remark of Luther 'that a revival of religion seldom continues above thirty years' has been verified many times in several countries. But it will not always hold. The present revival of religion in England has already continued fifty years. And, blessed be God, it is at least as likely to continue as it was twenty or thirty years ago. Indeed, it is far more likely; as it not only spreads wider but sinks deeper than ever, more and more persons being able to testify that the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin. We have therefore reason to hope that this revival of religion will continue, and continually increase, till the time when all Israel shall be saved and the fullness of the Gentiles shall come.

I have heard that Mr. [Maxfield] is in London, but have not heard where he is or what he does. [See letter of Feb. 14, 1778, to him.] As far as I can learn, he lives in the utmost privacy and does not preach at all. He seems to think that his present calling is to be an hermit in London.

Surely it is your wisdom to stand fast even in the outward liberty wherewith Christ has made you free. You are now happily disengaged from caring for the things of this world, and need only care for the things of the Lord, how you may be holy in body and spirit, and how you may promote His kingdom upon earth.

I have abundant proof that Baron Swedenborg's fever, which he had thirty years before he died, much affected his understanding. Yet his tract [Probably his Account of Heaven and Hell. See Journal, vi. 230.] is 'majestic, though in ruins.' He has strong and beautiful thoughts, and may be read with profit by a serious and cautious reader.

Some weeks since, I began another Journal, [The Eighteenth Part of the Journal (Jan. 1, 1776-Aug. 8, 1779) was issued in 1785.] and am going on with it when I have any scraps of time; probably it will be finished next month. I expect to visit Yorkshire this spring, when I hope to see you. [See her letter to Wesley in Arminian Mag., 1789, p. 105.] -I am

Yours affectionately.

To Samuel Bradburn

LONDON, February 13, 1779.

DEAR SAMMY, - You have done exactly right. Still be of neither side, but steadily follow after peace. I am glad Sister Jones remains in the House.

I desire you and my Betsy (love constrains me to call her so) will leave Cork by the middle of March at the farthest. I have sent to-day to T. Rutherford to change with you for six weeks. You must send him word of the day when he should be at Cork. If you want money or anything else, you will not want it long if you send word to, dear Sammy,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Knapp [6]

NEAR LONDON, February 19, 1779.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I hope to be at Tewkesbury on Wednesday, April [He probably meant March, when on the 17h he 'preached at Tewkesbury about noon, and at Worcester in the evening.'] 19, so as to preach at noon, and to be at Worcester to preach either at six or half-hour after, as you judge best. It would not be so agreeable to me to be at Worcester unless I was to be at your house. I love the house for the sake of its inhabitants, particularly my dear Suky. On Thursday at noon I am willing to preach at Stourport, of which timely notice should be sent to Mr. Cowan. You are all, I hope, pressing on to the mark! ee! the prize is before you am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Hannah Ball [7]

LONDON, February 24, 179.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I am in great hopes that the manner of your mother's death, together with her dying exhortations, will make a deep and lasting impression on some (at least) of her children. Brother Tunney [William Tunney, the second preacher in Oxfordshire, became an itinerant in 1774, and desisted from traveling in 1781.] did well to make a full use of so solemn an occasion. It is not improbable that from this very time a good work may commence, which, if you build a large and commodious chapel, will greatly and swiftly increase. I advise you whenever you build to build exactly on the model of our new chapel [City Road Chapel, London. A Mr. Jacques at Wycombe had frequently disturbed them by beating a drum during the whole hour of meeting. A site had been found, and Mr. Batting had subscribed handsomely and undertaken to superintend the erection of the chapel. See letter of Oct. 23.]; only reducing the dimensions, perhaps, from eighty by sixty to fifty or sixty by forty feet, according as your ground will allow. Surely He will withhold from us no manner of thing that is good. - I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To George Robinson

LONDON, February 24, 1779.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I am glad you have a little work to do in our Lord's vineyard, and doubt not but you will do it faithfully.

If it please God to prolong my life and health, I purpose visiting Lincolnshire about midsummer. [Wesley preached at Langham Row on July 5, and on June 1780, where he refers to ' onest George Robinson and his fourteen children.' For a noble letter from him to Wesley, see Arminian Mag., 1787, pp. 496-8.] It is well you wrote, or probably there would not have been a night to spare for Lungham Row. But I will now endeavor to bring it in. I did not think any of your daughters had remembered me. Peace be with you and yours! - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Robinson, At Langham Row,

Near Alford, Lincolnshire.

To Samuel Bardsley

BRISTOL, March 7, 1779.

DEAR SAMMY, - I am now just set out on my great journey; probably I shall not reach Inverness till June. It will be in July, if I am spared so long, that I shall visit Derby and Nottingham. My journey is longer this time than it was the last. Let us work while the day is!

Exhort all the believers strongly and explicitly to go on to perfection, and to expect every blessing God has promised not to-morrow but to-day! - I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Rankin

KINGSWOOD, March 12, 1779.

DEAR TOMMY, - It is well that Mr. Varde understands and enters into your proposal. When things are a little brought to bear, I shall hope to hear from him. I desire you to accept of two hundred of the Narrative, and of any other book you have occasion for.

It gives me pleasure to hear that Sister Rankin and you are happy in each other, and that there are no jealousies or misunderstanding among the, preachers. Stand fast, striving together for the hope of the gospel!

Does not John Atlay know that he should always send me a franked letter as it is The Duke of Beaufort's for instance. Half the letter costs something; the whole would cost nothing. Peace be with you and yours! - I am, dear Tommy,

Yours affectionately.

You may have my plan from Brother Pearson. Pray tell Mr. Atlay he did not send one quarter enough of the American Narrative [For A Brief Narrative of the Revival of Religion in Virginia and Popery Calmly Considered, see Green's Bibliography, Nos. 330, 336.] either to Birstall or Bristol. Let three or four hundred of Popery Calmly Considered be sent hither directly. Why does not he send the books to the Isle of Man They want [two] sets of the Short Hymns.

To George Gidley

BOLTON, April 11, 1779.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - It seems to me that this is a very providential thing, and that you did well not to let the opportunity slip. There is no doubt but our brethren at the Conference will readily consent to your asking the assistance of your neighbors. [That assistance was for the erection of a preaching-house. The letter was endorsed, 'Mr. Wesley's approbation of Exeter purchase.' See letter of Jan. 25.] And the time appears to be now approaching when poor Exeter will lift up its head. There is no danger at all of your being a loser by any bond or security that you have given. If I live till the latter end of summer, I hope to call upon you in my way to Cornwall. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Gidley, Officer of Excise,

In Exeter.

To Mrs. Hall

NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, May 15, 1779.

DEAR PATTY, - So far I am come. I have little above three hundred miles to go before I turn my face southward again.

I advise you to apply to two, three, or four intelligence officers with regard to Nancy. [A seamstress at Salisbury whom Mrs. Hall's husband seduced. See letter of June 20, 1755.] It is certain there are places to be had in London. And if the worst come, we must not insist upon her coming to the chapel. I do not know that she is any better for coming. She is not likely to profit less anywhere else. She was out of her wits to come to London. Mrs. Glynne [See W.H.S. iv. 217-20.] told me when I was last at Shrewsbury that she had as much work there as ever she could do, but she never would take advice, and acted contrary to the judgment of all her friends in coming to London without why or wherefore.

I wonder John Pawson [Pawson was now Assistant at City Road.] and his wife do not live in my apartments. They complained of the closeness of their own. Are they neither well full nor fasting

You sent me no word about Betsy Ellison. [Elizabeth, daughter of John Ellison and granddaughter of Wesley's sister Susanna. Dr. Clarke says she turned out unfortunate, and that Wesley showed her 'great kindness, often relieving her in distresses to which her imprudence had reduced her, treating her with great tenderness, and giving her advices which, had she followed, would have led her to true happiness.' For her sister Patience, see letters of Sept. 7, 1777, and Feb. 4, 1789.] I hope no news is good news. You must not forsake her. She has hardly any real friend in the world but you and me. What a blessing it is to have one Friend! How many have never found one in their lives! - I am.

To Ann Bolton

SUNDERLAND, May 18, 1779.

MY DEAR NANCY, - You make me smile. You address me as if you had never seen me. Why so Have I told you that I did not love you as well as ever I did in my life And yet, to say the truth, I was scarce ever more tried about you than I was lately. You was under my own roof for many days. And yet I hardly got an hour's conversation with you. That cruel 'something or other' always interposed and defrauded me of your company. I am glad, however, that others enjoyed it. And your labor with them was not in vain. You was a messenger of good to many souls, who bless God for the consolation. If you suffer a little yourself in conveying help to others, so much the better; this will turn to your account. I can wish nothing better for you than that you may be 'patient in bearing ill and doing well.'

There is little danger of .imputing too much to the good providence of God. It is deeply concerned even in extracting good out of the infirmities, follies, yea and sins of men in general. But it is peculiarly concerned in everything great and small that pertains to the children of God. It disposes all things strongly and sweetly that befall them, perhaps through their own mistake, for their profit, that they may be the more largely partakers of His holiness. He superintends all you do and all you suffer. And it is an invariable rule; 'Whatever you do not choose yourself God chooses for you.' You did not choose the distress of your friend; therefore God chose it for you. And so He did every circumstance consequent upon it which was afflictive to you.

I will tell you, my Nancy, what afflicted me. It seemed to me that you had lost your affection for me, that you was grown cool and indifferent. And yet it may be this was only my own imagination. But I am jealous over you, because I have a tender regard for you, and have had ever since I knew you. This makes me exceeding watchful over you. How is your health at present Have you any particular complaint besides your headache Will not that be eased by cold bathing Write without any reserve to, my dear Nancy,

Yours invariably.

Any time [you write] direct to [London].

To Mrs. Gair

NEAR DUNBAR, May 26, 1779.

MY DEAR SISTER, - It Was not your own desire to miss me at Alnwick as well as at Newcastle; otherwise I might have blamed you, and supposed that your love was grown cold, But I do not believe that is the case; and it is still your desire to love God. What, then, should hinder your recovering His love, if you still walk in all His appointed ways if you still contrive all the opportunities you can of hearing His word. of communicating, of prayer, reading, and meditation It cannot be, if you seek Him, but you will soon find. He will return and abundantly pardon. Who knows how soon Perhaps to-day; and why not at this hour You ask what I think of that strange book. I think the writer was distracted otherwise she could have no excuse. - I am, dear Becky,

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Carlill

ABERDEEN, June 13, 1779.

DEAR TOMMY, - I think it the safest way not to permit any Dissenting teacher to preach in any of our preaching-houses. [Carlill was Assistant in Oxfordshire. See letter of Jan. 23, 1778.] We have suffered so much by this already that we ought to beware of it for the time to come.

I am glad to hear that poor John Taylor has recovered his ground. Now let him watch and pray that he may no more enter into temptation.

It will be some time before I shall be able to fix the stations of the preachers. - I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Carlill, At Mr. Morris's,

In Withey, Oxfordshire.

To Samuel Bardsley [8]

EDINBURGH, June 19, 1779.

DEAR SAMMY, - I suppose John Atlay has paid the money. He is cautious to an extreme. I hear what angry men say or write; but I do not often regard it. Lemonade will cure any disorder of the bowels (whether it be with or without purging) in a day or two. You do well to spread the prayer-meetings up and down. They seldom are in vain. Honest Andrew Dunlop [The Assistant at Limerick.] writes me word that the book money is stolen. Pray desire him to take care that the knave does not steal his teeth. - I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Samuel Bradburn

EDINBURGH, June 19, 1779.

DEAR SAMMY, - I hear what angry men say or write, but I do not often regard it. I think Sister Ward and Malenoir counsel you well. I love you the better for loving them. You do well to spread the prayer-meetings up and down. They seldom are in vain. - I am, with kind love to my dear Betsy, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Samuel Bradburn [9]

EPWORTH, July 10, 1779.

DEAR SAMMY, - It is the judgment of many that, since the time of the Invincible Armada, Great Britain and Ireland were never in such danger from foreign enemies as they are at this day. Humanly speaking, we are not able to contend with them either by sea or land. They are watching over us as a leopard over his prey, just ready to spring upon us. They are mighty and rage horribly: but the Lord that dwelleth on high is mightier; and now is the time, at this awful crisis, for the inhabitants of the land to learn righteousness. I make no doubt but you improve the important opportunity and lift up your voice like a trumpet. Who knoweth but God may be entreated of us as He was for Nineveh

Our brethren in various parts of England have set apart an hour in a week for prayer (namely, from eight till nine on Sunday evening) in behalf of our King and country. Should not the same thing be done in Ireland too particularly at Cork and Bandon. Those who have not opportunity of meeting at the time may pray part of the hour in private. Meantime there is a text for: you: 'I will not destroy it for ten's sake.' - I am, dear Sammy, Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Duncan McAllum

EPWORXH, July 10, 1779.

DEAR DUNCAN, - This is the circumstance which puzzles the case: who can preach in Erse but you Cannot you, then, think of any preacher, whom you love, and who is a zealous, active man Inverness should by all means be a circuit by itself, including as many towns as you please, north and south. I wish you would think of it, and send me the plan to London.

Did not Sister Anderson receive my letter I wonder she did not answer. Joseph Moore utterly denies he ever offered her marriage. [Inverness was separated from Aberdeen at the Conference of 1779, and McAllum made superintendent. Moore was the second preacher at Edinburgh. He desisted from traveling at this Conference.] I desired her to tell me the very words he spoke or wrote.-I am, dear Duncan,

Yours affectionately.

To Mr. Duncan McAllum, At Mr.

John Watson's, Slater, Inverness.

To John Bredin [10]

LONDON, July 24, 1779.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - As you desire it, I will place you and Billy Myles (whose letter I have received) in the Londonderry Circuit. But it is a circuit of great importance. I hope you will both exert yourselves therein to the uttermost. It is a dangerous time, and you have need to give yourselves unto prayer.-I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. John Bredin, At Mr. Charles

Harrison's, In Limerick.

To Miss Livingston [11]

LONDON, July 24, 1779.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I am exceedingly obliged to you for your openness, and it is certain you have acted herein both according to justice and mercy. You need not be afraid of my taking any step that would occasion any reflection upon you. Your behavior in the whole affair has been so exactly right, that it has exceedingly endeared you to me and made me doubly fearful of giving you the least pain; but perhaps it may occasion some trouble to me. I had no intention, when I left it last, of visiting Inverness any more; but I think I must, if my life and strength be prolonged: for I would willingly see you once more. With tender regard, I am, my dear sister,

Yours very affectionately.

To Mrs. Woodhouse

LONDON, July 29, 1779.

MY DEAR SISTER, - Nay, you call me your friend; and you have not lost me yet, and probably never will. Perhaps when I am in the country you will like as well to go in my chaise as in his. An hundred little oddities one may account for by the disorder in his head. He is often considerably better; but I doubt whether he is ever quite well.

So the estate which old Mr. Hutton piled up with so much care does not descend even unto the third generation! May it not be so with Mr. Robert Maw [See Journal, iii. 135, 200, 280; iv. 67.] too O let us be rich to Godward!

I am glad Mr. Gerv. W. is come so far. And God is able to bring him farther. It strengthens the sight much to wet the eyes several times a day with forge-water, that which the smiths quench their irons in. Bear all, and conquer all. - I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Min. Woodhouse, At Mr. Hutton's,

In Epworth, Near Thorne, Yorkshire.

To Alexander Knox

LONDON, July 31, 1779.

DEAR ALLECK, - Come when they will, whether I am more or less busy, your letters are always welcome.... If you had firm and constant health, I do not see how you could have been saved; you would have been so admired, caressed, and applauded by your well-meaning relations, and perhaps by others, that it would have been next to impossible for you to have escaped the depths of pride and the height of vanity. But God was merciful to you, and sent this affliction to humble and prove you and show you what was in your heart. In the meantime nothing is more sure than that all these things will work together for some good.

Far, far beyond thy thought

His counsel shall appear,

When fully He the work has wrought

Which caused thy needless fear!

Doubtless He may give you an earnest of it now. Does not a beam of hope break into your soul Can you help saying,

God is love I I know, I feel!

Jesus weeps, but loves me still

Peace be with all your spirits! - I am, dear Alleck,

Yours affectionately.

To William Church

[LONDON, August 3, 1779.]

DEAR BILLY, - The week after next I hope to see you at Brecon. [Church had been appointed Assistant at Glamorgan at the Conference of 1779. Wesley visited Brecon on Aug. 13.] Pray tell Sister Williams I have her letter. If you can, reconcile the angry ones with each other. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Duncan McAllum

LONDON, August 4, 1779.

DEAR DUNCAN, - Two preachers are allotted for Inverness and Keith, two for Aberdeen and the country places adjoining. I desire the former two will change with the latter every eight weeks. And I desire Brother Dufton and Sanderson [Joseph Sanderson and William Dufton were appointed to Aberdeen.] will without delay go up to Inverness and Keith.

Each may stay either two or four weeks in or near Inverness while the other works the southern part of the circuit. I trust there will be such a work in Scotland this year as never was seen there yet. - I am, dear Duncan,

Yours affectionately.

To Samuel Bradburn

LONDON, August 5, 1779.

DEAR SAMMY, - In order to obviate the mischief of those lying tracts you may give away as many of our political tracts as you please; as likewise the Letter to a Roman Catholic [See letter of July 18, 1749.] and The Advantage of the Members of the Church of England over those of the Church of Rome. [See Works, x. 133-40.]

In one thing you will be disappointed. T. Rutherford must needs go to Londonderry [See letter of July 24 to John Bredin as to the importance Londonderry of the appointment. Rutherford had been in Belfast, and Bradburn evidently wanted him as his colleague at Cork.] and John Bredin come to Cork. He is a good preacher and a serious man, and I hope will behave well. I think he loves the King. You did well in lending the preaching-house to the Army. I would show them all the respect that is in my power. Jo. Bredin and you will not fail to change monthly. Do all you can at Kinsale and everywhere. - I am, with love to Betsy, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Wride [12]

OXON, August 10, 1779.

DEAR TOMMY, - George Story gives me a pleasing account of your behavior last year. Yet I am afraid there is something wanting still. As you know, love is full of fears. I am afraid your soul is not alive to God and that you are not deeply and steadily serious.

I am afraid your common conversation is not weighty and meet to minister grace to the hearers. O Tommy, stir yourself up before the Lord! Pray that you may be all alive! Labor to be serious, earnest, edifying in your daily conversations! And one thing never forget! At least, be serious in the pulpit! Let nothing queer, odd, or ludicrous pass your lips there! Then the work of the Lord will prosper in our hands, and you will be a comfort to, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Kitty Warren

COWBRIDGE, August 26, 1779.

MY DEAR SISTER, - Your conversation was exceedingly agreeable to me when I was last with you in Pembrokeshire. I think you was never so free with me before: therefore I never knew or loved you so well. You have reason to be thankful to God on many accounts, particularly for the desire He has given you of being useful to those that are round about you in as high a degree as you can. Indeed, this will expose you to many temptations. Sometimes you will be in danger of dejection: when you have labored long in any instance, and see no fruit of your labor. But remember l you will be rewarded according to your labor, not according to your success. At other times you will be in danger of pride, which will steal upon you in a thousand shapes. But you know in whom you have believed. He has never faded them that seek Him. In every temptation He will make a way to escape that you may be able to bear it.

I have one thing to desire of you: that Sister Jones, Sister Moon, and you will take a leisure hour together, and after prayer read calmly and impartially over the Advice to the Methodists with regard to Dress. [See letter of Sept. 15, 1770; and for Rules of the Bands, Works, viii. 272-3.] Then read over the Rules of the Bands, which are punctually observed by our sisters that meet in band in London and Bristol. If only you three had the resolution to follow their steps, the example would spread to the bands through all Wales.

Wishing that patience may have its perfect work in you till you are perfect and entire, lacking nothing, I remain, my dear Kitty,

Yours in tender affection.

To Miss Kitty Warren, In Haverfordwest.

To William Ferguson [13]

BRISTOL, September 7, 1779.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - The proposal you sent me from the Hague I like well. Pray talk with John Atlay about it; and if he and you are agreed, the sooner it is put in execution the better. Certainly all unsaleable books that are undamaged I will take again. But if any sermon be translated into Dutch, it should first be The Almost Christian. This is far more suitable to unawakened readers than The Lord our Righteousness. - I am, dear Billy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Johnston, Annandale, Lisleen [14]

BRISTOL, September 24, 1779.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I heard not one word of those accusations against John Howe, only that some time since he made a race on a Sunday. I ordered Mr. Watkinson to write to him concerning it. He did so, but could not gain a line in answer. This was utterly wrong. He ought at all hazards to have answered immediately. But of the things you mention I know nothing; I have not heard one tittle. My judgment is, John Howe should order a lawyer to write to the man that struck him and to each of them that held his hands, that he has 'orders to bring an action for assault and battery against them unless they ask his pardon for the error of illegal violence.'

I believe you have preachers now who truly fear God and have their hearts in His work. Wishing you may experience all His promises, I remain, my dear sister,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

I have received no other letter from you but that of the 9th instant.

To Robert Cart Brackenbury [15]

BRISTOL, September 27, 1779.

DEAR SIR, - I hope your stay at -- will be of use to many. But do not hurt yourself in order to help others. Mr. S -- is an upright, valuable man. His wife is a jewel indeed. I wish we had many like her. Your being at -- during this critical time is a singular providence. Both parties have a regard for you, and will hear you when they will not hear each other. I am glad you think of spending the winter in town, and doubt not but it will be for the glory of God. Go to my house. What is mine is yours; you are my brother, my friend: let neither life nor death divide us! Your visit to N-- will, I am persuaded, be of considerable use, the more because you love and recommend discipline. But I must beg of you to spend a night or two at Y--. and at L--. The sooner you come the more welcome you will be. Wrap yourself up warm, particularly your head and breast. - I am

Your very affectionate friend and brother.

To William Church

BRISTOL, September 28, 1779.

DEAR BILLY, - I entirely agree with Mr. Thomas [See letter of April 29, 1776.] in his judgment concerning that house: nothing can be more convenient for the purpose. You would do well to move all our friends to contribute towards it. I hope Brother Moorhouse [Michael Moorhouse is on the Minutes for Taunton, but may have been sent to Glamorgan. Cardiff was the head of that circuit. See letter of July 7, 1786.] and you are of one heart and go on hand in hand. - I am, dear Billy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Will. Church, At Mr. Colley's,

Cardiff, near Gloucester.

To James Creighton [16]

BRISTOL, September 29, 1779.

DEAR SIR, - If you are inclined to remove to England, I think you have a very fair opportunity. A curate is wanted for Madeley, Mr. Fletcher's parish, who has desired me to procure him one that can be depended on. For a change Dr. Coke would go down to Madeley at any time, and you might be a while with us in Bristol or London. You would have a large convenient house with a pleasant and fruitful garden. What the salary is I do not exactly know; but you shall not have less than sixty guineas a year. If you are inclined to accept of this, be pleased to send a line to, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

Pray direct to London.

To Thomas Carlill [17]

[October 1779.]

MY DEAR BROTHER, - An Assistant at the last Conference said, 'I will do as my predecessor has done. I will leave those as members that never met; they are as good members as I found them.'

Whoever does this for the time to come I will exclude from our Connection without delay. To prevent this vile practice I desire you will (I) Take an exact plan of your circuit at Christmas, and send it me in January; and do the same every quarter. (2) If you live till August, leave for your successor an exact list of the Societies in your circuit.

I desire likewise that at the next Quarterly Meeting you would change at least one of the stewards in every Society where there are two.

One thing more I desire, that you would read the proposals for the General Hymn-Book in every Society and procure as many subscribers as you can.

By your diligence and exactness in these particulars I shall judge whether you are qualified to act as an Assistant or not. - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

Pray send me word in January how many subscribers you have procured in your circuit.

Mr. Carlill, At Mr. Roberts', Tiverton,

Devon.

To Zachariah Yewdall [18]

LONDON, October 9, 1779.

DEAR ZACHARY, - Wherever you are be ready to acknowledge what God has done for your soul, and earnestly exhort all the believers to expect full salvation. You would do well to read every morning a chapter in the New Testament with the Notes, and to spend the greatest part of the morning in reading, meditation, and prayer. In the afternoon you might visit the Society from house to house in the manner laid down in the Minutes of the Conference. The more labor the more blessing! - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Samuel Bradburn [19]

LONDON, October 10, 1779.

DEAR SAMMY, - The alarm has been general in England as well as Ireland, particularly in the maritime parts. But it has done abundantly more good than harm to the work of God. The children of God have been greatly stirred up and have been more [instant] in prayer. And many men of the world have been greatly awakened, and continue so to this day. Most of those who have the fullest intercourse with God believe our enemies will never be permitted to land in England. And, indeed, God has already given abundant proof of His hearing prayer: first, in their not landing at Plymouth, where they stayed gaping and staring for eight-and-forty hours while they might with all ease have destroyed both the dock and the town; secondly, in the malignant fever which has broken out in their fleet, and already destroyed several thousands of men.

Is there any truth in the report that John Humpson has converted you to Arianism 'If you think it best, I will name two or three new stewards now. - I am, with tender love to dear Betsy, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Kitty Warren [20]

ROBERTSBRIDGE, October 19, 1779.

MY DEAR SISTER, - The accusations against Mr. Edwards were wonderful. So were the whole proceedings against him. But the thing is done; and, indeed, so long ago that it is now past remedy.

That jewel who told you he was a rabbi I fear is little better than a cheat. You did well to give me some information about him. I have wrote a line to the Assistant at Bristol; so that if he makes his appearance there our people will be aware of him.

I hope Mr. Booth, your third preacher, is now come. He is an Israelite indeed. He is peculiarly blest in encouraging believers to go on to perfection. In this respect I hope he will be particularly to you and all that hunger and thirst after righteousness.

It was never designed that Henry Floyd should be stationed in any one place. He is only permitted to preach up and down, chiefly in Welsh, at the discretion of the Assistant.

I believed your labor with the children would not be in vain. But in all things we have need of patience; and then, after we have done the will of God, we shall receive the promise.

If you love me, deal freely with me. And whenever anything material occurs send an account of it to, my dear Kitty, Yours very affectionately.

To Hannah Ball [21]

LONDON, October 23, 1779.

MY DEAR SISTER, - To-morrow night I am to set out for Norwich [] and this little tour will take me up a fortnight. At my return I have appointed to visit the classes, which requires a fortnight more. I see no possibility, then, of my opening the house, unless I steal away from them for a few hours. I care not for labor; but I want time. This, then, with God's help I will do. On Tuesday noon, November 9, I will steal away to Wycombe, preach at five in the evening, and then return to London. So I can go on with the classes at six on Wednesday morning.

If the preachers and leaders strongly exhort the believers to go on to perfection, then the entire work of God will prosper among you; otherwise it will languish. - I am, my dear Hannah,

Your affectionate brother.

To the Methodist Societies

TO ALL OUR BRETHREN WHOM IT MAY CONCERN

CITY ROAD, LONDON, October 24, 1779.

I cannot but highly approve of Captain Webb's design of assisting His Majesty in case of an actual invasion. The particulars he will himself explain to you. This may be of more consequence than yet appears. I recommend the design and all that promote it to the blessing of God; and am, my dear brethren, [See Methodist Recorder, Oct. 31, 1884, for particulars of the scheme, signed 'L. Webb'; and letter of May 25, 1782, to Captain Webb.]

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Wride [22]

LYNN, November 1, 1779.

DEAR TOMMY, - You will never disoblige me by telling me anything that you think or fear. No preacher in our Connection ever dealt more plainly with me than Thomas Walsh did. And there never was any that I loved better or put more confidence in. So that it is a mere groundless imagination which some of our friends have entertained that 1 love persons less for their plain-dealing. - I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate brother.

I expect to be at London on Friday.

To Mrs. Barton

LONDON, November 9, 1779.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I have always loved you from the time I knew you first; and never more than now, because you now speak freely to me, which I Sometimes feared you did not.

If you continue earnest to save your souls, both of you must expect temptations, and those of various sorts. Sometimes you will be tried by friends or enemies; sometimes by one another; at some times perhaps you will be quite out of conceit with each other, and all things will appear wrong. Then beware of anger, of fretfulness, or peevishness, which makes the grasshopper a burthen. But from all this the God whom you serve is able to deliver you; yea, and He will deliver you. Trust Him, and praise Him. - I am, my dear Jenny,

Yours affectionately.

To John Bredin [23]

LONDON, November 9, I779.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - As long as you act in full concert with Sammy Bradburn you will both see the fruit of your labor. [See letter of Feb. 26, 1780, to Bradburn.] I hope the morning preaching will never be neglected more, either at Cork or Bandon. That is the glory of the Methodists. If only thirty children continue to meet at each place, it will be worth all the pains. At every new place you may give the Earnest Appeal to the chief man in the town. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Bredin, At the New Room, In Cork.

To Thomas Rutherford [24]

LONDON, November 9, 1779.

DEAR TOMMY, - I shall write to Henry Brown [Compare Feb. 22, 1777.] this post and tell him how to cure his leg. He writes that he will not marry till I come over; and I think it is a wise resolution. He is certainly a devoted young man; and it is a great pity that anything should hinder him. It is exceeding well that Brother Barber came in the place of Brother Blair. Let him also preach sometimes at Londonderry. God chooses the foolish things to confound the wise. I do not know but God may bless him there more than either you or me.

You do well in holding the prayer-meetings and visiting the Poorhouse. But do not forget the children and visiting all the Society from house to house. - I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Society in Margate

DOVER, November 30, 1779.

MY DEAR BRETHERN, - I have no connection at all with Thomas Coleman. I am not satisfied with his behavior. I desire Mr. Wrigley, [Francis Wrigley, James Perfect were preachers in Kent.] Booth, and Perfect to act as if there was no such person in the world. [Coleman opened a school at Margate about 1767, and used the room for preaching. See Journal, vii. 128; W.H.S. xvii. 73] As many of our Society in Margate as [choose] to remain under my care I desire to receive these as they would myself. Commending you all to the God of peace and love, I am, my dear brothers and sisters,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. --

LONDON, December 4, 1779.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - The information you have procured concerning the widow of Thomas Young I believe will be quite satisfactory.

I know no reason why your little boy should not be admitted into Kingswod School if we live till autumn. Sammy Wells died last Saturday! [See heading to letter of Feb. 24 to Hannah Ball.]

'Live to-day! - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Abraham Brames [25]

LONDON, December 12, 1779.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - In the late Conference it was agreed that one steward (at least) in every Society should be changed. And when I lately heard it was not yet done, I wrote to every Assistant on the head. I heard no objection to you; and in your case there is something peculiar, because of the debt lying upon the house. Do all the good you can! Work your work betimes; and in due time He will give you a full reward! - I am, with kind love to your wife, dear Abraham,

Your affectionate brother.

I seldom complain that your letters are too long.

To Alexander Knox

LONDON, December 23, 1779.

DEAR ALLECK, - The whole account of yourself which you still give convinces me more and more of what I have once and again observed concerning the nature of your disorder. It is undeniable (1) That you have a bodily complaint. Your nerves are greatly disordered; and although it is only now and then that this rises so high as to occasion a fit, yet it has a constant influence upon you so as to cause a dejection of spirits. This dejection is no more imputed to you as a sin than the flowing of the blood in your veins. (2) Although I will not say you have no faith, yet it is certain your faith is small; and you are fearful, because you are of little faith: this is another source of your uneasiness. (3) You want to have the love of God fully shed abroad in your heart: you have only now and then a little touch of thankfulness, a small spark of that divine fire; and hence anger, or at least fretfulness and peevishness, more or less, will naturally arise. Add to these (4) the main cause - diabolical agency. Satan will surely take occasion, from the situation you are in, to inject a thousand thoughts; and will then accuse you for them: but he, not you, shall answer for them to God. God is on your side: He knows whereof you are made; and Jesus careth for you. He keeps you and my dear Mrs. Knox as the apple of an eye; His Spirit helps your infirmities; He is purifying you in that furnace; and when you have been tried, you shall come forth as gold. Expect the blessing: is it not at hand - I am, my dear Alleck,

Yours affectionately.

To Robert Cart [26]

LONDON, December 28, 1779.

DEAR ROBERT, - As God has once more given you your life for a prey, see that all be directed to Him I Let no sin have any more dominion over you. Watch and pray, and you shall not enter into temptation.

I make no doubt but a collection made in the circuit will supply what is wanting with regard to that little preaching-house, especially as there are no others building in that circuit.

By this time both our preachers and people should be well aware of the warm Predestinarians. They will do us no good. And they can do us no harm if we love them - at a distance. Peace be with you and yours! - I am, dear Robert,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Robert Cart, Of Leicester.

To Joseph Benson [27]

LONDON, December 29, 1779.

DEAR JOSEPH, - There are few persons on whose judgment I can more confide than Sister Clapham, Sister Dowries, and Betsy Ritchie. I know little of Miss Thompson; but if they approve of her I shall have no objection. Take every step with much prayer; and I trust God will give you His blessing. - I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate brother.

To Sarnuel Bradburn [28]

LONDON, December 29, 1779.

DEAR SAMMY, - Joseph Benson has explained himself at large, and in a very satisfactory manner. Dr. Coke wrote also to John Hampson; but I believe he has received no answer.

All the real lovers of Ireland will now love King George for removing those vile restraints upon the Irish trade. But still incendiaries will not be wanting who will do all the mischief they can. I am not sure that the loudest bawlers are not in French pay.

If one class does not suit Mrs. Bruce, let her meet in another. But I understand there is one whole class (Brother Brewer's) which contributes nothing weekly. If so, give no ticket either to him or any of them. They break a fundamental rule of the Society.

You may read in the Society that part of the Large Minutes relating to my power. I find by your last you have done it. In our last Conference it was agreed that a change of stewards should be made directly throughout England and Ireland. I do not thoroughly approve myself of G. Dobbyn remaining i~ the house. I do not forget his base treatment of Sister Malenoir, whom none had authority to put out of the house without my consent. I refer that to you. If you judge that Brother Laffan and Howe would be more unexceptionable, let them be stewards for the ensuing year. Were there no other objection, that behavior of Brother Large and Sweeny in the Society would be a sufficient reason why they could bear no office among the Methodists. Beware of heat! Beware of returning railing for railing! - I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

Pray give my kind love to Sister Bruce, and tell her I will consider her letter.