1777

 

 

CONSOLIDATION AND ADVANCE

JANUARY 11, 1777, TO DECEMBER 29, 1779

 

To Joseph Benson


LONDON, January 11, 1777.

DEAR JOSEPH,--The matter is short. I require you to meet the Societies of Sunderland and Shields next quarter and to give no tickets to any person who will not promise neither to buy nor sell uncustomed goods any more. I am sorry ---- did not save you the trouble: I thought he had been another man.

Pray worry John Reed [See letter of Dec. 24, 1776, and Feb. 15, 1777.] till he writes a circumstantial account. It must be done while things are fresh in his memory, otherwise we shall lose many particulars which ought not to be forgotten.

They have made good haste to finish the preaching-house at Sheephill already; I thought it had hardly been begun. [Wesley preached in the new house Sheephill, near Newcastle, on May 16, 1779. ‘Here the work of God greatly revives; many are lately convinced of sin, and many enabled from day to day to rejoice in God their Savior.’]

I have just received two letters from New York; one of them from George Robinson, late of Newcastle. They inform me that all the Methodists there were firm for the Government, and on that account persecuted by the rebels, only not to the death; that the preachers are still threatened, but not stopped; and the work of God increases much in Maryland and Virginia.--I am, dear Joseph,

Yours affectionately.

To Francis Wolfe [1]
LONDON, January 14, 1777.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Let James Perfect immediately change places with Rd. Whatcoat. There must be no delay.

You cannot make a better choice. She is an excellent woman.

O beware of Calvinism and everything that has the least tendency thereto. Let a burnt child dread the fire!--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Wolfe, At Mr. Walter's

Hatter, In Plymouth Dock.

To Thomas Wride [2]
LONDON, January 17, 1777.

DEAR TOMMY,--If your fellow laborers and you are zealous and active, you will give me a good account of the circuit. I found it in a flourishing state. So will you before you leave it.

Robert Empringham has done exactly right as to the sacrament. I advise you to tread in his steps.

I wish you would inquire at what price I could have some kind of vessel to carry me from Whitehaven by the isle to Dublin.--I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

I take no horses with me.

 

To Mrs. Woodhouse

LONDON, January 21, 1777.

MY DEAR SISTER, There is something exceedingly remark­able in the case of Mr. Dixon. To be snatched away just at the time that he was set above the world! But He with whom we have to do best understands what will be for our real advantage. Probably He saw that prosperity would hurt his soul, and so took him away from the evil to come.

I should have great hope that sickness or bodily weakness would be of use to your neighbors. When we feel pain, or when death looks us in the face, what do riches avail? In such circumstances you are richer than them all. You know in whom you have believed. You know that, if all these things pass away, you have in heaven a better and a more enduring substance. You may profit much by Richard Condy. [Condy was stationed at Epworth.] He is a valuable man. I seldom converse with him but he does me good. I wish you would tell him I desire he would send me a full account of his experience. Still be ready to do and to suffer the whole will of God.--My dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Christopher Hopper
NEAR LONDON, February 1, 1777.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--James Kershaw is stark staring mad, more than ever John Reed was. [See letters of March 3, 1776 (to Mrs. Woodhouse), and Feb. 15, 1777.] He prophesies that 'all the Methodists are to go over to America in the belly of a whale.' Take this as a specimen.

We shall not begin our building here before April. Prob­ably I shall take a short journey (to Leeds or Newcastle or Dublin) once a month; but I must never be absent long at a time. [See letter of Feb. 14.] How we shall be able to raise the money I know not. But ' the earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof.'--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Hopper, At the Preaching-house,

In Manchester.

 

Hester Ann Roe

LONDON, February 11, 1777.

MY DEAR HETTY,--The papers of one [Charles Perronet, who died on Aug. 12, 1776. See Atmore's Memorial, pp. 327-35; and letter of April 26.] who lately went to God are fallen into my hands. I will transcribe a few particulars. His experience is uncommon; and you may simply tell me how far your experience does or does not agree with it. But beware of hurting yourself upon the occasion, beware of unprofitable reasonings. God may have wrought the same work in you, though not in the same manner.

'Just after my uniting with the Methodists, the Father was revealed to me the first time; soon after, the whole Trinity. I beheld the distinct persons of the Godhead, and worshipped one undivided Jehovah and each Person separately. After this I had equal intercourse with the Son, and afterwards with the Spirit, the same as with the Father and the Son. After some years my communion was with Christ only, though at times with the Father, and not wholly without the Spirit. Of late I have found the same access to the Triune God. When I approach Jesus, the Father and the Spirit commune with me. Whatever I receive now centers in taking leave of earth and hasting to another place. I am as one that is no more. I stand and look on what God has done---His calls, helps, mercies, forbearances, deliverance’s from sorrows, rescue out of evils; and adore and devote myself to Him with new ardour. If it be asked how or in what manner I beheld the Triune God, it is above all description. He that has seen this light of God can no more describe it than he that has not. In two of those divine interviews the Father spoke while I was in an agony of prayer for perfect con­formity to Himself, twice more when I was in the depth of sorrow, and each time in Scripture words. It may be asked, 'Was the appearance glorious? ' It was all divine, it was glory. I had no conception of it. It was God. The first time the glory of Him I saw reached even to me. I was overwhelmed with it; body and soul were penetrated through with the rays of Deity.'

Tell me, my dear maid, if you have ever experienced anything like these things; but do not puzzle yourself about them, only speak in simplicity. You cannot speak of these things to many; but you may say anything without reserve to, my dear Hetty,

Yours in tender affection.

 

To Samuel Bardsley


LONDON, February 14, 1777.

DEAR SAMMY,--It is uncertain yet where I shall be this summer. If we do not build, [See letter of Feb. 1.] I shall go to Ireland; if we do, I must reside chiefly in London. Only I would endeavor to make a little excursion into the North. I have not promised to open the house at Halifax in April or May, although it is probable I shall in my journey to or from Newcastle. But my time will be very short, because I can never be absent from the building but about two or three weeks at a time. I am glad you have found a way to Lancaster. Be zealous, be active, and conquer all things!--I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Joseph Benson
LONDON, February 15, 1777.

DEAR JOSEPH,--If we build (as I expect we shall) this spring, I shall probably call upon you in May. Now is the time, before you say anything of the new chapel, to procure what subscribers you can to the Philosophy. [The third, enlarged edition of A Survery of the Wisdom of God in the Creatin was published in 1777. See Green’s Bibliography, No 325; and letter of Jan. 15 1778.] I have included all that is material in Dr. Goldsmith's eight large volumes. Speak earnestly, and you will succeed. Simple Michl. Fenwick has procured twelve subscribers in two days!


James Kershaw is stark staring mad. He was so, they tell me, some years ago.[ See letters of Feb. 1 and March 16.] Hasten John Reed in his account, [See letters of Jan. 11 and March 5.] and hasten yourself in extirpating smuggling. I am glad to hear Sister Denton meets again. She is a letter in my debt.--I am, dear Joseph,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Johnston, Annandale, Lisleen [3]
LONDON, February 16, 1777.

MY DEAR SISTER,--The persons with whom we have to do are so dilatory that I know not when we shall begin to build. Perhaps not this year; and if so, I shall with God's help go through Ireland as usual. But if we build, I can only visit Dublin, I suppose, about the middle of June. If it will suit your convenience, I shall hope for the pleasure of seeing you then.

If any other of the preachers exceed their time (about an hour in the whole service), I hope you will always put them in mind what is the Methodist rule. People imagine the longer the sermon is the more good it will do. This is a grand mistake. The help done on earth God doth it Himself; and He doth not need that we should use many words.

According to the account which you give I cannot blame you for keeping the preachers at your house. In such cir­cumstances you did well to detain them. It would have been cruelty to let them go. How wonderfully different from this was the account from Whisby, merely by the omission of a few little circumstances--so little can we depend upon any relation which is given by one whose passions are raging.

That none of your little company should have drawn back is more than one could have expected. It is well if a third part of those that at first set their hands to the plough endure to the end. May you and all yours be of that happy number, but particularly my dear Sidney.

I commend you all to Him that hath loved you; and am, my dear sister,

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Robert Costerdine
LONDON, February 18, 1777.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Mr. Wesley bids me tell you that there is to be but one subscription and collection this year (except for Kingswood School), out of which must be taken a sufficient sum for contingent expenses. He expects, therefore, that the Assistants and preachers will exert their whole strength and influence.

The Natural Philosophy, now printing, includes the substance of the three former volumes, but with great variations and improve­ments and in a new mode, most of the notes of the former impression being grafted into the text and new notes added. The letter is quite new and the paper exceeding good. He seems determined to spare no pains to render it complete. It is likely to have a great run among the clergy and gentry.

As the new building will go forwards as soon as we can lay the foundation, Mr. Wesley will be obliged to spend most of the summer in London, and only take occasional journeys to some of the more important places. He is exceeding well; I think I never saw him better in my life.

Mr. Fletcher is exceeding weak; I think he will not recover. Excuse haste; we are in the midst of the visitation of the classes.

That God may abundantly bless and prosper your soul and labors is the prayer of

Your affectionate friend and brother,

PETER JACO [Jaco was Assistant in London.]


To Robert Costerdine, At Derby.

To Mrs. Barton
LONDON, February 29, 1777.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I am glad to hear that your little Society prospers. If they increase in grace, they will increase in number; of which I can have no doubt if you watch against all jealousies and continue open and loving to each other. There will be nothing wanting, I am persuaded, on the part of the preachers. [The Hull preachers were George Story (afterwards editor of the Magazine) and William Dufton.] Whenever they speak, they will speak as the oracles of God, with sound speech, which cannot be reproved. And, what is more, the whole tenor of their life is agreeable to their doctrine. Whatever they preach you will experience. What you have received is a pledge of what you will receive; for He that loves you will withhold from you no manner of thing that is good.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Samuel Bradburn [4]
LONDON, February 22, 1777.

DEAR SAMMY,--If George Brown is likely to be an useful preacher, it is no wonder he should be so tempted. If he will forsake the work, there is a young man at Cork, John Howe, who may take his place; so I have wrote to John Watson. I do not remember, I have had a line from John Hampson since Christmas.

It will be a difficult thing to keep Mr. Smyth [Wesley met Mr. And Mrs. Smyth in the Isle of Man in June. See Tyerman’s Wesley, iii. 241-2 and letters of May 27, 1776 and June 1 1778.] from running into extremes. He surely will be prosecuted if he publishes anything which the law can lay hold on. And it is easier to prevent the evil than to redress it.

 

To Joseph Benson
LEWISHAM, March 5, 1777.

DEAR JOSEPH,--The death of John Annet was very remark­able. Such individuals ought to be had in remembrance. Publish the account of Sister Hutton's death just as you please, either at my expense or your own. [See letter of Oct. 22 to him.]

There are two ways to ease the expense of the Philosophy either two or three may join for a set, for which, after all of them have read it, they may cast lots; or they may give sixpence or a shilling weekly to Matthew Errington. And nine-tenths of the book any sensible tradesman, yea woman, may understand.

But John Reed! [See letter of Feb. 15.] Where is John Reed's account? It is high time I should have it.--I am, dear Joseph,

Yours affectionately.

To Hannah Ball
BRISTOL, March 13, 1777.

MY DEAR SISTER,--It seems the time is come that you are to have a more commodious preaching-house at High Wycombe. I will give you a plan of the building myself; and employ whom you please to build. But I hope to see you on Wednesday the 26th instant, and to preach about six in the evening [His Journal shows that he preached at Wycombe on the 26th.] after preaching at noon in Oxford. Peace be with your spirit!--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mary Bishop
BRISTOL, March 15, 1777.

MY DEAR SISTER,--It does not appear to me that you ought on any consideration to give up the privileges you mention. Neither do I apprehend that you would be more useful in a boarding-school than you are in your present station. I cannot, therefore, advise you to relinquish it. You have now a large field of action: you have employment enough, both temporal and spiritual; and you have ease enough. Abide in your calling.


The pious young woman whom I particularly lament over does not live at Bath, but Bristol. But I cannot help her; she allows my premises, but holds fast her own conclusion. Oh who can bear riches! Who can gain money without in some measure losing grace! I verily believe, if she was as poor as you, she would be as advisable.


Our Church Catechism is utterly improper for children of six or seven years old. Certainly you ought not to teach it them against your own judgement. I should imagine it would be far better to teach them the short catechism prefixed to the Instructions for Children. [See letter of Feb. 23 1773.]


Mr. Floyd [John Floyd, an apothecary and surgeon, was an itinerant from 1770 to 1782, when he settled as a doctor in Halifax and then in Leeds. He died in 1798. See Journal, vi. 350; Atmore’s Memorial, pp 142-4.] thought I had better preach at two on Friday than at twelve. So I propose dining at Mr. Brittain's on my way.

I think you might venture to write a little more than once a quarter to, my dear sister,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Miss Bishop, Schoolmistress,

In Bath.

To Christopher Hopper [5]
BRISTOL, March 16, 1777.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Madmen have often a deal of cunning; and this frequently puzzles the cause, so that sometimes we can hardly say whether the man is more fool or knave.

Right precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints; and much good is usually done at their funerals. You do well to improve all those opportunities.

Our friends are about laying the foundation of the new chapel; so that in a few days I must return to London. Then I shall consider what time I can spare from thence, and shall fix my spring and summer journeys accordingly.--I am, with love to Sister Hopper,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Alexander Knox
BRISTOL, March 19, 1777.

DEAR SIR,--If the returns of your disorder are more and more gentle, there is reason to hope it will be at length totally removed. Very probably, if you live to five- or six-and-twenty, your constitution will take a new turn. But it is certainly the design of Him that loves you to heal both body and soul; and possibly He delays the healing of the former that the cure of the latter may keep pace with it. As ' it is a great loss to lose an affliction,' He would not have you lose what you have suffered. I trust it will not be lost, but will be for your profit, that you may be partaker of His holiness. It is a blessing that He has given you that fear which is the beginning of wisdom; and it is a pledge of greater things to come. How soon? Perhaps to-day….

If I could spare time, I would gladly accept of your invita­tion; but I doubt whether I can get any farther than Dublin. [He spent Oct. 3-13 in Dublin.] Peace be with all your spirits!--I am, my dear Alleck,

Yours most affectionately.

 

To Mrs. Johnston, Annandale, Lisleen [6]

LONDON, March 28, 1777. (Good Friday.)

MY DEAR SISTER,--Surely this is a token for good. If we acknowledge God, He will acknowledge us. In the memory of man never was Good Friday observed in London with such solemnity as this has been, in consequence of a message which the Archbishop of Canterbury sent to the Lord Mayor some days since, incited thereto (it is supposed) by an intimation from His Majesty.


I expect the foundation of our new chapel will be laid the latter end of next week. From that day so many things will need to be considered that I must not be long out of town at a time. However, I hope, if my life is spared so long, to step over to Dublin about midsummer; but it will be doubtful whether I can get any farther, though I should not think much of my labor. I will by the grace of God use my strength while I can; the night cometh when no man can work. I am glad you are still of the same mind. While we have time let
us do good to all men, but especially to those that are of the household of faith.


It gives me pleasure to hear so good an account of Brother Boyle. He has leisure, and he is wise in employing it to good purpose. But I am sorry poor Hugh Brown is so discouraged as to depart from the work. Just so did James Morgan many years ago; but he could not rest till he returned. Those who have labored with him (H. Brown) cannot but be judges whether God has owned his labors. If He has, he cannot lie still and be guiltless; and none is a better judge of this than John Pritchard.


I commend you and yours to Him that loves you; and am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

 

To Ann Bolton [7]

NEAR LONDON, April 24, 1777.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Your state of mind for some time has been that which the Papists very improperly term a state of Desertion; wherein they suppose God deserts or forsakes the soul only for His own will and pleasure ! But this is absolutely impossible: I deny that such a state ever existed under the sun. As I observed before, the trouble you feel is in the very root and ground of it, a natural effect of disordered liver, of the corruptible body pressing down the soul. But you must likewise take into the account preternatural influence. For you may be assured your grand adversary will not be forgetful to avail himself of the opportunity, sometimes by plausible suggestions, sometimes by horrid and grievous injections. But blessed is the soul that endureth temptation. The Lord shall deliver you out of his hand. Doth not He know the way wherein you go? And when you have been tried you shall come forth as gold! I feel much sympathy with you in your troubles, which endear you to me exceedingly. But though I grieve with you, [I joy] over you; for I can easily see ' the end of the Lord.'

The fire your graces shall refine,

Till, molded from above,

You bear the character divine,

The stamp of perfect love I

I am glad you are to spend a few days with my dear friends at Publow. And when you are happy in each other, do not forget, my dear Nancy,

Yours most affectionately.

To Penelope Newman
LONDON, April 24, 1777.

MY DEAR SISTER,--If I had gone over into Ireland, as I proposed, it would have been scarce possible for me to visit Gloucestershire. But I think the time I had allotted for that journey may be more profitably bestowed in England. There­fore if I live till June, I purpose pay a short visit to Stroud, Tewkesbury, Gloucester, and a few other places. I laid the foundation of our new chapel here on Monday, with an immense concourse of people.

Work your work betimes; and in due time He will give you a full reward.--I am, my dear sister,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss March
LONDON, April 26, 1777.

To begin at the end: I did not preach any sermon for you in particular, though by accident. I know what sermon you mean, and both you and I have need of it.

I have some fine remains of Charles Perronet's wherein he describes his own experience. [See letters of Feb. 11 and June 11.] It exactly agrees with yours. He too was led at first to Jesus the Mediator, and seemed in a manner to have no concern with the Father and the Holy Ghost. Afterwards he had communion with the Father, next with the Spirit, and then with the whole Trinity. You therefore are afraid where no fear is. Our Lord is not displeased at your following His Spirit.

I do not remember the making mention of covetousness: but it is likely I might; for I am exceedingly afraid of it, lest it should steal unawares (as it always comes in disguise) either upon myself or my friends. I know no way to escape it but (having saved all we can) to give all we can. I think this is at present your rule as well as mine; and I trust it always will be.

We cannot impute too much to divine Providence, unless we make it interfere with our free-agency. I suppose that young woman, by saying she did not believe God had anything to do with it, only meant that the passion itself was not at all from God, but altogether from evil nature. She could not mean that God does not in a thousand instances draw good out of evil; yea, that He may not sometimes permit us to be overtaken in a fault to preserve us from a greater.

General rules are easily laid down. But it is not possible to apply them accurately in particular cases without the anointing of the Holy One; this alone, abiding with us, can teach us of all things. Thus our general rule is ‘Thou shalt do no murder'; which plainly forbids everything that tends to impair health, and implies that we use every probable means of preserving or restoring it. But when we come to apply this to particular instances, we are presently in a labyrinth, and want that anointing which alone can make plain the way before our face and direct us to do in every, minute circum­stance what is acceptable to God.

You have abundant reason to praise God both for spiritual and temporal blessings. Beware of indulging gloomy thoughts; they are the bane of thankfulness. You are encompassed with ten thousand mercies; let these sink you into humble thankfulness.

To Lady Maxwell [8]
NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, May 3, 1777.

MY DEAR LADY,--The new chapel which we are now building in London requires much of my attendance there, so that I cannot conveniently be absent more than two Sundays together. Accordingly, when I set out, I fixed Saturday, the 19th instant, for my return; and ordered notice to be given of my design to meet the classes the week following. I cannot therefore have the pleasure of seeing you now; which, if it could be, I should greatly desire. I love your spirit; I love your conversation; I love your correspondence: I have often received both profit and pleasure thereby. I frequently find a want of more light; but I want heat more than light. And you have frequently been an instrument of conveying this to my soul, of animating me to run the glorious race. I trust you find no decay in your own soul, but a still increasing rigor. Some time since, you enjoyed a measure of that great salvation, deliverance from inbred sin. Do you hold fast whereunto you had attained, and still press forward, to be filled with all the fullness of God? There is the prize before you l Look up, believe, and take all you want!

Wishing you the whole gospel blessing, I remain, my dear Lady,

Your ever affectionate servant.

I hear Sister Gow is gone hence. Did she go in triumph or only in peace?

 

To Thomas Wride [9]

DARLINGTON, May 7, 1777.

DEAR TOMMY,--I am resolved to make one fair trial of the island. So I have desired Brother Empringham and Joseph Bradford to go over immediately together and preach in every town and village. Now the summer is before us, and let us try what can be done; and let Brother Seed and you exert yourselves in England.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

 

To Thomas Carlill


HULL, May 13, 1777.

DEAR TOMMY,--I commend you for letting none but the members of the Society stay when the Society meets, and more particularly at the lovefeasts. You cannot give a ticket to any who robs the King by selling or buying uncustomed goods.

You say true. You have been useful wherever you have been; and so you will be still. But those little circuits I reserve for invalids. You and I (blessed be God) are not invalids yet.--I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

 

To Hannah Ball [10]

COLNE, June 11, 1777.

MY DEAR SISTER,---From the many unforeseen hindrances you have met with, it does indeed seem reasonable to infer that God's time is not yet fully come. It is your present business to tarry the Lord's leisure. When His time is come that He will work, then who shall hinder?

I have lately made diligent inquiry into the experience of many that are perfected in love. And I find a very few of them who have had a clear revelation of the several Persons in the ever-blessed Trinity. It therefore appears that this is by no means essential to Christian perfection. All that is necessarily implied therein is humble, gentle, patient love: love regulating all the tempers, and governing all the words and actions.--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Elizabeth Ritchie [11]
WAKEFIELD, June 16, 1777.

MY DEAR BETSY,--I write a few lines, on condition that you will not write if it does you hurt; it certainly will, if you lean upon your breast or if you write much at a time. But perhaps (of which you yourself must be the judge) you might write a few lines now and then. Do you still find your will wholly given up? Have you no choice as to life or death? and have you no choice as to the manner of your death ? Are you not afraid of the pain of dissolution? Can you freely part with all your friends here?

And to an unknown somewhere wing away?

Do you never lose your consciousness of the presence of the Three-One God? And is your testimony of His Spirit that you are saved from inward sin never obscured? Are you always happy? Do you always enjoy an hope full of immortality? I ask many questions, that you may have an opportunity of being a witness for God, whether you live or die. I think in life or death you will not forget

Yours affectionately.

 

To Walter Churchey [12]

LONDON, June 25, 1777.

MY DEAR BRTHER,--At present I am very safe; for I am a good many pounds, if not scores of pounds, worse than nothing. In my Will I bequeath no money but what may happen to be in my pocket when I die.

It is my religion which obliges me 'to 'put men in mind to be subject to principalities and powers.' Loyalty is with me an essential branch of religion, and which I am sorry any Methodist should forget. There is the closest connection, therefore, between my religious and my political conduct; the selfsame authority enjoining me to 'fear God' and to 'honor the King.'

Dr. Coke promises fair, and gives us reason to hope that he will bring forth not only blossoms but fruit. He has hitherto behaved exceeding well, and seems to be aware of his grand enemy, applause. He will likewise be in danger from offence. If you are acquainted with him, a friendly letter might be of use, and would be taken kindly. He now stands on slippery ground, and is in need of every help.

I expect to be at Monmouth (coming from Worcester) on Wednesday, July the 9th, and at Brecon on the 10th.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

 

To Mary Bishop


NEAR LONDON, June 26, 1777.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Blessed be God that He hath hitherto helped you and lifted you up from the gates of death ! It is not probable that you will be able to teach school any more, as it implies breathing so long in a confined air and speaking several hours in a day. But I make no doubt of your being able to meet a class, perhaps in a month's time. Neither need you ever relapse into your disorder, if you take the precautions which common sense will prescribe.

Yesterday I spent some time with Dr. Dodd, and spoke very freely to him. He seems to be in the very temper which one would wish, calmly resigned to the will of God. I hope Miss March is recovering her strength as well as you; and am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.


To Miss Bishop, At Miss March's,
In Bristol.

To Mr. ----
 
WORCESTER, July 7, 1777.
MY DEAR BROTHER,--I advise all that will take my advice to abide where they are called, and not to 'heap to them­selves teachers having itching ears.' [2 Tim. iv. 3. ] So I advise all that were brought up in the Church to continue in the Church. [See letter of Oct 1, 1778] It never entered my thoughts to advise them to hear none but Methodists.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Joseph Benson
WORCESTER, July 8, 1777.

DEAR JOSEPH,--What you say is unquestionably right. Why, then, should it not immediately be put in execution? Let Berwick directly be taken into the Newcastle Circuit, and Dunbar be supplied once a fortnight from Edinburgh. Pray write this instantly to Brother M'Nab, [Assistant to Edinburgh.] and admit of no excuse. If by this means there is a preacher to spare, let him step over as soon as possible from Portpatrick and supply the place of that good young man John Harrison [Harrisin, whose obituary appeared the following month, was ‘a promising youth, serious, modest, and much devoted to God.’] in the Lisburn Circuit. Mr. Smyth calls aloud for help: he is zealous and active, but is quite overborne. I have set down you with Brother Hopper in the Manchester Circuit [They went to Bradford in August.]; and am, dear Joseph,

Yours affectionately.

To John Bredin
HAVERFORDWEST, July 17, 1777.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--John Floyd, who is in Dublin, comes over to the Conference, [Floyd was stationedin Bristol in 1776 and Leeds in 1777.] and will bring your accounts and money to Bristol.

Push out wherever you can into new places. I think you need go no farther than Cork and Brandon next year. Mean­time do, not so much or so much, but all you can for God.-- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Bredin, At Mr. John Fitzhenry's,

At Bollimore, Near Goree, Ireland.

 

To Mrs. Barton

BRISTOL, July 29, 1777.

MY DEAR SISTER,--It is well that you have learned to say, ' The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away.' Your child is gone but a little before you. How soon shall we overtake her! It is no way inconsistent with Christian resignation to ask conditionally, ' Let this cup pass from me '; only with the addition,' Nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou writ.'

Rapturous joy, such as is frequently given in the beginning of justification or of entire sanctification, is a great blessing; but it seldom continues long before it subsides into calm, peaceful love. I believe, if Miss Hurrell [See letter of Oct. 28.] were to spend a little time with you, it might be of great use to many.--I am, with love to Brother Barton, Your affectionate brother.

 

To Alexander Knox

BRISTOL, July 29, 1777.

DEAR ALLECK,--I am just returned from a journey through Monmouthshire and other parts of Wales.

No: God has not forgotten you. You must not say, ' He hideth away His face, and He will never see it.' Surely God hath seen it; and He cannot despise the work of His own hands. But He frequently delays giving bodily health till He heals soul and body together. Perhaps this is His design concerning you. But why do not you go to the salt water? If you are short of money, let me have the pleasure of assisting you a little. Meantime I give you a word for your consideration,--' Why art thou so heavy, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? O put thy trust in God! I shall yet give Him thanks, who is the help of my countenance, and my God.'

Peace be with all your spirits!--I am

Yours affectionately.

 

To Elizabeth Ritchie [13]

BRISTOL, August 2, 1777.

MY DEAR BETSY,--It is with great pleasure I learn that God has been pleased to lift you up from the gates of death, and that your strength is considerably increased, although you are far from being out of danger. When and in what manner was this change wrought? Can you impute it to any outward circum­stance? How did you feel your mind affected when you found a return of strength? Did you rejoice or grieve? or calmly desire, ' Let the will of the Lord be done’? In what respects are you better than when I saw you? In what respects are you the same or worse? Give me as particular an account as you can. Do you find your soul as much alive to God as ever? Does not the corruptible body press down the soul? Do you feel faith's abiding impression, realizing things to come? Do you live in eternity and walk in eternity? And do you still (as Mr. De Renty says) ' carry about with you an experi­mental verity and a fullness of the presence of the ever-blessed Trinity'?--I remain

Yours affectionately.

 

To George Robinson [14]

BRISTOL, August 4, 1777.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--You will have but one family this year; so that if the Societies increase you will soon be able to lift up your head, especially as I will desire our brethren to allow Brother Brown the seven pounds.

Although the number of your children may incite you to it, yet I hope you will not be in haste to make a second choice. Let it be a matter of much prayer and deliberation. Many women will doubtless be offered. But let piety be your first consideration and fortune only the last.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Geo. Robinson, At Langham Row,

Near Alford, Lincolnshire.

 

To Alexander Mather [15]

[BRISTOL, August 6,] 1777.

No, Aleck, no! The danger of ruin to Methodism does not lie here. It springs from quite a different quarter. Our preachers, many of them, are fallen. They are not spiritual. They are not alive to God. They are soft, enervated, fearful of shame, toil, hardship. They have not the spirit which God gave to Thomas Lee at Pateley Bridge or to you at Boston. [In the autumn of 1757, where he suffered much from the mob (Wesley’s Veterans, ii 93-7). Lee was rolled in the common sewer and had his back nearly broken; for his sufferings at Pateley, see ibid iii, 204-6.] Give me one hundred preachers who fear nothing but sin and desire nothing but God, and I care not a straw whether they be clergymen or laymen, such alone will shake the gates of hell and set up the kingdom of heaven upon earth.

 

To Elizabeth Ritchie

ST. IVES, August 24, 1777.

MY DEAR BETSY,--Ever since I was informed that it has pleased God in some measure to restore your strength I have lived in hope that He will yet be entreated and will give you back to our prayers. Do you still find the same consciousness of the presence of the ever-blessed Trinity? [See letter of Aug 2.] Do you find it day and night? In the midst of trials does it remain the same? But one would be ready to ask, excepting a weak body, what trials can you have?

Secluded from the world, and all its care,

Hast thou to joy or grieve, to hope or fear?

Unless it be for this,--You long to please all for their good, but you cannot succeed. You would fain give them satisfaction, but they will not be satisfied. This may be a dose trial.

Send as particular an account as you can of the state both of your body and mind to

Yours affectionately.

 

To Alexander Knox

PENRHYN, August 29, 1777.

MY DEAR ALLECK,--You should read Mr. Fletcher's Essay on Truth. He has there put it beyond all doubt that there is a medium between a child of God and a child of the devil--namely, a servant of God. This is your state. You are not yet a son, but you are a servant; and you are waiting for the Spirit of adoption, which will cry in your heart,' Abba, Father.' You have ' received the Spirit of grace,' and in a measure work righteousness. Without being pained for what you have not, you have cause to bless God for what you have, and to wait patiently till He gives the rest by revealing His Son in your heart.

For all this I have little doubt of seeing you an healthy as well as an happy man. But it is true nothing less than almighty power can heal either your soul or body. And is not this enough? Have not you reason to rejoice that ' salvation cometh of the Lord’? I pray, on whom can you better depend? who loves you better than He? Away, then, with despair! Hope unto the end. To Him I recommend you all; and I am,
dear Alleck,

Yours most affectionately.

 

To his Wife


GWENNAP, September 1, 1777.

MY DEAR,--I sincerely wish a reunion with you if it could be upon good terms. Otherwise it would not continue; and then the last error would be worse than the first. But what are those terms on which it probably would continue? In order to know we must state the case; which I will do as briefly as I can, leaving out all unnecessary circumstances. [See letters of July 15, 1774, and Oct. 2, 1778.]

Some years since, without my consent or knowledge, you left me and settled at Newcastle.

I received you again without any terms--nay, without any acknowledgement that you had done wrong.

Two years ago you left me again without my consent or knowledge. A few days since, I met you, and (to my great surprise) you seemed willing to return. I was willing to receive you upon these terms: (1) restore my papers; (2) promise to take no more.

But upon reflection I see I was too hasty. For you have given copies of my papers, and these you cannot recall. Like­wise you have spoken all manner of evil against me, par­ticularly to my enemies and the enemies of the cause I live to support. Hereby many bad men have triumphed and been confirmed in their evil ways; and many good but weak men have been stumbled, and some have drawn back to perdition. A sword has been put into-the hands of the enemies of God, and the children of God have been armed against one another.

Things standing thus, if I was to receive you just now without any acknowledgement or reparation of these wrongs, it would be esteemed by all reasonable men a confirmation of all you have said.

But it may be asked, 'What reparation are you either able or willing to make? '

I know not if you are willing to make any. If you are, what reparation are you able to make? Very little indeed; for the water is sprit, and cannot be gathered up again.

All you can do now, if you are ever so willing, is to unsay what you have said. For instance, you have said over and over that I have lived in adultery these twenty years. Do you believe this, or do you not? If you do, how can you think of living with such a monster. If you do not, give it me under your hand. Is not this the least you can do?

To his Great-niece Patience Ellison [16]
BRISTOL, September 7, 1777.

MY DEAR PATTY,--Only go on as you have begun. Labor to be not almost but altogether a Christian; and not only an outside but an inside Christian, the same in heart and in life. Then you will receive more and more blessings from Him who watches over you for good, and that observes the faintest motions of your heart towards Him, and is ever ready to bring every good design into effect.

In order to your improvement in every respect, serious company will be of admirable use, and you will have need to keep your mouth as with a bridle when you are among triflers. But let them do as they please. You have one thing to do-- to work out your own salvation.


I will send you the volume of poems. The more you read (only a little at a time) the more you will love reading. And to assist you in anything will always be a pleasure to, my dear Patty,

Your affectionate Uncle.

To Alexander Clark [17]
BRISTOL, September 8, 1777.


MY DEAR BROTHER,--If we live till spring, I hope to reconcile most of the contending parties. In the meantime, that something may be done at the present, I have wrote to Mr. Boardman at Cork and desired him to come to Dublin immediately. Mr. Bradburn is to supply his place at Cork.


In every place the Assistant chooses the leaders. But any leader or any other person does well to appeal to me if he thinks himself hardly used. When Mr. Boardman comes, I wish you would speak to him; and whatever he determines will be agreeable to

Your affectionate brother.


To Mr. Alex. Clark, In Chancery Lane,
Dublin.

To Alexander Clark
BRADFORD-[UPON-AVON], September 9, 1777.


MY DEAR BRETHERN, [This letter was sent to Clark for himself and the other leaders.] --It is certain our preachers have a right to preach our doctrines, as my lady’s have to preach theirs. None can blame them for this. But I blame all even that speak the truth otherwise than in love. Keenness of spirit and tartness of language are never to be commended. It is only in meekness that we are to instruct those that oppose themselves. But we are not allowed upon any account whatever to return evil for evil or railing for railing.

I have desired Mr. Boardman to be in Dublin as soon as possible. I believe you know his spirit. He is a loving, peaceable man. Meantime in your patience possess ye your souls.--I am, my dear brethren,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Alex. Clark, In Chancery Lane,

Dublin
 

To Alexander Clark
BRISTOL, September 11, I777.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I received your last letter this after­noon, and one at the same time wherein are these words:

Last Sunday morning the two Clarks in a very indecent and unbecoming manner persisted to meet their classes, and peremptorily refused to admit the appointed leader, who it is said with all Christian meekness endeavored to reason with them. But they were inflamed, and had so kindled and irritated the spirits of their classes that with a mob-like anarchy they declared they would have none else to meet them. What could be done? Was it not necessary to disband such unsubdued and inflammatory spirits? In the most tender, gentle, awful, and affecting manner Mr. Hampson at the Society last night showed the consequences of such proceedings and the necessity of order and good government, and then declared the two Clarks to be no longer members of this Society.

This is not wrote or dictated by either of the preachers, but by (I believe an impartial) bystander. I am sorry both for the thing and for the occasion of it. But in very deed I know not what to say or do. For many years I have had a particular regard for Alexander Clark, and I have so still. I love him as a plain, honest man that wishes to do all things well. But what can I advise you to in the present case? in this trying hour? I would really advise you to sit still for a little while. Very soon you may expect to see Mr. Boardman. And as he will be the Assistant, he will be able, if anything is wrong, to set it right.

Commending you and our brethren to the God of peace and love, I remain

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Alex. Clark, In Chancery Lane,

Dublin.

 

To Samuel Wells

BRISTOL, September 11, 1777.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--You may remember it was observed at the Quarterly Meeting that the present contributions can­not support four preachers; and it was considered, What can be done either to increase the contributions or to lessen the expenses?

The easiest way, we thought, to increase the contributions was this: Let our ablest Societies advance quarterly according to their abilities.

£ s. d.

Coleford has agreed to advance . . 1 0 0

Motcomb . . . . 10 6

Corsley . . . . 10 6

Frome . . . . 6 6

Is not Braford Society able to advance. . 1 0 0

Freshford . . . . 10 6
Shaftesbury . . . . 8 0

Seand . . . . 7 6

Catbench . . . . 4 6

Oakhill . . . . . 2 6

If they can and will do this, nothing will be wanting.

In order to lessen the expenses, the Motcomb Society has engaged to furnish the Quarterly Dinner every Midsummer, the Coleford Society every Michaelmas, the Societies of Frome and Corsley every Christmas. If the Bradford Society chooses to furnish it at Lady Day, it is well. If not, Motcomb will do this too. By this means several pounds in the year will be saved and many uncomfortable complaints prevented.

One thing more I desire. I request all the Wiltshire Societies to do as they do in other circuits, to pay their quarterly collection when they receive their tickets. And it is then I hope persons of property will advance their subscriptions according to their ability. Out of this serve the other preachers first, and yourself last. [Wells was Assistant in North Wilts Circuit.]--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

 

To Mary Bishop

BRISTOL, September 15, 1777.

MY DEAR MISS BISHOP,--There is seldom much heat in the preaching-house at Bradford: at least, it is not caused by the largeness of the congregation; although I think it was larger last week than I have seen it for several years.

We have reason to be thankful that none of our friends at Bristol have been hurt by Mr. Hilton's change. [See letters of Aug. 6 and Oct. 22 (to Miss Bishop).] They seem to be grieved but not hurt, rather the more established in the truth. Of Miss Flower I have heard something not so agree­able. But I can say nothing yet. In a day or two I hope to have an opportunity of talking with her, and then I shall know how to judge. If she will copy after my dear Miss Yerbury, I shall have no more pain about her.

The sea breezes may be of service to you, if you have an opportunity of using constant exercise. This has brought many from the gates of death. It is beyond all medicine whatever.

I am in great hopes this sickness will not be unto death, but that the glory of the Lord may be revealed. Kempis's rule admits of many exceptions. Whatever was the case then, we have now abundant proof that very 'many are made better by sickness'; unless one would rather say ‘in sickness.’ This is one of the grand means which God employs for that purpose. In sickness many are convinced of sin, many converted to God, and still more confirmed in the ways of God and brought onward to perfection.

His gracious design in yours seems to be chiefly this--to wean you yet more from created things, to make and keep you dead to all below. To this end you are in a manner cut off from everything that you may find your all in Him. If He should see good to restore you, you will be an instrument fit for the Master's use.

It seems the best way to profit by that retirement which results from your present weakness is to divide your time between reading, meditation, and prayer, intermixed with serious conversation. And when your strength will permit, you must endeavor to do a little good; only take care at first not to go too far. Some years since, we had a little Society at Southampton; perhaps you may find some frag­ments of it remaining. May the God of all grace, after you have suffered awhile, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, and settle you!--I am, my dear sister,

Your ever affectionate brother.

 

To Ann Bolton

BRISTOL, September 15, 1777.

MY DEAR SISTER,---You know how nearly I am concerned in whatever relates to you. My regard for you has been invariable ever since you was with me in London. I then set you-down for my inalienable friend, and such I trust you will always be, until the union of our spirits will be complete where our bodies part no more.

Why, then, should I not speak (as I have done hitherto) in all simplicity. Why should I not tell you just what rises in my heart even on the most delicate occasion! I cannot once suppose you will take it amiss. I speak plainly because I love you.

God has lately delivered you out of imminent danger, that of being unequally yoked with an unbeliever. That he is so now will admit of no dispute. And it is not plain that ever he was otherwise. It is highly probable that he never was: that he either wore the appearance of religion for a time, or deceived himself as well as others by mistaking good desires, transient desires for good tempers, whether those desires were real----. But it is certain they were not deep; and as they were chiefly from love to you, it is scarce possible they could have been lasting.

And now, instead of praising God for your great deliverance, you are [set] against Him, as [if] it were no deliverance at all! You are fretting and grieving yourself because the snare is broken, because your soul is taken out of the net! But must not this grieve the Holy Spirit of God? What deep unthankfulness! And it is well if here be not a little inordinate affection lying at the bottom of all; otherwise it is a mere device of Satan to hinder you soaring aloft upon the wings of love. My Nancy, arise and shake yourself from the dust! You have acted wisely and faithfully. God has heard your prayer. He is well pleased with the sacrifice you have made [Admit] no thought to the contrary; and if one should, give no place to it--no, not for a moment. And whenever you are troubled on this or any account, [Miss Bolton seems to have replied at once. See letters of April 24 and Sept. 27.] what human friend can you unbosom yourself to more freely than to, my dear, Nancy,

Your tenderly affectionate.

To Duncan McAllum [18]
BRISTOL, September 24, 1777.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--There is a good deal of weight in what you and our other brethren say concerning the infancy of the work of God at Inverness. I therefore consent to your staying in the North till spring upon this one condition, that you try what can be done north of Inverness by spending one or two days every week 'in preaching at Moss, Cromartie, or wherever the people are wining to hear. Commending you all to the grace of God, I am, my dear brother,

Your affectionate brother.

 

To Ann Bolton

BRISTOL, September 27, 1777.

Shall not I speak to my dear friend all that is in my heart? I know no reason why I should not. I have done so from the time I knew you first, and more especially from the time you was with me in London. Then I took more intimate know­ledge of you: I tasted of your spirit. I observed all your tempers, and marked you down as the ' sister of my choice.' As such I have looked upon you ever since without any inter­mission or variation. And sometimes you have been free and open to me; but at other times you have been more shy and distant. My Nancy, let that time of distance and reserve return no more! Be to me always (if you can) what I am to you, a faithful and tender-hearted friend.

Undoubtedly Satan, who well understands the manner how the mind is influenced by the body, can, by means of those parts in the animal machine which are more immediately subservient to thinking, raise a thousand perceptions and emotions in the mind, so far as God is pleased to permit. I doubt not but he was the chief agent in your late painful exercises. [See letter of Sept. 15 to her.] And you gave him advantage by reasoning with him--that is, fighting him at his own weapons; instead of simply looking up and saying, 'Thou shalt answer for me, O Lord, my God.'

You undoubtedly want more thankfulness. And you want more simplicity; that grace, Cambray says, 'which cuts the soul off from all unnecessary reflections upon itself.' You are encompassed with ten thousand mercies; and the greatest of all is, ' Christ in a pure and spotless heart! ' Beware of ever admitting any doubt or reasoning concerning this! Where­unto you have attained hold fast! And use all the grace you have received. Warn every one, and exhort every one, especially those who groan after full salvation.

I cannot on any account pass an whole day without com­mending you to God in prayer. I thank you for writing to me so soon.

Continue to love and pray for, my dear Nancy,

Yours most affectionately.

 

To Mrs. Smyth [19]

BANGOR FERRY, October 15, 1777.

MY DEAR MRS. SMYTH,--As I believe both you and our friends in Dublin will be pleased to hear of our safe landing, I will first give you a short account of what has befallen us hitherto. We went on board the packet about seven. The wind was full in our teeth and blew high. However, tacking to and fro, by the help of the tide, we got out to sea before noon. When the tide turned against us, we made little way, but beat up and down till night. The wind rising higher and higher, and the sea in proportion, my fellow passengers were all sick: I, by the blessing of God, was not sick at all. How­ever, as I could not read, I lay down about seven, but (which is very uncommon with me) could not sleep till past midnight. In the morning, the wind being still very high and directly contrary, we found ourselves out of our course, having been driven far to the southward. But being under the Carnarvonshire shore, we were in tolerably smooth water. About noon, the wind coming a point to the south, we put out to sea again. But the storm increased, and about four carried away our bolt-sprit and tore one of the sails all to bits. The captain and his men with all quietness and composure quickly repaired the loss. And before six, by the good providence of God, we landed safe at Holyhead,--I believe in answer to many of your prayers, who were not forgetful of us.

I blamed myself for not taking the opportunity of talking with you on Sunday morning. I had desired it many times; but neither you nor I could speak freely before much company. You are in the right not to rest satisfied without the present witness that you are a child of God. The bare remembrance of past things will neither make you holy nor happy. And if you continue to seek it, you will surely find it; for 'every one that seeketh findeth.' When your mouth is opened, you may call upon God with many words out of the abundance of your heart. But if you have few or none, you may ' groan to Him that reads the heart the unutterable prayer."

You certainly did right in casting in your lot among the people of God. But it is no wonder that you are tempted concerning it. However, that matter may be made easy. Agree upon a time when Sister King may meet Mrs. Blachford, Mrs. Shiels, and you by yourselves. I believe you will then find no difficulty in speaking. And it will be a blessing to your soul. You have set your hand to the plough: see that you look not back; neither you nor my dear Mr. Smyth. Go on; run, and never tire, till we meet in our Father's house.--I am, my dear sister,

Yours in tender affection.


To Mrs. William Smyth, In William
Street, Dublin.

 

To Walter Churchey [20]

LONDON, October 18, I777.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--You see how 'good wits jump.' We agree that no politics shall have a place in the Arminian Magazine. But poetry will; only my brother and I are the judges what pieces shall be admitted. It may be some will think us too nice in our choice; but that we cannot help. As to a review of religious books, it might be well; but I have two objections: (1) I scruple my own sufficiency for the work; (2) I would not at any price be bound to read over all the present religious productions of the press.

Peace be with you and yours, young and old!--I am

Your affectionate brother.

 

To Christopher Hopper

LONDON, October 18, I777.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I believe what you say of John Hilton [Benson says on Oct. 7 (manuscript Life, i. 788): ‘I wrote a very close letter to Mr. Hilton three weeks ago; but have had no answer. I wish our friendship may not be at an end.’ See letter of Aug. 6.] is true; therefore I hindered the angry ones from falling upon him at the Conference.

There is no divine visitation which is likely to have so general an influence upon sinners as an earthquake. The rich can no more guard against it than the poor. Therefore I have often thought this would be no undesirable event.

I hang out no false colors. Scriptural, Christian, &c., are all equivocal words. I mean a magazine purposely wrote to defend Universal Redemption. Other magazines give forty pages for sixpence; this gives eighty for a shilling. [See previous letter.] My time is short; so I publish as much as I can at once, if haply I may live to finish it. All these things I have maturely weighed.

I have said over and over there are weighty reasons why no preacher should ever be a trustee. Sycophants are wide 'of this question.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Joseph Benson [21]
WITNEY, October 22, 1777.

DEAR JOSEPH,--I do not wonder you do not conceive what Grotius meant by that odd sentence; for I doubt whether he conceived it himself. I can translate it, but I cannot under­stand it; it is well if any one can. 'Everything exists necessarily or of itself; not as it is considered in a general view, but as it actually exists. But individual things' (only) 'exist actually.' There is a good English translation of this book, published some years since by Dr. John Clarke, Dean of Sarum. [John Clarke (1682-1757) was Dean of Salisbury in 1728. For Samuel Clarke, see letter of Sept. 24, 1753.] He was (I think younger) brother to Dr. Samuel Clarke.

I have no objection to your printing a thousand or two of the account of Mrs. Hutton's death. It may be of use for you to visit Manchester again when opportunity serves. Only do everything in full concurrence with the Assistant.--I am, dear Joseph,

Yours affectionately.

 

To Mary Bishop


NEAR OXFORD, October 22, 1777.

MY DEAR MISS BISHOP,--By long experience I am con­vinced that natural strength of understanding is no defense against the most absurd errors; more especially if we lean to it ever so little, if we are not deeply conscious of our own weakness. I am therefore jealous of you also: I am afraid lest you too 'fall where many mightier have been slain.' Indeed, some have not scrupled to say already, 'Oh, Miss Bishop will soon be enlightened as well as Miss Flower. [ See letters of Sept. 15 (to her) and Nov. 16.] She has such a regard for Mr. Hilton, that he will soon open her eyes.' As yet I cannot believe he will; yet I do not say there is no danger. Has he opened the cause? Has he spoke o wrote to you upon the favorite subject? Has he talked you about 'being still, ceasing from your own works, and from crying, Lo here and lo there'? If he has, what impression did that smooth and plausible conversation make upon your mind Was you almost persuaded it was right? or did you stand unmoved? If you was moved, if you too should leave 'the fallen Methodists,' and join 'the Friends, the only living people in the world '; still, I do not find myself inclined to bring am heavy indictment against you. I should not be angry; though I should grieve, for I cannot easily part with those I love.

I am inclined to think your friend of Bath made a mistake with regard to the person. I did receive ' a letter which I knew-not what to make of.' But it was from Miss Flower, not Miss Bishop. I do not remember that ever I received a letter from you which I did not understand. I know few people who write or speak more intelligibly than you do; and I hope you will soon give a fresh proof of it to, my dear Miss Bishop,

Yours affectionately

To Miss Bishop, At Mrs. Taylor's,


Above Bar, Hanover Row, Southampton.

To Mrs. Barton
STONY STRATFORD, October 28, 1777.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I am glad that in spite of all discouragement’s your little Society still keep together. There is un­doubtedly a fairer prospect now than there has been for some time. I believe good will result from Miss Hurrell's visit. [See letter of July 29 to Mrs. Barton.] She has been of use to many. And it is certain both T. Hanson [The ministers in the Hull Circuit.] and James Hudson [The ministers in the Hull Circuit.] are workmen that need not be ashamed. They are good preachers and (what is more) good men; and their heart is in the work. I wish when opportunity serves you would speak freely to them. Men of this kind are not always to be found. You have been long led in a rough and thorny way. But as your day so your strength has been. He that loves you gives you help for to-day, and you need not take thought for to-morrow. You have His love and truth and promise on your side, and He hath never failed them that seek Him. Peace be with your spirit!--I am, dear Jenny,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Jane Barton, In Norwood,

Beverley, Yorkshire.

To the Assistant Preachers
[October 1777.]

MY DEAR BROTHER, About March you may begin to make the subscription for the new chapel. Till then I will beg you with all possible diligence to procure subscriptions for the Philosophy. [See letter of Feb. 15.] Spare no pains. It will be the most complete thing in its kind of any in the English tongue. But it is well if I procure as many subscribers as will pay the expense of the edition.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

 
To Mr. -----
LONDON, November 9, 1777.

I have not time to write to you so full and so plain upon the point as I have written in the sermons that are printed. I have a thousand other things to do, and I have said all I can say. Here is a precipice on each side. To say every man can believe to justification or sanctification when he will is contrary to plain matter of fact. Every one can confute it by his own experience. And yet if you deny that every man can believe if he will, you run full into absolute decrees. How will you untie this knot? I apprehend very easily. That every man may believe if he will I earnestly maintain, and yet that he can believe when he will I totally deny. But there will be always something in the matter which we cannot well com­prehend or explain.--I am, &c.

 

To William Ripley [22]

WESTMINSTER, November 13, 1777.

DEAR BILLY,--It is well if the houses both at Driffield and Guisborough be not too small. Mr. Atlay will send you a complete set of my Works. If you increase in substance, you are in great danger of decreasing in grace.

Treacle-plasters would very probably prevent that crack­ling of the joints. To prevent worldly-mindedness be as much employed in the work of God as you possibly can.

Peace be with you and yours!--I am, dear Billy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Will. Ripley, In Whitby,

Yorkshire.

To Mary Bishop
LONDON, November 16, 1777.

DEAR MISS BISHOP,--You have entirely taken away my fear (indeed, not a vehement one) of your following the example of poor Miss Flower and connecting yourself with the Quakers. [See letters of Oct. 22, 1777, and May 15, 1778, to her.] I am glad you are not tossed to and fro even by those you love well, and hope you will always say, ' I am a friend to Socrates and to Plato, but much more to truth.'

'To be faithful to the teaching of the Spirit of God,' you have been exhorted ever since you joined the Methodists. This sentiment is not peculiar to Mr. Hilton [See letter of Feb. 7, 1778.]; nor, I believe, any scriptural sentiment. What I have lamented in him for some years is an aptness to condemn and to despise his brethren. There is no failing more infectious than this; 'tis much if you did not catch a little of it from him. For otherwise you would hardly pass that sentence, ' that the body of Methodists are degenerated.' You cannot possibly judge whether they are or no. Perhaps you converse with one or two hundred of them. Now, allowing two-thirds of these to be degenerated, can you infer the same concerning thirty or forty thousand?

Yet thus much I will allow. Two-thirds of those who are grown rich are greatly degenerated. They do not, will not save all they can in order to give all they can. And without doing this they cannot grow in grace; nay, they continually grieve the Holy Spirit of God.


It gives me pleasure to hear that you are recovering your strength of body. That you may continually increase in spiritual strength also is the constant wish of, my dear Miss Bishop,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Miss Bishop, At Mrs. Taylor's,

Southampton.

 

To Thomas Rutherford [23]

LONDON, November 22, 1777.

DEAR TOMMY,--You send me a pleasing account of the isle; just such an one as I expected. For I did not doubt but the work of God would prosper in your hands.

They talk, but they can do nothing. If the Act of Tolera­tion does not extend to the isle, neither does the Conventicle Act. So they have no ground to stand upon. It is soon enough to take the oaths when you are required so to do. If any one actually molests you, then apply to the Governor, telling him, ' I desired you so to do.' He will likewise do you justice in case of riots.--I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

My kind love to Mr. Corlett. [See heading to letter of Jan. 17.] You may sell many of the penny tracts, and they will do much good.

To the Reader of the ' Arminian Magazine' [24]

LEWISHAM, November 24, 1777.

It is usual, I am informed, for the compilers of magazines to employ the outside covers in acquainting the courteous reader with the beauties and excellencies of what he will find within. I beg him to excuse me from this trouble: from writing panegyric upon myself. Neither can I desire my friends to do it for me in their recommendatory letters. I am content this Magazine should stand or fall by its own intrinsic value. If it is a compound of falsehood, ribaldry, and nonsense, let it sink into oblivion. If it contains only the words of truth and soberness, then let it meet with a favorable reception.

It is usual likewise with magazine writers to speak of them­selves in the plural number: ' We will do this.' And, indeed, it is the general custom of great men so to do. But I am a little one. Let me, then, be excused in this also, and permitted to speak as I am accustomed to do.

To Mrs. Crosby [25]
LONDON, December 2, 1777.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I hope you will always have your time much filled up. You will, unless you grow weary of well doing. For is not the harvest plenteous still? Had we ever a larger field of action? And shall we stand all or any part of the day idle? Then we should wrong both our neighbor and our own souls.

For the sake of retrenching her expenses, I thought it quite needful for Miss Bosanquet to go from home. And I was likewise persuaded (as she was herself) that God had something for her to do in Bath and Kingswood; perhaps in Bristol too, although I do not think she will be called to speak there in public.

The difference between us and the Quakers in this respect is manifest. They flatly deny the rule itself, although it stands clear in the Bible. We allow the rule; only we believe it admits of some exceptions. At present I know of those, and no more, in the whole Methodist Connection. You should send word of what our Lord is doing where you go to, dear Sally,

Yours affectionately.

To Joseph Benson
LONDON, December 8, 1777.

DEAR JOSEPH,--Undoubtedly Bishop Newton's book on the Prophecies is well written. [Thomas Newton, Bishop of Bristol 1761-82, Dean of St. Paul's 1768, See letter of March 10, 1763.] And he is certainly a man of sense and of considerable learning. This he has shown in what he writes on the Revelation. But with regard to the passage you mention I cannot agree with him at all. I believe the Romish antichrist is already so fallen that he will not again lift up his head in any considerable degree. The Bishop of Rome has little more power now than any other of the Italian Princes. I therefore concur with you in believing his tyranny is past never to return.

But there is no comparison, either as to sense, learning, or piety, between Bishop Newton and Bengelius. The former is a mere child to the latter. I advise you to give another serious and careful reading .to that extract from his comment on the Revelation which concludes the Notes. There you have one uniform consistent [view] far beyond any I ever saw. And I verily believe the more deeply you consider it the more you will admire it.

Does any one deny that a kite is bigger than a lark, or that Ogilvie has written a larger book than Virgil? And certainly there are larger magazines than ours; but it does not follow that they are better. Ours is reduced to half the price, and will contain forty-eight pages, which is the usual number for sixpence.

We are called to propagate Bible religion through the land--that is, faith working by love, holy tempers and holy lives. Let us do it with our might!--I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Miss March [26]
NEAR LONDON, December 10, 1777.

You do not at all understand my manner of life. Though I am always in haste, I am never in a hurry'; because I never undertake any more work than I can go through with perfect calmness of spirit. It is true I travel four or five thousand miles in a year. But I generally travel alone in my carriage, and consequently am as retired ten hours in a day as if I was in a wilderness. On other days I never spend less than three hours (frequently ten or twelve) in the day alone. So there are few persons in the kingdom who spend so many hours secluded from all company. Yet I find time to visit the sick and the poor; and I must do it, if I believe the Bible, if I believe these are the marks whereby the Shepherd of Israel will know and judge His sheep at the great day; therefore, when there is time and opportunity for it, who can doubt but this is matter of absolute duty? When I was at Oxford, and lived almost like an hermit, I saw not how any busy man could be saved. I scarce thought it possible for a man to retain the Christian spirit amidst the noise and bustle of the world. God taught me better by my own experience. I had ten times more business in America (that is, at intervals) than ever I had in my life. But it was no hindrance to silence of spirit.

Mr. Boehm [See letter of Aug. 31, 1772, to Philothea Briggs.] was Chaplain to Prince George of Denmark, Secretary to him and Queen Anne, principal manager of almost all the public charities in the kingdom, and employed in numberless private charities. An intimate friend, knowing this, said to him when they were alone, 'Sir, are you not hurt by that amazing hurry of business? I have seen you in your office, surrounded with people, listening to one, dictating to another, and at the same time writing to a third; could you then retain a sense of the presence of God? ' He answered, ' All that company and all that business no more hindered or lessened my communion with God than if I had been all alone in a church kneeling before the communion table.' Was it not the same case with him to whom Gregory Lopez said, ' Go and be an hermit in Mexico'? I am concerned for you; I am sorry you should be content with lower degrees of usefulness and holiness than you are called to. But I cannot help it: so I submit; and am still, my dear Miss March,

Yours in sincere affection.

To Mr. Powell
LONDON, December 18, 1777.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Your proposal is good. Let Mr. Watson, who is a pious and sensible youth (?), act as a fourth preacher; at least till you hear farther from

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Powell, In the Drapery,

Northampton.

 

To Thomas Rutherford [27]

LONDON, December 20, 1777.

DEAR TOMMY,--You gave me an agreeable account of the progress of the work of God in the island. I apprehend you will meet with no hindrance from men in power. They know the mind of the King.

You cannot with a good conscience receive that froward man either as a leader or a member of the Society unless he acknowledges his fault. Otherwise he would do more hurt in the Society than out of it.--I am, dear Tommy,

Yours affectionately.

I fix no journeys till after Christmas.

 

To John Bredin


LONDON, December 23, 1777.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I have wrote to Mr. Creighton. [See letters of May 24, 1773, and July 12, 1778.] Yours of the 12th instant I received this afternoon. I desire one of the preachers in the Armagh Circuit to change with you till Lady Day. Before that time (if my life health are spared) I hope to be in Ireland myself.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

I shall be glad of a correspondence with the clergyman mention.

To Mr. John Bredin, At Mr. Maire's Merchant,

In Iniskillan.