1791

To Richard Rodda

LONDON [January]. 1791.

DEAR RICHARD, -- It was madness to make that matter up. I would rather have thrown it into Chancery. [See letter of Nov. 20, 1789, to him.]

Charles Bond is determined, it is plain, to sell the Methodists for a wife. I do not see how you can help it. Sammy and you have done your pain. His blood is not upon your head. [Samuel Bradburn was Rodda's colleague. Bond, fourth preacher in the Manchester Circuit, was stationed at Coventry in 1791, at Norwich in 1791, and in 1793 'desisted from traveling.' See letter of July 7, 1786.]

Perhaps greater consequences than yet appear may follow from the dissentions at Mr. Bayley's chapel. [Dr. Cornelius Bayley. See letter of Oct. 12, 1778.] However, it is your duty to go straight forward, breathing nothing but peace and love.

I do not depend upon taking any more journeys. But if my life is prolonged I shall probably be at Manchester about the usual time. Peace be with you all! -- I am, dear brother,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Rodda, At the Preaching-house,

In Manchester.

To John Fry [1]

CITY ROAD, January 1, 1791.

MY FRIEND, -- The sum of what I said to you and to Dr. Hamilton was this: 'I will revise that part of the Ecclesiastical History; and if I am convinced any of it is wrong, I will openly retract it.' I have revised it again and again, but I am not convinced that any part of it is wrong; on the contrary, I am fully persuaded it is all the naked truth. What the Quakers (so called) are or do now is nothing to the purpose, I am thoroughly persuaded they were exactly such as they are described in this History. Your present summary exactly answers the account Barclay's Apology given in the 135th page of the History. O be content! I love you well; do not constrain me to speak. I do not want to say anything of George Fox; but I hope he was stark mad when he wrote that medley of nonsense, blasphemy, and scurrility styled his 'Great Mystery.' But I love and esteem you and many of the present Quakers; and am

Your real friend.

To Adam Clarke

LONDON, January 3, 1791.

DEAR ADAM, -- I suppose the account sent to Mr. Mather concerning your running so much in debt was not sent out of love. I am glad you have cleared up the matter. So let it die and be forgot. But you startle me when you talk of grieving so much for the death of an infant. [His eldest girl died on Dec. 16, and he was suffering from rheumatic affection in the head. See letter of Jan. 18 to Mrs. Clarke.] This was certainly a proof of inordinate affection; and if you love them thus all your children will die. How did Mr. De Renty behave when he supposed his wife to be dying This is a pattern for a Christian.

Be firm and duly attend St. Patrick's once a month. But you forgot to send me your thoughts on Magnetism. [See letters of April 14, 1790, and Feb. 9, 1791.]

John Bredin is a weak brother. Let him not complain. He behaved ill both at Jersey and Guernsey. Pray let him behave well now; the past will be forgotten. -- I am, dear Adam,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Clarke, At the New Room,

Dublin.

PS. by James Rogers

I hope you received my second letter about poor Simmonds, or rather that of the stewards from Plymouth Dock, as I was sorry their former letter must have reached you too long before I had it in my power to contradict it.

It is wonderful how this report of your starving for want, &c., &c., in Dublin had arisen in the manner it seems to have been told our friend Mather. But I told Mr. Wesley at the time I was confident it was a mistake. It is well if some who thought, nay, often said: 'If such and such left us, the work of God as to temporals in Dublin must decline.' I say it is well if these are not the inventors of it. But, blessed be God, He will never be at loss for means to carry on His own work.

My wife joins in much love to you and yours, and all friends.--I am yours, etc., etc.

JAMES ROGERS.

To Thomas Taylor [2]

LONDON, January 6, 1791.

DEAR TOMMY, -- With regard to the powerful workings of the Spirit, I think those words of our Lord are chiefly to be understood: 'The wind bloweth where it listeth; Thou hearest the sound thereof' (thou art sure of the fact), 'but canst not tell whence it cometh, or whither it goeth.'

Make your Yearly Subscription when you see best, only take care it does not interfere with any other subscription.

The tract of Archbishop King has been particularly admired by many persons of excellent sense. I do not admire it so much as they do; but I like it well. Yet I have corrected far better tract on the subject, probably the last I shall have to publish.

Indeed, I hope I shall not live to be useless. I wish you and yours many happy years; and am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ann Bolton [3]

LONDON, January 12, 1791.

MY DEAR NANCY, -- I thank you for your welcome present, and rejoice to hear that your health is better. What is it which is good for us that our Lord will not give if we can but trust in Him These last four days I have had better health than I had for several months before. Only my sight continues much as it was. But good is the work of the Lord! -- I am, my dear Nancy,

Affectionately yours.

To Edward Lewly

LONDON, January 12, 1791.

MY DEAR BROTHR, -- I do not believe any single person in your Select Society scruples saying,

Every moment, Lord, I need

The merit of thy death.

This is clearly determined in the Thoughts upon Christian Perfection. But who expects common people to speak accurately And how easy is it to entangle them in their talk! I am afraid some have done this already. A man that is not a thorough friend to Christian Perfection will easily puzzle others, and thereby weaken if not destroy any Select Society. I doubt this has been the case with you. That Society was in a lively state and well united together when I was last at Birmingham. My health has been better for a few days than it has been for several months. Peace be with all your spirits! I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Edward Lewly,

Birmingham.

To Henry Anderson [4]

NEAR LONDON, January 13, 1791.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- The speaking to a congregation in the name of Christ is a thing of no small importance. You are therefore in the right, before you undertake it, to consider the matter well. Indeed, it may not be improper to speak a little now when opportunity offers. But I do not advise you to give yourself up to the work till you are proposed and approved at the next Conference.--I am

Your friend and brother.

To Mr. Henry Anderson, At Kilham,

Near Malton, Yorkshire.

To Mrs. Adam Clarke

LONDON, January 18, 1791.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- Before this time I hope God has heard the prayers and given Brother Clarke a little more ease. I should suspect a dropsy in the brain, which, though formerly judged incurable, has lately been cured.

Both Brother Clarke and you have large proofs that whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth. [See letters of Jan. 3 and Feb. 9.] He knoweth the way whence you go; when you have been tried, you shall come forth as gold.

I wonder at the folly of Mr. V. Surely he is a very weak man. But I shall judge better when I see his performances. Peace be multiplied again! -- I am, my dear sister,

Ever yours.

To James Macdonald

LONDON, January 18, 1791.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am glad to hear that the work of God is so prosperous at Newry. Continue to seek Him by fasting, and you shall see still greater things than these. Take care to keep as exact an account as you can of everything that occurs. The verses are worthy to be inserted in the Arminian Magazine. I should be glad to be acquainted with the author of them; but I hardly think either she or you will see me any more in this world. [See letter of Oct. 23, 1790.]

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Robert Dull [5]

LONDON, January 19, 1791.

DEAR ROBERT, -- Certainly Calvinism is the direct antidote to Methodism -- that is, heart religion, and I think it would not be amiss if you presented, where you see proper, the Dialogue between a Predestinarian and his Friend.

I am glad you have wrote to Joseph Cole. His visit to Melrose will not be in vain. And it is a good omen that God has provided you with an able curate.

Although my health is better now for several days than it has been for several months, yet I much doubt whether I shall attempt to cross the sea any more; my last voyage discomposed me so much. But if I cannot reach Ireland, I am in hope my strength will suffice for visiting Scotland. Probably we shall have a little conference at Edinburgh in spring. -- I am, with love to Sister Dall, dear Robert,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To William Torrie [6]

LONDON, January 19, 1791.

MY DEAR BROTHER TORRIE, -- I wish John Philips well, and do not wish to hinder his doing all the good he can. Therefore I commend you for dealing so tenderly with him, and advise you to do so still, even if he should speak unkindly either to you or of you. But I will not blame you either for preaching in the morning or for meeting a class. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Greathead [7]

LONDON, January 22, 1791.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am half blind and half lame; but by the help of God I creep on still. You have great reason to thank Him for the blessings He hath given you from your youth up until now. Undoubtedly many of these were sent, as you observe, in answer to the prayers of your good mother. Now, do all the good you can to your poor neighbors. A word spoken in season, how good is it. Wishing you and yours all happiness, I am

Your affectionate brother.

To John Booth [8]

LONDON, January 29, 1791.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You give me a very agreeable account of the progress of the work of God in your circuit. As to the poor self-conceited enthusiasts in Keighley, it seems best that you should never name them in public, but when occasion offers strike at the root of their errors by clearly proving the truth which they deny; and whenever you meet with any of them in private, then speak and spare not. Whenever you have opportunity of speaking to believers, urge them to go on to perfection. Spare no pains; and God, our own God, shall give you His blessing! -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. John Booth, At the Preaching-house,

In Keighley, Yorkskire.

To Thomas Broadbent [9]

LONDON, January 29, 1791.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You have great reason to praise God that He gives a blessing to your labors. So He will more and more if you do not entangle yourself with the affairs of this life. If you seek your happiness in God alone, you will never be disappointed: if in anything else, you surely will; for all creatures are broken cisterns. Let your eye be single. Seek one thing--to save your own soul and those that hear you. -- I am, dear Tommy, Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Alice Cambridge [10]

LONDON, January 31, 1791,

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I received your letter an hour ago. I thank you for writing so largely and so freely; do so always to me as your friend, as one that loves you well. Mr. Barber has the glory of God at heart; and so have his fellow laborers. [Thomas Barber had evidently come from Carlow to Bandon.] Give them all honor, and obey them in all things as far as conscience permits. But it will not permit you to be silent when God commands you to speak: yet I would have you give as little offense as possible; and therefore I would advise you not to speak at any place where a preacher is speaking at the same time, lest you should draw away his hearers. Also avoid the first appearance of pride or magnifying yourself. If you want books or anything, let me know; I have your happiness much at heart. During the little time I have to stay on earth pray for

Your affectionate brother.

To Ezekiel Cooper, of Philadelphia [11]

NEAR LONDON, February 1, 1791.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Those that desire to write or say anything to me have no time to lose; for time has shaken me by the hand and death is not far behind. But I have reason to be thankful for the time that is past: I felt few of the infirmities of old age for fourscore and six years. It was not till a year and a half ago that my strength and my sight failed. And still I am enabled to scrawl a little, and to creep, though I cannot run. Probably I should not be able to do so much did not many of you assist me by your prayers.

I have given a distinct account of the work of God which has been wrought in Britain and Ireland for more than half a century. We want some of you to give us a connected relation of what our Lord has been doing in America from the time that

Richard Boardman accepted the invitation and left his country to serve you. See that you never give place to one thought of separating from your brethren in Europe. Lose no opportunity of declaring to all men that the Methodists are one people in all the world; and that it is their full determination so to continue,

Though mountains rise, and oceans roll,

To sever us in vain.

To the care of our common Lord I commit you; and am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Henry Moore [12]

LONDON, February 6, 1791.

MY DEAR HENRY, -- So good Mr. Easterbrook has got the start of us. Let us follow him as he followed Christ. Let the service begin at [ten or eleven] if the leaders think it best. I hope to be in Bath the first Monday in March (to-morrow three weeks); and am, with love to my dear Nancy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Henry Moore, At the New Room,

Bristol.

To Mr. York [13]

LONDON, February 6, 1791.

DEAR SIR,--On Wednesday, March the 17th, I purpose, if God permit, to come from Gloucester to Worcester; and on Thursday, the 18th to Stourport. If our friends at Worcester are displeased, we cannot help it. Wishing you and yours all happiness, I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate servant.

February 28. This morning I found this in my bureau.

To Mr. York, At Stourport.

To Thomas Roberts

LONDON, February 8, 1791.

MY DEAR BROTHER, [See letter of Oct. 23, 1790.] --Who was it opposed your reducing the preachers in the circuit to two and on what pretense We must needs reduce all our expenses everywhere as far as possible. You must never leave off till you carry this point and constitute bands in each large Society. When the lecture begins at Carmarthen, it will then be time enough to prevent any ill effects of it. I am glad to hear your journey home has not been in vain. My best wishes attend my friends at Traison and Langwair. [Trecwn and Llwynygwair. See Journal, vii. 426-7.] --I am, dear Tommy,

Yours, &c.

To Adam Clarke [14]

LONDON, February 9, 1791.

DEAR ADAM, --You have great reason to bless God for giving you strength according to your day. [See letter of Jan. 18.] He has indeed supported you in a wonderful manner under these complicated afflictions. You may well say, 'I will put my trust in the Lord as long as I live.' I will desire Dr. Whitehead to consider your case and give you his thoughts upon it. I am not afraid of your doing too little, but too much. I am in continual danger of this. Do a little at a time, that you may do more. My love to Sister Cookman and Boyle [See letters of March 28, 1777, and May 2, 1787; and Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, i. 428.]; but it is a doubt with me whether I shall cross the seas any more.

What preacher was it who first omitted meeting the Select Society I wonder it did not destroy the work!

You have done right in setting up the Strangers' (Friend) Society. It is an excellent institution.

I am quite at a loss concerning Mr. Madan. I know not what to think of him. Send me your best thoughts concerning him. Let not the excluded preachers by any means creep in again. In any wise, write, and send me your thoughts on Animal Magnetism. [See letter of Jan. 3.] I set my face against that device of Satan. Two of our preachers here are in that Satanic delusion; but if they persist to defend it, I must drop them. I know its principles full well. With much love to your wife, I am, my dear Adam,

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Taylor

LONDON, February 13, 1791.

DEAR TOMMY, -- The doubt is whether the remedy would not propagate the diseases by making many people curious to understand it who never thought of it before. Remember the madman's words,

Kill your enemies Kill a fool's head of your own.

They will die of themselves if you let them alone.

I take knowledge that you have been Dissenter. Several clergymen at this day do good both to the cause of God in general and to the Methodist in particular -- and they that hurt us do it not as clergymen but as Calvinist clergymen. I will not blame any of my preachers for mildly warning our people of them. Unstable Methodists will always be subject to the temptation of sermon-hunting. I do not advise our people to go to the Low Church. [The Low Church in Hull.] I shall write no plan till I know how my strength turns out; perhaps I may do it when I come to Bristol. [This letter was dictated. See letter of Feb. 18.] Peace be with you and yours! -- I am, dear Tommy,

Yours affectionately.

To Sarah Rutter

NEAR LONDON, February 17, 1791.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- You have abundant reason to praise God, not on your own account only, for enabling you to enter into the rest that remaineth for the people of God, but likewise on the account of your companions on whom He hath poured the dew of His blessing. You have cause particularly to rejoice over the little ones. [See letter of Oct. 18, 1790.] Surely this is a token for good both to this and to the rising generation. I have ordered some Hymns and other little books to be sent down, which you win [use] as you see good. Be zealous! Be active l Time is short l Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am, dear Sally,

Yours affectionately.

To Francis Wrigley [15]

LONDON, February 18, 1791.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- As yet I cannot at all judge whether I shall be able to take my usual turn or not! I am a little stronger than I was, but not much, and my sight is rather better than worse. Probably in a month you may have a determinate answer from, dear Francis,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Susanna Knapp [16]

LONDON, February 19, 1791.

MY DEAR SUKY, -- As the state of my health is exceeding wavering and waxes worse, I cannot yet lay down any plans for my future journeys. [See previous letter.] Indeed, I purpose, if God permit, to set out for Bristol on the 28th instant; but how much further I shall be able to go I cannot yet determine. If I am pretty well, I hope to be at Worcester about the 22rid of March. To find you and yours in health of body and mind will be a great pleasure to, my dear Suky,

Yours affectionately.

 

 

To John Ogilvie

LONDON, February 21, 1791.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I have not been well for a few days; but I am now by the blessing of God much recovered. It should be matter of great thankfulness that your wife and you were both enabled to give that lovely child to God. We are well assured that He does all things well--all things for our profit, that we may be partakers of His holiness. It is not improbable that I may look upon you in the spring. [Ogilvie was second preacher at Alnwick.] Peace be with your spirits! -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Walter Churchey [17]

LONDON, February 22, 1791.

My DEAR BROTHER, -- I have the MSS. I have not seen Mr. Cowper. [See letter of Dec. 6, 1788.] Next week I hope to be at Bristol. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Churchey, Near Hay, Brecon.

To William Wilberforce [18]

BALAM, February 24, 1791.

DEAR SIR, -- Unless the divine power has raised you up to be as Athanasius contra mundum, ['Athanasius against the world.'] I see not how you can go through your glorious enterprise in opposing that execrable villainy, which is the scandal of religion, of England, and of human nature. Unless God has raised you up for this very thing, you will be worn out by the opposition of men and devils. But if God be for you, who can be against you Are all of them together stronger than God O be not weary of well doing I Go on, in the name of God and in the power of His might, till even American slavery (the vilest that ever saw the sun) shall vanish away before it.

Reading this morning a tract wrote by a poor African, I was particularly struck by that circumstance, that a man who has a black skin, being wronged or outraged by a white man, can have no redress; it being a law in all our Colonies that the oath of a black against a white goes for nothing. What villainy is this!

That He who has guided you from youth up may continue to strengthen you in this and all things is the prayer of, dear sir,

Your affectionate servant.