1781

To Thomas Rutherford

LOUTH, July 4, 1781.

DEAR TOMMY, -- I got half-way again, as far as the Isle of Man; but I could get no farther. What He doth we know not now, but we shall know hereafter.

I wish Isabella and you much happiness, which you cannot fail of if you have much holiness. Therefore the certain way to make each other happy is to strengthen each other's hands in God.

Some time since, I desired Brother Moore [Henry Moore was his colleague at Lisburn, and their wives were sisters. He had just removed from Tanderagee. See Crookshank’s Methodism in Ireland, i. 345; and letter of Feb. 23, 1783.] to procure and send me as particular account as possible of that odd affair near Tanderagee; I mean with regard to the house which was so strangely disturbed. I wish he would do it without delay. -- I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Hannah Ball

SHEFFIELD, July 12, 1781.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I cannot at all understand George Story’s [George Story was Assistant in Oxfordshire. The new preachers were Richard Rodda and Thomas Warwick. See letter of Nov. 17.] behavior. He seems prejudiced against you; and I cannot devise for what. But your business is to go straight forward. And let both Nancy and you do all the good you can.

Surely you should take an opportunity to warn Jo. Accutt [John Accutt was the second preacher. He desisted from work in 1785.] of his danger. I shall appoint two new preachers for the Oxford Circuit next year.

Jasper Winscom [See letter of Oct. 20, 1775, to him.] is a good man and a local preacher. But I am glad you are not minded to leave Wycombe. The longer your letters are the more welcome they are to, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Ann Loxdale

NOTTINGHAM, July 14, 1781.

MY DEAR MISS LOXDALE, -- As it has pleased God to restore you in a measure to what you enjoyed once, I make no doubt but He will restore all which you then had, and will add to it what you never had yet. There is no end of His mercies. He will give ‘exceeding abundantly beyond all that you are able to ask or think.’ If that sickness you mention came (as is the case with some) only at the time of private prayer, I should incline to think it was preternatural, a messenger of Satan permitted to buffet you. But as you find it likewise at other times, when you feel any vehement emotion of mind, it seems to be (partly at least) a natural effect of What is called weakness of nerves. But even in this case the prayer of faith will not fail to the ground. You may ask with resignation; and if it be best, this cup will be removed from you.

You have, indeed, reason to rejoice over your sister. Is she not given you in answer to prayer And have you not encouragement even from this very thing to expect that more of your family will be given you Those are true words, when in His own strength you wrestle with God, --

My powerful groans Thou canst not bear,

Nor stand the violence of my prayer,

My prayer omnipotent.

You remind me of what occurred when my dear Hetty Roe first mentioned you to me. I almost wondered I should feel so much regard for one I had never seen! But I can taste your spirit, and rejoice to find that you are so near, my dear Miss Loxdale, to

Yours in tender affection.

To Mary Bishop

NEAR LEEDS, July 17, 1781.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- When the school began at Publow, [See letter of May 21 to her.] it was in all respects a school after my own heart, conducted exactly on the same principles as that of Miss Bosanquet at Leytonstone. But it declined from its original simplicity, I know not how, by slow and insensible degrees indeed, so insensible that I hardly know what to blame, and so know not how to cure it.

If I have to meet the Society at Bristol again, I shall kill or cure those unwise and unkind parents who make their children finer than themselves. I believe I shall make their ears tingle. As to you, I advise you, first, to be a Bible Christian yourself inwardly and outwardly. Be not an hair's breadth more conformable to the fashions of the world than you was when I last saw you. Then train up your children in the selfsame way. Say to them with all mildness and firmness, ‘Be ye followers of me, even as I am of Christ.’ Whoever is pleased or displeased, keep to this -- to Christian, primitive simplicity. Perhaps at first you will lose some scholars thereby; but regard not that: God will provide you more. And be assured nothing shall be wanting that is in the power of, my dear sister,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Miss Bishop, At the Boarding School,

In Keynsham, Somersetshire.

To his Niece Sarah Wesley

NEAR LEEDS, July 17, 1781.

MY DEAR SALLY, -- Although I did not know what your reason was, I took it for granted you had a reason for not writing. Therefore I did not blame you or love you the less, believing you would write when it was convenient. Without an endeavor to please God and to give up our own will, we never shall attain His favor. But till we have attained it, till we have the Spirit of adoption, we cannot actually give up our own will to Him.

Shall I tell you freely what I judge to be the grand hindrance to your attaining it -- yea, to your attaining more health both of body and mind than you have ever had, or at least for a long season I believe it is (what very few people are aware of) intemperance in sleep. All are intemperate in sleep who sleep more than nature requires; and how much it does require is easily known. There is, indeed, no universal rule, none that will suit all constitutions. But after all the observations and experience I have been able to make for upwards of fifty years, I am fully persuaded that men in general need between six and seven hours’ sleep in four-and-twenty; and women in general a little more--namely, between seven and eight.

But what ill consequence is there of lying longer in bed -- suppose nine hours in four-and-twenty

1. It hurts the body. Whether you sleep or no (and, indeed, it commonly prevents sound sleep), it as it were soddens and parboils the flesh, and sows the seeds of numerous diseases; of all nervous diseases in particular, as weakness, faintness, lowness of spirits, nervous headaches, and consequently weakness of sight, sometimes terminating in total blindness.

2. It hurts the mind, it weakens the understanding. It blunts the imagination. It weakens the memory. It dulls all the nobler affections. It takes off the edge of the soul, impairs its vigour and firmness, and infuses a wrong softness, quite inconsistent with the character of a good soldier of Jesus Christ.

It grieves the Holy Spirit of God, and prevents, or at least lessens, those blessed influences which tend to make you not almost but altogether a Christian.

I advise you, therefore, from this day forward, not trusting in yourself, but in Him that raiseth the dead, to take exactly so much sleep as nature requires, and no more. If you need between seven and eight hours, then, in the name of God, begin! This very night, in spite of all temptation to the contrary, lie down at ten o'clock, and rise between five and six, whether you sleep or no. If your head aches in the day, bear it. In a week you will sleep sound. If you can take this advice, you may receive more from, my dear Sally,

Yours most affectionately.

To Miss Wesley, In Chesterfield Street,

Marybone.

To Robert Hopkins [1]

NEAR LEEDS, July 25, 1781.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- As long as you give yourself up to God without reserve you may be assured He will give you His blessing. Indeed, you have already received a thousand blessings: but the greatest of all is yet behind--Christ in a pure and sinless heart, reigning the Lord of every motion there. It is good for you to hold fast what you have attained, and to be continually aspiring after this; and you will never find more life in your own soul than when you are earnestly exhorting others to go on unto perfection. Many will blame you for doing it; but regard not that: go on through honor and dishonor. ‘This one thing I do,’ is your motto. I save my own soul and them that hear me.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Francis Wolfe

YORK, July 30, 1781.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- To allow money for the keeping of children is not the business of the Conference, but of the circuit wherein a preacher labors. So it is expressly appointed in the Minutes. I do not judge it is expedient for you to remain any longer in the West of England. [Now at Redruth, Cornwall West. He was reappointed there the following month.] I am glad to hear that your spirit revives. You need not ‘let Him go except He bless you.’ -- I am, dear Franky,

Your affectionate brother.

To George Fettes [2]

YORK, August 3, 1781.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Prove these two points---first that pawnbroking is necessary, secondly that it is lawful (in England) --and you will satisfy

Your affectionate brother.

To his Nephew Charles Wesley [3]

NEAR LEEDS, August 4, 1781.

DEAR CHARLES, -- It has been much upon my mind to-day that I am still indebted to you; there is a debt of love which I should have paid before now, but I must not delay it any longer.

I have long observed you with a curious eye; not as a musician, but as an immortal spirit, that is come forth from God the Father of spirits, and is returning to Him in a few moments. But have you well considered this Metkinks, if you had, it would be ever uppermost in your thoughts. For what trifles in comparison of this are all the shining baubles of the world!

Wise is the man that labors to secure

The mighty, the important stake,

And by all methods strives to make

His passage safe and his reception sure.

God has favored you with many advantages. You have health, strength, and a thousand outward blessings. And why should not you have all the inward blessings which God hath prepared for those that love Him You are good-humored, mild, and harmless; but unless you are born again, you cannot see the kingdom of God! But ask, and you shall receive; for it is nigh at hand. -- I am, dear Charles,

Your affectionate Uncle.

To his Niece Sarah Wesley.

NEAR LEEDS, August 4, 1781.

MY DEAR SALLY, -- Your last gave me much satisfaction, convincing me that I had not labored in vain. O trust in Him that is stronger than you l Then shall you be enabled to persevere in your resolution. Otherwise you will soon grow weary and relapse into the same dull way. Whenever it depends upon yourself, go to bed soon after ten. [See letter of July 17 to her.] But you will need, in order to do this steadily, more firmness than nature can boast; nothing less will keep you steady herein than the mighty power of God.

I have been considering whether there be anything else that is an hindrance to your receiving the blessing that awaits you; and I am persuaded it will not offend you to tell you all that passes through my mind. When any young gentleman came to me at Oxford, I told him plain and downright, ‘Sir, I cannot undertake to make you either a scholar or a Christian unless you will promise me (1) to read those books which I advise, and (2) while you are my pupil read no others.’

Now, my Sally, was not this an hard condition But they soon found the advantage of it. And so would you, if you had the courage to read those books only which were recommended either by my brother or me. [See letter of Sept. 8 to her.]

I want you, not to be an half but an whole Christian! Let all that mind be in you that was in Christ! And present your soul and your body a living sacrifice acceptable unto God through Him! -- I am, my dear Sally,

Your most affectionate Uncle.

To Members and Friends [4]

August [7], 1781.

FRIENDS AND BROTHER, -- As several of the preachers in our Connection, who have spent their time and strength in calling sinners to repentance, are now so superannuated that they can no longer keep a circuit, [Three names of supernumeraries appear in the Minutes for 1781: Joseph Bradford, Richard Seed, and John Furz.] and as others of them (who are gone to their reward) have left destitute widows and children behind them; -- in order to make some small provision for these, it has been agreed on in Conference that every traveling preacher shall out of his little allowance subscribe a guinea yearly.

But, as this sum is no wise sufficient to answer the growing demands, several of our friends have offered their assistance by subscribing something yearly; and if others of you shall see good to follow their laudable example, it will no doubt be pleasing to God, a comfort to His worn-out servants, and a great encouragement to those who are still laboring in our Lord's vineyard; and, of consequence, give great satisfaction to your affectionate brethren and servants in the gospel.

JOHN WESLEY.

A.B } CD } Stewards.

 

 

To Robert Cart Brackenbury [5]

LEEDS, August 12, 1781.

DEAR SIR, -- I shah not soon forget the agreeable conversation I had with dear Mrs. Brackenbury at Raithby. The sweetness of her temper, and the open, artless account she gave of her experience, increased my love for her. I trust you shall not die, but live to strengthen each other's hands in God and provoke one another to love and to good works. Who is so great a God as our God To His care I commit Mrs. Brackenbury and you. Peace be with your spirits! I commend myself to your prayers; and am, dear

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ann Loxdale

SHEFFIELD, August 15, 1781.

MY DEAR MISS LOXDALE, -- Your letter gave much satisfaction. Whereunto you have attained hold fast, and ‘press on toward the mark, the prize of your high calling of God in Christ Jesus.’ I do not see any reason to doubt but that you have tasted of the pure love of God. But you seem to be only a babe in that state, and have therefore need to go forward continually. It is by doing and suffering the whole will of our Lord that we grow up in Him that is our Head; and if you diligently hearken to His voice, He will show you the way wherein you should go. But you have need to be exceeding faithful to the light He gives you. ‘While you have the light walk in the light,’ and it will continually increase. Do not regard the judgment of the world, even of those called the religious world. You are not to conform to the judgment of others, but to follow your own light; that which the blessed Spirit gives you from time to time, which is truth and is no lie. That He may guide you and your sister into all truth and all holiness is the prayer of, my dear Miss Loxdale,

Yours most affectionately.

To Mrs. Malenoir [6]

LONDON, August 19, 1781.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- Indeed, I began to be a little jealous over you lest your love was growing cold. Only I frequently heard something of you from our dear friend Sister Ward, who has been a sharer with you in all your afflictions. It has pleased God to try you as silver is tried; but you will lose nothing beside your dross. In every temptation hitherto He has made a way to escape, that you might be able to bear it. If your temptations have been of an uncommon and delicate nature, this was all permitted in tender mercy that you might receive the greater profit thereby, and by so much the more conform to the image of our Lord.

I must inquire of my friends what is the most practicable way of doing something for your son. [Samuel Malenoir.] If I can find any one that is acquainted with the captain of the Grafton, this will be the easiest way. But I am this evening setting out for Bristol. Peace be with your spirit! -- I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To his Nephew Charles Wesley

BRISTOL, September 8, 1781.

DEAR CHARLES, -- Your letter gave me a good deal of satisfaction. You received my advice just as I hoped you would. [See letter of Aug. 4 to him. ] You are now, as it were, on the crisis of your fate: just launching into life, and ready to fix your choice, whether you will have God or the world for your happiness. Scripture and reason tell you now, what experience will confirm, if it pleases God to prolong your life--that He made your heart for Himself, and it cannot rest till it rests in Him. You will be in danger of being diverted from this thought by' the fashion of the world. The example of those that are round about us is apt to get within our guard. And, indeed, their spirit steals upon us in an unaccountable manner and inclines us to think as they think. Yet you cannot avoid being very frequently among elegant men and women that are without God in the world. And as your business rather than your choice calls you into the fire, I trust that you will not be burnt: seeing He whom you desire to serve is able to deliver you even out of the burning fiery furnace. -- I am, dear Charles,

Your very affectionate Uncle.

To his Niece Sarah Wesley

BRISTOL, September 8, 1781.

MY DEAR SALLY, -- It is certain the Author of our nature designed that we should not destroy but regulate our desire for knowledge. What course you may take in order to this I will now briefly point out. [See letter in June 1764 to Margaret Lewen.]

1. You want to know God, in order to enjoy Him in time and eternity.

2. All you want to know of Him is contained in one book, the Bible. And all you learn is to be referred to this, either directly or remotely.

3. Would it not be well, then, to spend at least an hour a day in reading and meditating on the Bible reading every morning and evening a portion of the Old and New Testament with the Explanatory Notes

4. Might you not read two or three hours in the morning and one or two in the afternoon When you are tired of severer studies, you may relax your mind by history or poetry.

5. The first thing you should understand a little of is Grammar. You may read first the Kingswood English Grammar, and then Bishop Lowth’s Introduction.

6. You should acquire (if you have not already) some knowledge of Arithmetic. Dilworth’s Arithmetic would suffice.

7. For Geography I think you need only read over Randal’s or Guthrie’s Geographical Grammar.

8. Watts's Logic is not a very good one; but I believe you cannot find a better.

9. In Natural Philosophy you have all that you need to know in the Survey of the Wisdom of God in Creation. But you may add the Glasgow [Edinburgh] abridgement of Mr. Hutchinson’s Works.

10. With any or all of the foregoing studies you may intermix that of History. You may begin with Rollin’s Ancient History; and afterwards read in order the Concise History of the Church, Burnet’s History of the Reformation, the Concise History of England, Clarendon’s History of the Rebellion, Neal’s History of the Puritans, his History of New England, and Robertson's History of America.

11. In Metaphysics you may read Locke’s Essay on the Human Understanding and Malebranche’s Search after Truth.

12. For Poetry you may read Spenser's Fairy Queen, select parts of Shakspeare, Fairfax’s or Hoole’s Godfrey of Bouillon, Paradise Lost, the Night Thoughts, and Young's Moral and Sacred Poems.

13. You may begin and end with Divinity; in which I will only add, to the books mentioned before, Bishop Pearson On the Creed and the Christian Library.

By this course of study you may gain all the knowledge which any reasonable Christian needs. But remember, before all, in all, and above all, your great point is to know the only true God and Jesus Christ whom He hath sent. -- I am, my dear Sally,

Your affectionate Uncle.

To Ann Bolton

BRISTOL, September 9, 1781.

MY DEAR NANCY, -- One thing we are absolutely assured of -- that good is the will of the Lord! But I should be glad to know, How do Neddy’s [See letters of Feb. 20, 1781, and Aug. 3, 1782, to her.] affairs stand now Has he any prospects of getting out of his troubles Is there a probability that he will be able to extricate himself from the present difficulties How far are you concerned therein Are you perplexed on any other account Where do you spend your time, and how are you employed When you have any leisure, certainly you cannot bestow it better than in visiting as many as you can of your poor neighbors. How is your health now I should be afraid these pressures upon your mind would increase your bodily disorders. I do not believe you murmur or fret at anything. But you cannot avoid grieving (unless when the power of the Highest overshadows you in an extraordinary manner). And even this will shake the tenement of clay.

My dear Nancy, share all your griefs with

Your real friend.

To Miss Bolton, In Witney,

Oxfordshire. X Post.

To Elijah Bush [7]

COLEFORD, September 11, 1781.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I was much concerned yesterday when I heard you were likely to marry a woman against the consent of your parents. I have never in an observation of fifty years known such a marriage attended with a blessing. I know not how it should be, since it is flatly contrary to the fifth commandment. I told my own mother, when pressing me to marry, ‘I dare not allow you a positive voice herein; I dare not marry a person because you bid me. But I must allow you a negative voice: I will marry no person if you forbid. I know it would be a sin against God.’ Take care what you do. Mr. S----- is not a proper judge; he hopes to separate you from the Methodists; and I expect, if you take this step, that will be the end. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Hall

BATH, September 15, 1781.

DEAR PATTY, -- But when will the hundred pounds come I hear nothing about that. But fifty pounds of it were bespoke by him that sent me the first notice, and what could be done less For, you know, the messenger of good news should always be rewarded. However, if we live to meet again, probably something may be done without waiting for the legacy; and it is not impossible that you should procure half an hour's very private conversation into the bargain. I say still, you are one of the youngest women of your years that I know, [See letter of May 28 to her.] and perhaps it is your fervor that keeps you alive as well as keeps you from the gout and stone, to which you know we have an hereditary right. God does all things well. -- I am, dear Patty,

Your affectionate friend and Brother.

To John Bredin

NEAR BRISTOL, September 22, 1781.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I supposed you to be a dying man, and had therefore no thought of your being an Assistant or even a traveling preacher. [Bredin had been at Athlone, and was now in the Londonderry Circuit, though his name does not appear in the Minutes. See letters of May 17 and Oct.] But if you can undertake it, do.

The more exercise you use the better. But the morning preaching must not be left off on any account. That is the glory of the Methodists.

It is hardly worth while to keep an horse for the sake of three or four little places. We have need to save all possible expense. Several of our preachers in England now walk their circuits.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. John Bredin, In Coleraine,

Ireland.

To Robert Lindsay [8]

BRISTOL, October 7, 1781.

DEAR ROBERT, -- The question is, ‘Is the chapel actually made over to Mr. Jacques and Egerton for that debt’ If not, they cannot sell it. Mr. Hunt will inform you how this is.

I have no money; and Mr. Atlay writes me word that I am above two hundred pounds behindhand, that is, on my own account, over and above what I owe on account of the new chapel in London. Now and then, indeed, I have a legacy left me. Should such a thing occur, I would reserve it for Kilkenny. If I find a proper preacher that can be spared, I will send him to you.

Be discouraged at nothing: God is on our side.--I am, dear Robert,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Robert Lindsay, At Mr.

Frederick Hunt's, In Kilkenny.

To Martha Chapman

LONDON, October 13, 1781.

DEAR PATTY, -- I returned hither yesterday in the afternoon, and had the pleasure of yours. I hope to be at High Wycombe on Monday and Tuesday, at Oxford on Wednesday noon, and at Witney on Wednesday evening.

If in all these trials your mind is unmoved and fixed upon Him that loves you, they will only help you forward on your way. [Wesley’s wife died on Oct. 8, and was buried on the 12th. ‘I was not informed of it till a day or two after.’ See Journal, vi. 337.] --I am, dear Patty,

Your affectionate brother.

To John Bredin [9]

LONDON, October 19, 1781.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Some time hence we may have room for Adam Clarke at Kingswood. At present the house is quite full. Meantime he should read a little Greek and Latin every day.

You do well to meet the children constantly and to establish as many prayer-meetings as you can. Over and above the other advantages attending them, they are excellent nurseries for young preachers.

You should without delay establish the Methodist discipline in all the country places. The spreading the books is always a means of increasing the awakening in any place.

I do not know any remedy under heaven that is likely to do you so much good as the being constantly electrified. But it will not avail unless you persevere therein for some time. [See letters of Sept. 22, 1781, and July 9, 1782.] Would it not be of use for you and Brother Moore to change I am

Yours affectionately.

To Mr. Bredin, In Coleraine,

Ireland.

To Charles Armore [10]

October 20, 1881.

DEAR CHARLES, -- I am glad to hear so good an account of the work of God in Glasgow. But you must not stay there too long at a time. That is not the Methodist plan. I expect, therefore, Brother Johnson and you constantly to change once a quarter.

It does not appear that we have as yet any place in Greenock. But I am glad you have paid a visit to Air. Many things have hindered Brother Barber. [Thomas Barber was at Castlebar, Tiverton.] But I hope you will see him soon. It seems Brother Surer is in his place--I am, dear Charles,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Rev. Mr. Charles Armore,

In Glasgow.

To Mrs. Foley

[LONDON, November 3, 1781 ().]

Your occasions of fight [will lead you to] conquer. The danger is, lest that inflammation should turn to a cancer. Probably this may be prevented by an easy remedy. Make a strong decoction of Briar-leaves, and gargle your mouth with it eight or ten times a day. See neither of you grow weary in your mind! -- I am, my dear sister,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Foley, At Quinton,

Near Birmingham.

To Mrs. Barton

LONDON, November 6, 1781.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I am always well pleased to hear from you, especially when you tell me that God has dealt well with you. I trust He has yet greater blessings in store for you and for the little flock at Beverley. I was glad of the little time we had together, and hoped it would not be in vain. [He had been at Beverley in Alexander Suter at August.] I found love to your two little maidens. There is good seed sown in their hearts, which, if it be carefully watered, will probably bring forth fruit to your comfort and the glory of God. Let your husband and you go on hand in hand, stirring up the gift of God that is in you and running with resignation and patience the race that is set before you. You have met, and undoubtedly will meet, with manifold temptations; but. you have had full proof that God is faithful, who will never suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape that you may be able to bear it. O tarry, then, the Lord's leisure I Be strong, and He shall comfort thy heart. And put thou thy trust in the Lord. -- I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Samuel Bradburn

LONDON, November 6, 1781.

DEAR SAMMY, -- The being concerned in that execrable bill trade [See letter of Dec. 11, 1787.] has ruined many honest men. Determine nothing concerning Brother Stocks yet. You have heard only the worst of the story.

I have no objection to mortgaging the house. I do not see anything else that we can do in this matter, Do all things as mildly and smoothly as you can; but, whenever you have the rule on your side, the opposers must either bend or break. It would then be worth while to lose fifty members rather than not carry your point. If A. Mather had not been married, he might have done anything.

In any wise you must clip the wings of those local preachers who do not punctually observe your directions. Either mend them or end them. On condition that one horse only be kept in each circuit, I consent to the dividing the circuit into two. Do all you can to procure subscribers for the History. -- I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Bradbum, At the Preaching-

house, In Bradford, Yorkshire.

To Henry Fisher [11]

LONDON, November 7, 1781.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- The case of Joan Bocher I remember well; and I believe God avenged her death on Archbishop Cranmer. But I do not remember that Queen Elizabeth or King James (bad as they were) burnt any heretics. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Fisher, At 187, Opposite

Campbell’s Nursery, Hampstead.

To Henry Brooke [12]

LONDON, November 15, 1781.

DEAR HARRY, -- In general there is no great danger of our thinking too meanly of ourselves. Yet it is certain we may undervalue any of the talents which it has pleased God to entrust us with. And this is one of the few cases wherein it is wise to depend on the judgment of a friend rather than on our own.

I doubt whether you do not undervalue some of the talents which God has lent you, and whether He will be pleased with your hiding them in the earth instead of employing them to His glory.

It would be more pleasing to me to bury myself in silence and solitude. But I should not then be able to give a good account to Him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead. Be a follower of me (in your little way) even as I am of Christ.

Yours affectionately.

 

 

 

 

To Hannah Ball

LONDON, November 17, 1781.

‘Suffered from those you loved most’ [See letter of June 28.] Nay, my dear Hannah, I thought you had loved me as well as any one. And I hope you never suffered from me -- at least, I never designed you should. I would not willingly give you any pain; but I would give you all the comfort that is in my power.

I am in great hopes you will yet see an increase of the work of God this year, both in High Wycombe and the other parts of the circuit. You have two sound preachers, [See letters of July 12, 1781 and March 10, 1782.] and two plain, downright men, who speak the truth from their heart. Encourage them, whenever you have a fair occasion, to preach full salvation as now attain able by faith. -- I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Robert Carr Brackenbury

TOWCESTER, November 19, 1781.

DEAR SIR, -- I rejoice to hear that your health is so well re-established, and am in hopes it will continue. Your preaching frequently will be no hindrance, but rather a furtherance to it, provided you have the resolution always to observe the Methodist rule of concluding the service within the hour. The want of observing this has many times hurt you; and we must not offer murder for sacrifice. We are not at liberty to impair our own health in hopes of doing good to others.

A gentleman whose leg had been ill for several years and had several running sores in it was advised by an old clergyman to discard his physicians and surgeons, and to follow this simple prescription, ‘Take a fillet of soft Welsh flannel four inches broad and four yards long, let it be rolled as tight as you can bear it over your leg from the knee to the sole of the foot, and keep it on day and night without any alteration.’ He wore this for a month, and has been perfectly well ever since. If she is not well already, I have little doubt but the same method would cure Mrs. Brackenbury. [See letters of Aug. 12, 1781, and March 9, 1782, to him.] I trust she and you are both pressing on to the mark and strengthening each other's hands in God. -- I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ellen Gretton [13]

LONDON, November 19, 1781.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- The affection which I have felt for you ever since I had the pleasure of your company at Mr. Dodwell’s [The Rev. William Dodwell. Wesley preached in his church at Welby on July 8, and next day at Grantham. He assisted Wesley on July 13, 1788, in administering the Lord's Supper at Nottingham and was at the Conference of 1782. He died in 1824, leaving 10,000 to the Wesleyan Missionary Society and 10,000 to the Bible Society. See Journal, vi. 328, vii. 416.] will never suffer your letters to be troublesome to me any more than your conversation. I rejoice to hear that the consolations of the Holy One are not small with you. All these are given for that very end, to enlarge and strengthen your desires, and to quicken your hope of that perfect love which is nigh, even at the door! How soon may you find the fulfilling of that word, ‘All things are possible to him that believeth’! Now believe and enter in! ‘The promise is sure.’ He cannot deny Himself.

In order to show you more of your own weakness and His power, He suffers you to be variously tempted. But still in every temptation he makes a way to escape that you may be able to bear it.

As I was going through Grantham [After preaching at Sheffield on Aug. 15, he ‘took chaise with Dr. Coke; and, traveling day and night, the next evening came to London.’ See Journal, vi. 331.] I cast a wishful eye at the place where I spent a little time with my dear friend. But you were all, I suppose, fast asleep, and it was too early to wake you. I trust there shall never be wanting a little company of you to watch over one another in love. Peace be with all your spirits!

My dear Nelly, I regard you much. Receive me as your friend. Perhaps there are not many that would be more glad to serve you in anything than Yours very affectionately.

To Miss Gretton, At Mr. Derry’s,

Shoemaker, Grantham.

To Various Friends [14]

November 19, 1781.

1. For many years I have earnestly advised both in public and in private all in connection with me who have been brought up in the Established Church to continue therein, and of consequence to attend the public service of the Church at all opportunities; and my reasons for so doing I published to all the world more than twenty years ago. [Reasons against a Separation from the Ckurch of England, 1758. See Works, xiii. 224-32; Green’s Bibliography, No. 201; and letter of Jan. 9, 1782.]

2. But a few months ago I was favored with a letter which required me to review my sentiments. It is signed by several members of our Society, men of a loving spirit and of an unblameable conversation; and it is worthy of the greater regard, as they speak not only in their own name but in the name of many who wish to have a conscience void of offense both towards God and towards man.

3. Part of it runs thus: --

Having read many of your books and heard many of your preachers, and being in connection with you, we have from time to time been advised by them and you constantly to attend the church. But we find that neither you nor your preachers have given any countenance to the doctrines of Calvinism. This induces us humbly to ask the following questions:

First. Whether you would have us to go to that church where the doctrines of Calvinism are continually inculcated, and where the doctrines taught by you, Christian Perfection in particular, are continually exploded.

Secondly. Whether you think we shall be profited in any degree by hearing such preaching.

Thirdly. Whether it is not a means of filling our hearts with prejudice either against those preachers or against the truth.

Fourthly. Whether hearing them does not expose us to temptation from those who continually ask, ‘How did you like the sermon to-day’ We cannot dissemble; and if we do not, we offend them.

If you please, you may give us your sentiments in the Arrninian Magazine.

JOHN W-----, JOHN R-----, JOSEPH B-----,

NATHAN O-----, FRANCIS B-----,

BAILDON, NEAR BRADFORTH.

July 24, 1781.

4. It is a delicate as well as important point, on which I hardly know how to answer. I cannot lay down any general rule. All I can say at present is, If it does not hurt you, hear them; if it does, refrain. Be determined by your own conscience. Let every man in particular act ‘as he is fully persuaded in his own mind.’

To John Fletcher [15]

LONDON, November 24, 1781.

DEAR SIR, There is not a person to whom I would have wished Miss Bosanquet joined besides you. But this union, I am thoroughly persuaded, is of God; and so are all the children of God with whom I have spoken. Mr. Bosanquet’s being so agreeable to it I look upon as a token for good; and so was the ready disposing of the house and the stock, which otherwise would have been a great encumbrance. From the first day which you spend together in Madeley I hope you will lay down an exactly regular plan of living, something like that of the happy family at Leytonstone. Let your light shine to all that are round about you. And let Sister Fletcher do as much as she can for God and no more. To His care I commit you both; and am, my dear friends,

Your very affectionate brother.

To the Rev. Mr. Fletcher, Near

Leeds.

To Duncan Wright

LONDON, November 24, 1781.

DEAR DUNCAN, -- Surely you and I may speak freely to each other; for we love one another.

If George Holder [George Holder and James Bogie were admitted on trial at the next Conference.] goes out, either you must keep his mother or she must go to the workhouse.

You must not give an exhortation to the bands, but encourage them to speak.

I would be much obliged to you if you would (1) accept the key of the book-room and immediately take the books into your own care; (2) clip the wings of the local preachers, stewards, and leaders, changing them as need requires; (3) fix bands where they are wanting; (4) if James Bogie is willing to remain single, let him travel; (5) do not receive the blind man hastily, let him be thoroughly tried first; (6) lastly, be of good courage, and conquer everything! -- I am, dear Duncan,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Rutherford [16]

[November 1781.]

DEAR TOMMY, -- Write to Hugh Moore in my name, and tell him, ‘I desire he would change places with you for six weeks or two months.’ The being near her relations at the time of her lying in may be a means of saving your wife's life. I doubt not of Brother Moore’s willingness to oblige either you or me in a matter of such importance.

Probably more persons will buy the History of the Church [His Concise Ecclesiastical History. See letter of June 8, 1780.] when they see it. Peace be multiplied upon you both! -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Downes

LONDON, December 1, 1781.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- Never be afraid that I should think your letters troublesome; I am never so busy as to forget my friends.

Mr. and Mrs. Fletcher made an excellent beginning, and I trust they will increase with all the increase of God. Now let all of you that remain in the neighborhood arise up and supply her lack of service. Be instant in season, out of season, that all may know you have caught her mantle! [See letters of Nov. 24 and Dec. 9.]

But pray do not suffer my poor Miss Ritchie to work herself to death. Let her do all she can, and not more than she can. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Davenport [17]

LONDON, December 2, 1781.

REVEREND AND DEAR SIR, -- I have some remembrance of receiving such a letter as you mention above a year ago. But as there was no name subscribed I did not know how to direct an answer. Your case is plain. You are in the hands of a wise Physician, who is lancing your sores in order to heal them. He has given you now the spirit of fear. But it is in order to the spirit of love and of a sound mind. You have now received the spirit of bondage. Is it not the forerunner of the Spirit of adoption He is not afar off. Look up! And expect Him to cry in your heart, Abba, Father! He is nigh that justifieth! that justifieth the ungodly and him that worketh not! If you are fit for hell, you are just fit for Him! If you are a mere sinner, He cannot cast you out! This evening, when our Society meets, we will spread the case before the Lord. And I trust it will not be a long time before your eyes shall see His salvation! -- I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate brother.

To the Rev. Mr. Davenport, At Allexton,

Near Uppingham, Rutlandshire.

To Hester Ann Roe

LONDON, December 9, 1781.

MY DEAR HETTY, -- We may easily account for those notices which we frequently receive, either sleeping or waking, upon the scriptural supposition that ‘He giveth His angels charge over us to keep us in all our ways.’ How easy is it for them, who have at all times so ready an access to our souls, to impart to us whatever may be a means of increasing our holiness or our happiness! So that we may well say with pious Bishop Ken,

O may Thy angels, while we sleep,

Around our beds their vigils keep,

Their love angelical instill,

Stop every avenue of ill!

Without needing to use any other arguments, you have a clear proof in your own experience that our blessed Lord is both able and willing to give us always what He gives once; that there is no necessity of ever losing what we receive in the moment of justification or sanctification. But it is His will that all the light and love which we then receive should increase more and more unto the perfect day.

If you are employed to assist the children that are brought to the birth, that groan either for the first or the pure love, happy are you l But this is not all your work. No, my Hetty; you are likewise to watch over the new-born babes. Although they have much love, they have not yet either much light or much strength; so that they never had more need of your assistance, that they may neither be turned out of the way nor hindered in running the race that is set before them.

I should not have been willing that Miss Bosanquet should have been joined to any other person than Mr. Fletcher; but I trust she may be as useful with him as she was before. [See letter of Dec, 1.]

I fear our dear Betsy Ritchie will not stay long with us. I have no answer to my last letter, and Mrs. Downes writes that she is far from well. Yet God is able to raise her up. As to Peggy Roe, [Her cousin. See letter of Sept. 16, 1776.] I have little hope of her life; but she seemed, when I saw her, to be quite simple of heart, de.siring nothing more but God. My dear Hetty, adieu! Remember in all your prayers

Yours most affectionately.