1776

 

To Richard Boardman () [1]

NEAR LONDON, January 12, 1776.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I rejoice to hear so good an account of the work of God and of my dear friends Mr. and Mrs. 'Smith. I believe I shall send you a man after your own heart, a stanch, sensible, solid man, and one that I trust is a living witness of the grand Christian doctrine.

Our little books you should spread wherever you go. Reading Christians will be knowing Christians. My health (blessed be God) is perfectly restored.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To George Gidley [2]

LONDON, January 18, 1776.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I am glad to hear that you are ordered to Exeter: there seems to be a particular providence in this. We have a small Society there, which is but lately formed, and stands in need of every help; so that I doubt not your settling among them will be an advantage to them. See that you be not ashamed of a good Master nor of the least of His servants.

--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Gidley, Officer of Excise, In Port Isaac,

Near Camelford, Cornwall.

To Ann Bolton

LONDON, January 25, 1776.

MY DEAR SISTER,--The ignorance of Christians (so called) is indeed greater than can well be conceived. English Christians in general know no more of Christian salvation than Mahometans or heathens. Let us impart to them all the light we can. It will not all be lost labor. You have already seen some fruit; you will see more. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand. Mr. Valton is indeed a faithful laborer, willing to spend and be spent for his Master.

In the house I know you have exercise enough. But I am afraid You are not enough in the open air. It is true you cannot be much abroad in this severe weather; but you must catch all the opportunities you can. I long for you to have more opportunities of exercising yourself in the noblest way! But good is the will of the Lord! To Him I tenderly commend you.

--I am, my dear Nancy,

Your ever affectionate.

To the Printer of the 'Gazetteer'
 

 
 

LONDON, January [25], 1776.
In one respect I am much obliged to the gentlemen (or gentleman) who spend so much time upon the Primitive Physick; and would humbly entreat them to say something about it (no matter what) in half a dozen more of your papers. If nothing was said about it, most people might be ignorant that there was any such tract in the world. But their mentioning it makes many inquire concerning it, and so disperses it more and move.

The gentleman signing himself XXX in your last week's paper (Probably Mr. Antidote) seems now to have shot his last bolt, anti that feebly indeed. But he begins magnanimously: 'Mr. Wesley is too proud, too self-sufficient, and too much wrapped up in his self-importance, to vouchsafe either Mr. Caleb Evans or any other correspondent anything in the shape of an answer.' How grievously does this man stumble at the threshold! with what glaring, palpable falsehood does he set out! Have I not given a direct answer, both to Mr. Evans and Antidote, and S. E. and P. P. in the public papers

However, I am obliged to him for informing me of the difference between 'ounces, scruples, drachms, or drams, and grains.' Otherwise, after mistaking a dram for a grain, I might have mistaken an ounce for a dram.

But a dreadful objection comes next: 'Some people run as they read. Mr. Wesley's whole progressive life stands as a proof that he is one of that species of readers. In that mode he hath read the Scriptures, and in that mode doth he read every book.’

There is some truth in this. For several years, while my brother and I traveled on foot, our manner was for him that walked behind to read aloud some book of history, poetry, or philosophy. Afterwards for many years (as my time at home was spent mostly in writing) it was my custom to read things of a lighter nature, chiefly when I was on horseback. Of late years, since a friend gave me a chaise, I have read them in my carriage. But it is not in this manner I treat the Scriptures: these I read and meditate upon day and night. It was not in running that I wrote twice over the Notes on the New Testament (to say nothing of those on the Old), containing above 800 quarto pages.

'But was this supposed misprint of dram for grain ever corrected before the error was detected in the Gazetteer '

Your next question answers this.

' Or was it only referred to in the Errata, with pro Dram lege Grain '

I add a word concerning the former objection. I do still in a sense run as I read. I make haste, though I do not hurry. It behoves me to do, as my work is great and my time is short. For how much can a man expect to remain who has seen between seventy and eighty years And may I not plead for some indulgence even on this account, if I am mistaken in more points than one

To Alexander Knox [3]
LONDON, January 27, 1776.

MY DEAR ALLECK,--I wrote a particular answer to your last a day or two after I received it. 'Tis well if someone did not intercept it; otherwise I know not how it could miscarry. Your illness will continue just so long as is necessary to suppress the fire of youth, to keep you dead to the world, and to prevent your seeking happiness where it never was nor ever can be found. Considered in this view, it is a great blessing and a proof of God's watchful care over you ....

I cannot but admire the wisdom and goodness of Divine Providence with regard to you. As you have all the necessaries and conveniences of life; as you have a tender, indulgent parent; as you have a natural sprightliness and flow of spirits, you must in all probability have excited the admiration or affection of your relations and acquaintance, and have placed your happiness therein, had not so wonderful a counterpoise been prepared for you. A common illness, especially a transient one, would by no means have answered the intention, or saved you either from admiring yourself or from being admired by others. Therefore God keeps you long in His school, the very best wherein Infinite Wisdom could place you, that you may thoroughly learn to be meek and lowly in heart and to seek all your happiness in God.

Wishing every blessing to my dear Mrs. Knox and the little ones, I remain

Yours affectionately.

To Mary Bishop

LONDON, February 4, 1776.

MY DEAR SISTER,--If you never wrote, if you forgot me quite, I should still love you with a love of esteem. But I am not content with this. I want to come nearer. Meet me half-way, and I shall still love you with a love of friendship.

Although I am thoroughly persuaded that those reasonings are in a great measure from a preternatural cause, and therefore chiefly to be resisted by continuing instant in prayer, yet I think Christian prudence not only permits but requires you to add other means to this. That which I would especially recommend is reading, particularly Pascal's Thoughts (in the Christian Library) and the first two tracts in the Preservative against Unsettled Notions in Religion. These temptations are permitted to give you a deep and lasting conviction of the littleness and weakness of your own understanding, and to show you the absolute need wherein you stand of continual light as well as power from on high.

That ' the regulation of social life is the one end of religion' is a strange position indeed. I never imagined any but a Deist would affirm this. If that good man Mr. D---- did, I suppose it must be a slip of the pen; for he could not but know that the love, without which, St, Paul affirms, all we do profits us nothing, is that humble, meek, patient love of our neighbor, which supposes and flows from the love of God.

A degree of reasoning you certainly may and ought to use, only joined with humility and prayer. But what you more immediately want is faith. Believe, and thou shalt be saved into perfect peace.--I am, my dear sister, Yours affectionately.

To Miss Bishop, Near the Cross Bath, In Bath.

To Matthew Mayer [4]
LONDON, February 4, 1776.

DEAR MATHEW,--Robert Johnson complained that you preached out of your turn, and thereby made other preachers who came to preach lose their labor. I heard no complaint of you but this; and to this you have now given a sufficient answer.

I have not heard any blame you on Mr. Barker's account, and am glad that affair is likely to end well. Till it is decided whether we shall build a new Foundery or not, I determine nothing concerning my journeys. Peace be with you and yours!

--I am, dear Matthew,

Your affectionate brother.

Mr. Matthew Mayer, At Portwood, Near Stockport, Cheshire.

To Christopher Hopper
LONDON, February 7, 1776.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--One sin is wanting to fill up the measure. The English in general have not persecuted the Gospel. Therefore we have still reason to hope that God will interpose, when all human help fails.

If we build a New Foundery this Summer, I shall spend most of it in London, and only just make a flying journey through England, and look at our friends in the capital places. Possibly I may touch at Edinburgh or Aberdeen.

You 'received but one book.' True: but I desired you to enquire after the other, which is far more valuable. It must be either at Bolton or Liverpool. I am, with love to Sister Hopper.

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Miss March

LONDON, February 7, 1776.

I have found some of the uneducated poor who have exquisite taste and sentiment; and many, very many, of the rich who have scarcely any at all. But I do not speak of this: I want you to converse more, abundantly more, with the poorest of the people, who, if they have not taste, have souls, which you may forward in their way to heaven. And they have (many of them) faith and the love of God in a larger measure than any persons I know. Creep in among these in spite of dirt and an hundred disgusting circumstances, and thus put off the gentlewoman. Do not confine your conversation to genteel and elegant people. I should like this as well as you do; but I cannot discover a precedent for it in the life of our Lord or any of His Apostles. My dear friend, let you and I walk as He walked.

I now understand you with regard to the Perronets; but I fear in this you are too delicate. It is certain their preaching is attended with the power of God to the hearts of many; and why not to yours Is it not owing to a want of simplicity 'Are you going to hear Mr. Wesley' said a friend to Mr. Blackwell. ' No,' he answered, ' I am going to hear God: I listen to Him, whoever preaches; otherwise I lose all my labor.'

'You will only be content to convert worlds. You shall hew wood or carry brick and mortar; and when you do this in obedience to the order of Providence, it shall be more profitable to your own soul than the other.' You may remember Mr. De Renty's other remark: ' I then saw that a well-instructed Christian is never hindered by any person or thing. For whatever prevents his doing good works gives him a fresh opportunity of submitting his will to the will of God; which at that time is more pleasing to God and more profitable to his soul than anything else which he could possibly do.'

Never let your expenses exceed your income. To servants I would give full as much as others give for the same service, and not more. It is impossible to lay down any general rules, as to ' saving all we can' and ' giving all we can.' In this, it seems, we must needs be directed from time to time by the unction of the Holy One. Evil spirits have undoubtedly abundance of work to do in an evil world; frequently in concurrence with wicked men, and frequently without them.

To John Mason [5]
LONDON, February 17, 1776.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--The uncertainty of a passage from Liverpool is a weighty objection; as is also the uncertainty of the passage to Whitehaven, so I must lay that thought aside. A little fatigue I do not regard, but I cannot afford to lose time. Supply the poor people with all our small books, with money or without, and exhort them to keep a love to the Church as well as to their brethren. If we do not build a new Foundery this summer, I hope to see you at the usual time--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Joseph Benson

NEAR LONDON, February 22, 1776.

DEAR JOSEPH,--We must threaten no longer, but perform. In November last I told the London Society, ' Our rule is to meet a class once a week, not once in two or three. I now give you warning: I will give tickets to none in February but those that have done this.' I have stood to my word. Go you and do likewise wherever you visit the classes. Begin, if need be, at Newcastle, and go on at Sunderland. Promises to meet are now out of date. Those that have not met seven times in the quarter exclude. Read their names in the Society, and inform them all you will the next quarter exclude all that have not met twelve times--that is, unless they were hindered by distance, sickness, or by some unavoidable business.

And I pray without fear or favor remove the leaders, whether of classes or bands, who do not watch over the souls committed to their care ' as those that must give account.'--I am, dear Joseph,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss March
LONDON, February 26, 1776.

What I advise you to is, not to contract a friendship or even acquaintance with poor, inelegant, uneducated persons, but frequently, nay constantly, to visit the poor, the widow, the sick, the fatherless in their affliction; and this, although they should have nothing to recommend them but that they are bought with the blood of Christ. It is true this is not pleasing to flesh and blood. There are a thousand circumstances usually attending it which shock the delicacy of our nature, or rather of our education. But yet the blessing which follows this labor of love will more than balance the cross,

'To be uneasy under obligations which we cannot repay' is certainly a fruit of diabolical generosity; and therefore Milton with great propriety ascribes it to the devil, and makes him speak quite in character when he says concerning his obligations to God Himself--

So burthensome, still paying, still to owe.

I am quite of another mind; I entirely agree with you that the more sensible we are of such obligations the more happy we are. Surely this yoke is easy and this burthen is light.

Perhaps, if you give another reading to Thoughts upon Dress, you will clearly see that both reason and religion are more deeply concerned than we are apt to imagine even in the trifling article of dress--trifling if compared with the weightier matters of the law, yet in itself of no small importance; and that, whether you consider yourself as an individual or as a member of a Christian society. Certainly Dr. Young can only mean, ' None is happy unless he thinks himself so'; and truly this is no great discovery. Is it any more than, ' None is happy unless he is so' If he means more than this, he means wrong, for we know the best man is the happiest; but if I thought myself the best man in the world, I should be very proud, and consequently not happy at all.

To Thomas Rutherford

LONDON, March 3, 1776.

DEAR TOMMY,--I am glad you have a convenient lodging at Edinburgh. You should try all the little places round Glasgow as soon as you can preach abroad.

Rd. Watkinson is as much called to preach as you or I. But is it any wonder his mouth should be shut when he is worn down with weakness and pain and the unkind censures of those he is among Some of the Calvinists stumbled in lately while I was preaching. 'Ay,' said one of them, 'poor man! He has quite lost his gift! ' Perhaps your Greenock critics might do the same. So they said of Hugh Saunderson.

Those who will not conform to the Rules of our Society are no members of it. Therefore I require John Campbell, John Laird, and Peter Ferguson to take their choice one way or the other. If they will meet their class weekly, they are with us. If they will not, they put themselves from us. And if the rest of the Society cannot or will not bear the expense, our preachers shall trouble Greenock no more. But show them the reason of the thing in The Plain Account of the People called Methodists. After they have considered this, let them either join with us upon these terms or be our friends at a distance.

I think what you propose concerning Brother Watkinson is the best thing that can be done. As soon as possible he should drink decoction of nettles or of burdock morning and evening. If need be, I will send him another little bill. Possibly I may see you in May.--I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse

LONDON, March 3, 1776.

MY DEAR SISTER,--We are endeavoring to procure a piece of ground on which we think of building a new Foundery, as the old one with all the adjacent houses is shortly to be pulled down. If we build, it will necessarily detain me in London a great part of the summer.' Both George Shadford and T. Rankin were well when they wrote last. They were threatened unless they would declare in favor of the Republicans; but the matter went no farther than words. I am not sorry that James Kershaw is going to settle at Gainsborough. He may be exceeding useful there. He is more than a match for Mr. Glascot and an hundred Predestinarians beside. There is but one thing to do--let us live and die unto Him that died for us!--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse, Owston Ferry.

To Samuel Bradburn [6]
BRISTOL, March 10, 1776.

DEAR SAMMY,--Billy Roots must not come to Pembroke-shire any more. Therefore if Brother Dixon leaves it, he must change not with him but some other preacher--suppose with John Broadbent.

Our preachers may preach where there is no Society; but I do not require it of them. I expect little good to be done in such places. It is better to break up new ground. Why do you not make a trial at Narberth The more labor the more blessing.--I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Robert Costerdine

BIRMINGHAM, March 26, 1776.

DEAR ROBERT,--I refer to you an important affair, which I trust God will give you wisdom to determine. Richard Condy accuses Samuel Woodcock, I hope without sufficient grounds. As soon as possible hear them face to face, and send me your judgement to Manchester. I expect to be there on Saturday, April 6, and on Sunday, April 21 (as well as the three days following), at Leeds.

If you judge Brother Woodcock is not guilty, pray write to any preacher in Yorkshire in my name to change places with him. And whatever you do, do quickly!--I am, dear Robert,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Alexander Knox
 

 
 

CONGLETON, April 1, 1776.
MY DEAR ALLECK,--I am fully persuaded all your disorders depend upon a deep scurvy. What influence the bark may have upon this I cannot tell; however, I have no objection to a decoction or infusion of it. I object only to your taking it in specie; because I can never reconcile to common sense the introducing ounce after ounce of powdered post into an human stomach. But I really think you rather want anti-scorbutic medicines, such as watercress’s or decoction of nettles or burdock. This accounts for your almost continual depression of spirits, which is a bodily as well as spiritual malady. And it is permitted to repress the fire of youth and to wean you from the desire of earthly things, to teach you that happy lesson--

Wealth, honor, pleasure, and what else

This short-enduring world can give;

Tempt as ye will, my heart repels--

To Christ alone resolved to live.

--My dear Alleck,

Yours very affectionately.

To Robert Costerdine
MANCHESTER, April 7, 1776.

DEAR ROBERT,--You have done exceeding well in the case of poor Sam. Woodcock. I do not see what you could do more. But the great question is now what he can do; for I doubt he cannot be employed as a preacher--at least, until he has given sufficient proof of a real and deep repentance. I have sent T. Newall into Epworth Circuit. This day fortnight I expect to be at Leeds; and am, dear Robert,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mary Bishop
ROCHDALE, April 17, 1776.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Mr. Jones's book on the Trinity is both more clear and more strong than any I ever saw on that subject. If anything is wanting, it is the application, lest it should appear to be a merely speculative doctrine, which has no influence on our hearts or lives; but this is abundantly supplied by my brother's Hymns.

After all the noise that has been made about mysteries, and the trouble we have given ourselves upon that head, nothing is more certain than that no child of man is required to believe any mystery at all. With regard to the Trinity, for instance, what am I required to believe Not the manner wherein the mystery lies. This is not the object of my faith; but the plain matter of fact, ' These Three are One.' This I believe, and this only.

Faith is given according to our present need. You have now such faith as is necessary for your living unto God. As yet you are not called to die. When you are, you shall have faith for this also. To-day improve the faith which you now have, and trust God with to-morrow.

Some writers make a distinction which seems not improper. They speak of the essential part of heaven and the accessory parts. A man without any learning is naturally led into the same distinction. So the poor dying peasant in Frederica: ' To be sure heaven is a fine place, a very fine place; but I do not care for that: I want to see God and to be with Him.' I do not know whether the usual question be well stated, ' Is heaven a state or a place ' There is no opposition between these two; it is both the one and the other. It is the place wherein God more immediately dwells with those saints who are in a glorified state. Homer could only conceive of the place that it was paved with brass. Milton in one place makes heaven' s pavement beaten gold; in another he defines it more sublimely ' the house of God, star-paved.' As full an account of this house of God as it can yet enter into our hearts to conceive is given us in various parts of the Revelation. There we have a fair prospect into the holiest, where are, first, He that sitteth upon the throne; then the four living creatures; next, the twenty-four elders; afterwards the great multitude which no man can number; and, surrounding them all, the various myriads of angels, whom God hath constituted in a wonderful order.

'But what is the essential part of heaven ' Undoubtedly it is to see God, to know God, to love God. We shall then know both His nature, and His works of creation, of providence, and of redemption. Even in paradise, in the intermediate state between death and the resurrection, we shall learn more concerning these in an hour than we could in an age during our stay in the body. We cannot tell, indeed, how we shall then exist or what kind of organs we shall have: the soul will not be encumbered with flesh and blood; but probably it will have some sort of ethereal vehicle, even before God clothes us ' with our nobler house of empyrean light.'

No, my dear friend, no! it is no selfishness to be pleased when you give pleasure. It proves that your mind was antecedently in a right state; and then God' answers you in the joy of your heart.' So be more and more athirst for that holiness; and thereby give more and more pleasure to

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Hall
OTLEY, April 24, 1776.

DEAR PATTY,--Since I recovered my strength after my late fever, I have scarcely known what pain or weakness or weariness meant. My health is far better and more uninterrupted than it was when I was five-and-twenty. I was then much troubled with a shaking hand. But all that is over.

I am glad Peter Hare has a little care for his mother. You may call upon Mr. Atlay, and desire him to give you two guineas for her. And whatever her son will allow her quarterly, I will allow her the same. I much approve of her being with you.' It may prove a great blessing to her.

It is not improbable a voyage will save Betty Appleton's life. I think it will either kill or cure. Let us live to-day!--I am, dear Patty,

Your affectionate friend and Brother.

To Mrs. Martha Hall, At the

Foundery, London.

To Samuel Bradburn
NEAR COLNE, April 29, 1776.

DEAR SAMMY,--Keep to the whole Methodist discipline, whoever is pleased or displeased. 'But what shah I do,' says one, 'with regard to L. Thomas, who is continually proposing new schemes' 'Why, let him talk on, and go you on your old way just as if there were no such upon earth. Never dispute with them. But do the thing which you judge is for the glory of God.' When you can get another preaching-room, you may do a little more; till then you must be content. I hope Jenny Smeton is in the Society at Pembroke, and that you are not strange with her. Her sister Lawrie at Greenock, after violent agonies of conviction, at last rejoiced in God for ten days and died in peace. See that your own soul be all alive, and then exhort the believers to expect full salvation.--I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To James Barry
COLNE, April 30, 1776.

DEAR JAMES,--Five or six years ago the Dales Circuit was quite out of debt. How come they in debt now Why, at this rate we shall never have done. If they now collect only for themselves, how does this help me to carry on the general work This is nothing for the purpose of the Yearly Subscription toward a common stock. But be this as it may, you know the rule in the Minutes--that all the money thus collected is to be produced at the Conference. If I am not called back to London to superintend the building/I hope to be in your circuit in June.--I am, dear James, .

Your affectionate friend.

To Mr. James Barry, At the Preaching-house,

Barnard Castle, County of Durham.

To Hester Ann Roe [7]

WHITEHAVEN, May 3, 1776.

MY DEAR HETTY,--With pleasure I sit down to write to my dear Miss Roe, who has been much upon my mind since I left Macclesfield. Once I saw my dear friend Miss Beresford; when I came again, she was in Abraham's bosom. Once I have seen her living picture, drawn by the same hand and breathing the same spirit; and I am afraid I shall hardly see you again till we meet in the Garden of God. But if you should gradually decay, if you be sensible of the hour approaching when your spirit is to return to God, I should be glad to have notice of it, wherever I am, that if possible I might see you once more before you

Clap your glad wing and soar away,

And mingle with the blaze of day.

Perhaps in such a circumstance I might be of some little comfort to your dear mamma, who would stand in much need of comfort; and it may be our blessed Master would enable me to' Teach you at once, and learn of you, to die

In the meantime see that you neglect no probable means of restoring your health, and send me from time to time a particular account of the state wherein you are. Do you feel your own will quite given up to God, so that you have no repugnance to His will in anything Do you find no stirrings of pride no remains of vanity no desire of praise or fear of dispraise Do you enjoy an uninterrupted sense of the loving presence of God How far does the corruptible and decaying body press down the soul Your disorder naturally sinks the spirits and occasions heaviness and dejection. Can you, notwithstanding this, 'rejoice evermore and in everything give thanks'

Mr. Fletcher shows (as does the Plain Account of Christian Perfection) that sanctification is plainly set forth in Scripture. But certainly before the root of sin is taken away believers may live above the power of it. Yet what a difference between the first love and the pure love! You can explain this to Mr. Roe by your own experience. Let him follow on, and how soon may he attain it!

I am glad you wrote to Miss Yates, and hope you will write to Miss Ritchie. As to health, they are both nearly as you are; only Miss Ritchie is a little strengthened by a late journey. I never conversed with her so much before. I can give you her character in one line: she is ' all praise, all meekness, and all love.' If it will not hurt you, I desire you will write often to, my dear Hetty,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Freeman [8]

EDINBURGH, May 27, 1776.

MY DEAR SISTER,--If you forget me, I shall not easily forget you; I love you too well for that. I hear not from my dear Sister Gayer; surely she has not forgotten me too. If you would take up your cross, and at a proper opportunity gently tell John Bredin what you think, certainly it would do no harm, and probably it would do good.

I am glad Mr. Smyth had the courage to preach in the Linen Hall, and still more so that Mr. Abraham is with him. His being pushed out of his house is a good sign: he must be like me, a wanderer upon earth. I hope you as well as my dear Miss Gayer (that sat by my bedside when I was just going away) still hold fast your confidence that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin.--I am, my dear Jenny,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Jane Freeman, At No. 2

Ely Place, Dublin.

To Ann Bolton

EDINBURGH, May 28, 1776.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I had the pleasure of yours last night at my return from the North. Indeed, I was in pain for you; I was afraid of your being quite laid up. If you drank a cup of beef-tea twice or thrice a day, I believe it would strengthen you.

I desire Mr. Valton or one of the other preachers will be so kind as to go to the Foundery and bring my grey horse down to Witney. Till the middle of June I am to be in or near New-castle-upon-Tyne; afterwards I shall be at York. Everywhere I am, with the tenderest regard, my dear Nancy,

Your affectionate brother.

If possible, you should ride every day.

To Christopher Hopper

EDINBURGH, May 28, 1776.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--You did exceeding well in writing to the Mayor. I believe he will not burn his fingers again.

I have found one that I think would serve Mrs. Wagner as an upper secant. But she is not willing to engage till she knows what she is expected to do. Send me word to Newcastle.

Pray tell Michael Fenwick that I am to be at Sheffield not on the 23rd but the 19th of July.--I am, with love to Sister Hopper,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Hopper, At the Preaching-house,

In Liverpool. X Post.

To Alexander Knox

EDINBURGH, May 28, 1776.

MY DEAR ALLECK,--I received yours a day or two ago at my return from the North of Scotland…I judge your disorder to be but partly natural and partly divine; the gift of God, perhaps, by the ministry of angels, to balance the natural petulance of youth; to save you from foolish desires; and to keep you steady in the pursuit of that better part which shall never be taken from you. Whether you have more or less sorrow, it matters not; you want only more faith. This is the one point. Dare to believe; on Christ lay hold; see all your sins on Jesus laid, and by His stripes you are healed. Very probably, if I live, I shall be detained in London great part of next summer.

Look up! Is not health at hand, both for soul and body! You have no business with fear. It is good for nothing. We are ' saved by hope.' . . .--I am, my dear Alleck,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss J. C. March
ALNWICK, [May 30, 1776].

Sometimes I have been afraid lest you should sustain loss for want of some reproach or disgrace. Your being young and a woman of fortune, and not wanting in understanding, were circumstances which, according to the ordinary course of Providence, keep reproach at a distance. However, you shall not escape it if our blessed Lord sees it to be the best means of purifying your soul. You shall have it just in due measure and in due time; for He will withhold from you no manner of thing that is good. There is one with me here who seems as yet to be under a peculiar dispensation--to be wholly screened from the reproach of Christ. There is something in the natural temper, the understanding, the person, and the behavior of Lady Maxwell which has hitherto prevented reproach, although she is much devoted to God and in many things quite singular. But she is not careful about it; being wining, whenever He shall see it best', and in whatever measure He shall choose, to share the portion of her Lord. The knowledge of ourselves is true humility; and without this we cannot be freed from vanity, a desire of praise being inseparably connected with every degree of pride. Continual watchfulness is absolutely necessary to hinder this from stealing in upon us. But as long as we steadily watch and pray we shall not enter into temptation. It may and will assault us on every side; but it cannot prevail.

To John Fletcher [9]
NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, June 1, 1776.

DEAR SIR,--Your answer to Dr. Price will not interfere with mine. But Mr. Collinson is a more able antagonist than him. However, if he does not publish his tract, you need not take any other notice of it than to fortify your arguments against his plausible objections.

If you can't overtake me at York (July 2) or at any other part of Yorkshire, I hope you will at least plan your business so as to meet me at the Conference. It would be highly expedient that my brother and you and I should then meet together. I have letters from two clergymen in Ireland, one or both of whom will probably be with us before that time.

The generality of believers in our Church (yea, and in the Church of Corinth, Ephesus, and the rest, even in the Apostolic age) are certainly no more than babes in Christ; not young men, and much less fathers. But we have some, and we should certainly pray and expect that our Pentecost may fully come.

In many places we have good ground for this expectation. In many parts even in Scotland the work of God spreads wider and wider, and likewise sinks deeper--a very probable sign that God will yet be entreated for a guilty land.--I am, dear sir,

Ever yours.

To Hester Ann Roe [10]
NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, June 2, 1776.

MY DEAR HETTY,--It is not uncommon for a person to be thoroughly convinced of his duty to call sinners to repentance several years before he has an opportunity of doing it. This has been the case with several of our preachers. Probably it may be the case with Mr. Roe; God may show him now what he is to do hereafter. It seems his present duty is to wait the openings of Divine Providence.

It gives me pleasure to know that you have seen Miss Yates and that you have heard from my dear Betsy Ritchie. I expect she will meet me again in two or three weeks and accompany me for a few days. What an happiness to us both would it be to have Hetty Roe sitting between us!

If I durst, I should earnestly desire that you might continue with us a little longer. I could almost say it is hard that I should just see you once and no more. But it is a comfort that to die is not to be lost. Our union will be more full and perfect hereafter.

Surely our disembodied souls shall join,

Surely my friendly shade shall mix with thine:

To earth-born pain superior, light shall rise

Through the wide waves of unopposing skies;

Together swift ascend heaven's high abode,

Converse with angels, and rejoice with God.

Tell me, my dear Hetty, do you experience something similar to what Mr. De Renty expresses in those strong words: 'I bear about with me an experimental verity, and a plenitude of the presence of the ever-blessed Trinity' Do you commune with God in the night season Does He bid you even in sleep, Go on And does He 'make your very dreams devout'

That He may fill you with all His fullness is the constant wish of, my dear Hetty,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Hall

NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, July 5, 1776.

MY DEAR PATTY,--It is not wisdom to impute either our health or any other blessing we enjoy merely to natural causes. It is far better to ascribe all to Him whose kingdom ruleth over all. And whether we have more or less bodily strength is of little concern so we are strong in the Lord and in the power of His might. He gives strength when it is wanted.

The week before last, when I was in the North of Scotland where wheels could not go, the going on horseback (though I should not have chosen it) an hundred miles did me no harm at all. By all means let Suky Hare be with you. Show this to Mr. Atlay, and he will give you two guineas for her; and I will help her farther when I come to London. A little longer, and pain will be no more!--I am, dear Patty,

Your affectionate brother.

To William Severn
WHITBY, June 23, 1776.

DEAR BILLY,--I had some thoughts of your remaining another year in Bristol, where I know your labor has not been in vain; but first one, then a second, and afterwards a third preacher desired to be stationed there, and each of them gave such reasons for desiring it as appeared to be of weight. You judge right concerning George Snowden: he is ' a sensible and upright man,' ' and you justly observe the Wiltshire circuits are not so convenient for him. I agree with you, too, that Gloucestershire will suit him well--it will be a comfortable situation for him, provided you will bear him company; for you will go hand in hand. Next year, if we live and you desire it, you may be in Nottinghamshire.

But I must lay one burthen more upon you (if a labor of love may be termed so); observe, I speak in your ear! Sister Snowden is good-natured, but is a consummate slut: explain with her largely on this head; convince her that it is both a sin and a shame. She came into a clean house at Stroud; let her take care to keep it clean for the honor of God--for the honor of her husband--for the honor of her country!--I am, dear Billy,

Your affectionate brother.

If Christopher Walker is willing to go into Gloucestershire, you may take his place in Nottinghamshire.

To Isaac Andrews
SCARBOROUGH, June 24, 1776.

You misunderstood me. I never said or thought that every one who lives and died a Calvinist is damned. I believe thousands who lived and died in that opinion are now in Abraham's bosom. And yet I am persuaded that opinion has led many thousands to hell.--I am Yours affectionately.

To Mr. Isaac Andrews, At Mr. Farrens, In Hunt Street, Mile End, Newtown.

To James Barry

WHITBY, June 24, 1776.

DEAR JAMES,--The writer (I forget his name) does not say the local preachers talked blasphemy, but that several of them talk nonsense and that some of them speak against perfection. This must not be suffered. Fix a regular plan for the local preachers, and see that they keep it. You cannot be too exact in this and every other part of discipline.' This, however, I expect. You will see the fruit of your labor.--I am, with love to Sister Barry,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. James Barry, At the Preaching-

house, In Barnard Castle.

To Elizabeth Ritchie

DONCASTER, July 15, 1776.

MY DEAR BETSY,--I suppose you wait for my writing first. Nay, I hope this is the case; otherwise I should be afraid that you were fallen ill again. How is your health And how is your mind Do you find as near and as constant a communion with God as ever Are you always happy Does no circumstance interrupt or deaden your spirit of prayer Do you feel nothing contrary to resignation Can you say with your whole heart--

Determined all Thy will to obey,

Thy blessings I restore;

Give, Lord, or take Thy gifts away,

I praise Thee evermore.

The word of our Lord to you is, ' Feed My lambs.' Methinks I see you giving yourself up, as far as possibly you can, to that blessed work; carrying the weak, as it were, in your bosom, and gently leading the rest to the waters of comfort. Meantime your own soul will enjoy a well of water springing up into everlasting life. If you find any perplexing temptation in your way, you should not scruple to let me know. Youth is the season for many of the most dangerous temptations incident to human nature. But, indeed, you are preserved from many of these by your settled determination to slight all dreams of creature happiness and give your heart to Him who alone is worthy. And believe me to remain

Yours affectionately.

To 'Mr. Hawes, Apothecary and Critic' [11]
LONDON, July 20, 1776.

DEAR SIR,--My bookseller informs me that since you published your remarks on the Primitive Physick, or a Natural and Easy Method of Curing most Disorders, there has been a greater demand for it than ever. If, therefore, you would please to publish a few farther remarks, you would confer a farther favor upon

Your humble servant.

To Joseph Benson
SHOREHAM, July 31, 1776.

DEAR JOSEPH,--I think of Joseph Fothergill, and just as you do; and shall willingly propose him at the Conference. I believe he has considerable gifts and is truly alive to God. You are in the right. We must beware of distressing the poor. Our substantial brethren are well able to bear the burthen. I shall write a letter for each Assistant before the Conference is over. If they are in earnest, all will go well.

If the asserters of the decrees are quiet and peaceable, troubling no one with their opinions, reason is that we should bear with them. But if they will not be quiet, if they trouble others, we cannot keep them. Do all you can for God!--I am, dear Joseph,

Yours affectionately.

Pray tell Joseph Thompson I have set him down for Leeds.

To Mrs. Downes (Dorothy Furly)

LONDON, August 2, 1776.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I know not that you differ from me at all. You are certainly in your place at present; and it seems one providential reason of your ill-health was to drive you thither. Now use all the ability which God giveth, and He will give more. Unto him that hath shall be given, and he shall have more abundantly; it is the hand of the diligent that maketh rich. If you can persuade honest Alice Brammah to be cleanly as well as gentle, she will be tenfold more useful; and so will Billy Brammah, if he will be teachable and advisable; otherwise there is a fly in the pot of ointment. You are sent to Leeds chiefly for the sake of those that enjoy or thirst after perfect love. Redeem the time! Go on in His name! And let the world and the devil fall under your feet!--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Dickinson [12]
LONDON, Monday, August 5, 1776.

Although I hope to see you to-morrow se'nnight, yet I cannot but write a few lines. None that are in the Excise incur any danger by being a member of our Society; but several officers have been made supervisors, and Mr. Ball is now a collector. So that Mr. Dickinson has nothing to fear from any quarter, but may just do as he is persuaded in his own [mind].

When I was at Taunton' I was much pleased with the account I heard of you, and should have been glad to talk with you myself. If you have leisure, I can talk with you a little after dinner in Mrs. Pond's chamber. I hope you will never be weary or faint in your mind, nor ever be ashamed when it concerns your soul. If you have God on your side, nothing can hurt you. O consecrate your early days to Him! To His care I commit you; and am, my dear Suky,

Yours affectionately.

To Penelope Newman

LONDON, August 9, 1776.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Before I received yours we had been speaking in the Conference on that very head--the means of preventing spiritual religion from degenerating into formality. It is continually needful to guard against this, as it strikes at the root of the whole work of God. One means whereby God guards us against it is temptation, and indeed crosses of every kind. By these He keeps us from sleeping, as do others, and stirs us up to watch unto prayer. So He is now stirring you up! Hear His voice; and you will feel more life than ever.--I am, dear Penny, Yours affectionately.

To John Crook [13]
LONDON, August 10, 1776.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--By all means stay in the island till the storm be ended; in your patience possess your soul. Beware of despising your opponents! Beware of anger and resentment! Return not evil for evil or railing for railing. I advise you to keep with a few serious people a day of fasting and prayer. God has the hearts of all men in His hands. Neither Dr. Moor nor the Bishop himself is out of His reach. Be fervent in prayer that God would arise and maintain His own cause. Assuredly He will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able to bear. Violent methods of redress are not to be used till all other methods fail. I know pretty well the mind of Lord Mansfield and of one that is greater than he; but if I appealed to them, it would bring much expense and inconvenience on Dr. Moor and others. I would not willingly do this; I love my neighbor as myself. Possibly they may think better, and allow that liberty of conscience which belongs to every partaker of human nature, and more especially to every one of His Majesty’s subjects in his British dominions. To live peaceably with all men is the earnest desire of

Your affectionate brother.

To Dr. Ford [14]

LONDON, August 10, 1776.

DEAR SIR,--I am a little surprised that so odd a design should enter into the head of any of our preachers without having consulted either me or the Assistant. It was a kind Providence that interposed. I believe there is no danger that any other of our preachers should make such attempt any more than Mr. Peacock, who is now removed into another circuit.

I have frequently observed that, when prejudice has arisen in a place to such an height that it seemed nothing could withstand it, it has swiftly subsided, almost without any visible means. And this was a fresh proof that the hearts of all men are in the hands of God, and that He turneth them as the rivers of water.

Although you do not immediately see the fruit of your labor, this is no reason for being discouraged. Our Lord may permit this, to convince you the more thoroughly that the help which is done upon earth He doeth it Himself. Perhaps when there is least appearance a flame will suddenly break out, and you shall see the day of His power. Commending Mrs. Ford and you to His tender care, I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Rev. Dr. Ford, At Melton Mowbray,

Leicestershire.

To Elizabeth Ritchie
LONDON, August 12, 1776.

MY DEAR BETSY,--To talk of ' thinking without ideas' is stark nonsense. Whatever is presented to your mind is an idea; so that to be without ideas is not to think at all. Seeing, feeling, joy, grief, pleasure, pain are ideas. Therefore to be without ideas is to be without either sense or reason. Mr.---- certainly does not understand the word; he mistakes it for images.

O desire nothing different in nature from love! There is nothing higher in earth or heaven. Whatever he speaks of which seems to be higher is either natural or preternatural enthusiasm. Desire none of those extraordinaries. Such a desire might be an inlet to a thousand delusions. I wish your desires may all center in that:

I want the witness, Lord,

That all I do is right!

According to Thy will and word,

Well pleasing in Thy sight!

I ask no higher state,

Indulge me but in this!

And soon, or later, then translate

To my eternal bliss.

You say Satan had laid a snare for you. What snare was that I am concerned in whatever concerns you. 0 continue to remember in all your prayers

Yours most affectionately.

To the Officer of Excise [15]

LONDON, September 1776.

SIR,--I have two silver teaspoons at London, and two at Bristol. This is all the plate which I have at present; and I shall not buy any more while so many round me want bread.

--I am, sir,

Your most humble servant.

To Thomas Carlill

BRISTOL, September 8, 1776.

DEAR TOMMY,--Whatever these poor self-deceivers do, it is our part to go straight forward; and we know the counsel of the Lord that shall stand--the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

There is a blessed seed in Wales, and particularly in Brecknockshire. And if you will take the pains when you are in any town to call upon our poor people at their own houses, religion will deepen in their hearts and you will see the fruit of your labor. Begin this as soon as possible.--I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

PS.--I hope you wrote to George Mowatt.

To Hester Ann Roe [16]

BRISTOL, September 16, 1776.

MY DEAR HETTY,--As I did not receive yours of August 28 before my return from Cornwall, I was beginning to grow a little apprehensive lest your love was growing cold. But you have sweetly dispelled all my apprehensions of that sort, and I take knowledge that you are still the same.

The happy change wrought in Miss Peggy Roe as well as in Miss Bradock may encourage you to catch every opportunity of speaking a word for a good Master. Sometimes you see present fruit. But if not, your labor is not lost; it may spring up' after many days.' I hope, though your cousins are tried, they will not be discouraged; then all these things will 'work together for good.' Probably, if they stand firm, religion will in a while leaven the whole family. But they will have need of much patience and gentleness as well as much resolution. If any particular place is proposed for their residence, you would' [do] well to send me word immediately. They should not abruptly refuse to go; but it would be matter of prayer and consideration. Boarders at Kingswood pay twenty pounds a year. There is no entrance-money or farther expense of any kind. The masters are men of sense, learning, and piety. They are all a family of love.

I am not sorry that you have met with a little blame in the affair; and I hope it was not undeserved. Happy are they that suffer for well doing! I was almost afraid all men would speak well of you. Do you feel no intermission of your happiness in Him Does He ' bid you even in sleep go on’ What do you usually dream of Do you never find any lowness of spirits Is there never any time that hangs upon your hands How is your health Are you entirely free of your cough and the pain in your side You see how inquisitive I am, because everything relating to you nearly concerns me. I once thought I could not be well acquainted with any one till many years had elapsed. And yet I am as well acquainted with you as if I had known you from your infancy. Away with that thought, ' I shall not have you long.' Let our Lord see to that. Let us enjoy to-day. You are now my comfort and joy! And I hope to be far longer than this little span of life, my dear Hetty,

Yours in tender affection.

To Elizabeth Ritchie [17]
PUBLOW, September 20, 1776.

MY DEAR BETSY,--Some time since, you certainly were in danger of exchanging the plain religion of the Bible for the refined one of Mysticism, a danger which few can judge of but those that feel it. This my brother and I did for several years. This scheme, especially as Madame Guyon has polished and improved it, gives a delicate satisfaction to whatever of curiosity and self-esteem lies hid in the heart. It was particularly liable to make an impression upon you, as it came recommended by one you had a friendship for, whom you knew to be upright and sincere, and who had both sense and a pleasing address. At the same time that subtle enemy ' who beguiled Eve by his subtilty' would not fail to enforce the temptation. The more reason you have to bless God that you are delivered out of the snare of the fowler.

'He that followeth Me,' says our Lord, ' walketh not in darkness.' Nothing can be more certain. Closely follow Him, and you will never come into any darkness of soul. On the contrary, your light shall shine more and more unto the perfect day. Nothing but sin can bring you into confusion; and this, I trust, God has bruised under your feet. Surely, then, you have no need of ever losing the least part of what God has given you. But you may ' stand fast in glorious liberty' till your spirit returns to God.--I remain

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Downes

LONDON, October 1776.

MY DEAR SISTER,--YOU have abundant reason to praise God, who has dealt so mercifully with you, and to encourage all about you never to rest till they attain full salvation.

As to the question you propose, if the leader himself desires it and the class be not unwilling, in that case there can be no objection to your meeting a class even of men. This is not properly assuming or exercising any authority over them. You do not act as a superior, but an equal; and it is an act of friendship and brotherly love.

I am glad you had a little conversation with Miss Ritchie. She is a precious soul. Do her all the good you can, and incite her to exert all the talents which God has given her.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Hester Ann Roe [18]

BRISTOL, October 6, 1776.

MY DEAR HETTY,--To-morrow I set out for London; in and near which, if it please God to continue my life, I shall remain till spring. The trials which a gracious Providence sends may be precious means of growing in grace, and particularly of increasing in faith, patience, and resignation; and are they not all chosen for us by Infinite Wisdom and Goodness So that we may well subscribe to those beautiful lines,--

With patient mind thy course of duty run;

God nothing does, nor suffers to be done,

But thou wouldst do thyself if thou couldst see

The end of all events as well as He.

Everything that we can do for a parent we ought to do--that is, everything we can do without killing ourselves. But this we have no right to do. Our lives are not at our own disposal. Remember that, my dear Hetty, and do not carry a good principle too far. Do you still find

Labor is rest, and pain is sweet,

When Thou, my God, art here

I know pain or grief does not interrupt your happiness; but does it not lessen it You often feel sorrow for your friends; does that sorrow rather quicken than depress your soul Does it sink you deeper into God Go on in the strength of the Lord. Be careful for nothing. Live to-day. So will you still be a comfort to, my dear Hetty,

Your ever affectionate.

To Members and Friends of the Methodist Societies [19]

LONDON, October 18, 1776.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--The Society at London have given assistance to their brethren in various parts of England. They have done this for upwards of thirty years; they have done it cheerfully and liberally. The first year of the subscription for the General Debt they subscribed above nine hundred pounds, the next about three hundred, and not much less every one of the ensuing years.

They now stand in need of assistance themselves. They are under a necessity of building, as the Foundery with all the adjoining houses is shortly to be pulled down; and the City of London has granted ground to build on, but on condition of covering it, and with large houses in front; which, together with the new chapel, will, at a very moderate computation, cost upward of six thousand pounds. I must therefore beg the assistance of all our brethren. Now help the parent Society, which has helped others for so many years so willingly and so largely. Now help me, who account this as a kindness done to myself--perhaps the last of this sort which I shall ask of you. Subscribe what you conveniently can, to be paid either now, or at Christmas, or at Lady Day next.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

The trustees are John Duplex, Charles Greenwood, Richard Kemp, Samuel Chancellor, Charles Wheeler, William Cowland, John Folgham.

To Joseph Benson [20]
LONDON, October 22, 1776.

DEAR JOSEPH,--I apprehend Joseph Fothergill was not designedly omitted. I take him to be a good man and a good preacher.

You did right in excluding from our Society so notorious an offender. And you have now a providential call to stand in the .gap between the living and the dead. Fear nothing. Begin m the name of God and go through with the work. If only six will promise you to sin no more, leave only six in the Society. But my belief is an hundred and fifty are now clear of blame; and if you are steady, an hundred more will amend. You must at all events tear up this evil by the roots. The Word to a Smuggler should be read and dispersed. And secure your fellow laborers, that you may all speak one thing. Go on, for God is with you!--I am, dear Joseph,

Yours affectionately.

 

 

To Mrs. Johnston, Annandale, Lisleen [21]

LONDON, October 22, 1776.

MY DEAR SISTER,--If I live over the winter, I shall have a work upon my hands which will detain me in London great part of the year. This is the building in the room of the Foundery, which must shortly be pulled down. We have agreed with the City of London for the ground, and propose beginning the work early in the spring. This will allow me little time for journeys, as my presence will be necessary on many accounts. Perhaps I may have time to step over to Dublin, and probably that is all I shall be able to do.

It is suitable to the wisdom of God, now that He is sending a general call to these kingdoms, to send preachers of every sort, that some or other of them may be adapted to every class of hearer. Mr. Mill is adapted to plain, uneducated men, and some of them have much profited by him. Mr. Hem and Boardman are adapted to an higher class, men of taste and education; and a few even of these in almost every place are persuaded to choose the better part.

I think my dear Sidney could no more be idle at Longford than at Lisleen. She would certainly aim at being useful to those that were round about her. Many of our Society there would receive her with joy and profit by her conversation. But she would not, I am persuaded, confine herself to those, seeing we are debtors to all men, and happy are they that can speak a word for the comfort or strengthening of any soul for which Christ died.

It gives me pleasure to hear your soul is more established in the faith that works by love. Undoubtedly, if thou canst believe, all things are possible. It is possible for you to be all praise, all meekness, and all love; and what God gives once He is willing to give always. Whereunto you have attained hold fast, and look for all the residue of the promise.--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Samuel Bardsley
 

 
 

LONDON, October 25, 1776.
DEAR SAMMY,--I like your proposal well of desiring help from your acquaintance in the neighboring circuits; and the sooner it is put in execution the better, that it may not interfere with the subscription we must shortly make for the new Foundery. Whatever you do, temporal or spiritual, do it with your might!--I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Samuel Bardsley, At

Mr. Thomas Whitaker's, Jun., In Colne.

To Francis Wolfe

LONDON, October 25, 1776.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--The remark you make is perfectly just. Nothing will so effectually stop the plague of Calvinism as the preaching salvation from all sin and exhorting all to expect it now by naked faith. Let Brother Wright and all of you be diligent in this and in visiting all our Societies (where it is possible) from house to house. To be all in earnest in the whole work of God is the best prevention of all temptations.--I am Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Joseph Benson

LONDON, November 7, 1776.

DEAR JOSEPH,--Not only the Assistant but every preacher is concerned to see all our Rules observed. I desire Brother Rhodes will give no tickets either to those who have not constantly met their classes or to any that do not solemnly promise to deal in stolen goods no more. He and you together may put a stop to this crying sin.

I wish Edward Jackson would go into the Dales. But here is a great difficulty: Robert Wilkinson, you know, is married; therefore he cannot live (though he may starve) in the Dundee Circuit. I designed that he and Brother Lumley should change places. But what can be done now Consider the matter, and advise, dear Joseph,

Yours affectionately.

To Elizabeth Ritchie

LONDON, November 12, 1776.

MY DEAR BETSY,--I love you for your freedom and openness. At all times it is of use to have a friend to whom you can pour out your heart without any disguise or reserve. But it will be of peculiar use if you should ever meet with heavy temptation. Then you will find how true that word is, 'A friend is made for adversity.'

You have exceeding great reason to praise God for what He has already done for your soul. Take heed lest any one beguile you of your blessing by a voluntary humility. Never deny, never conceal, never speak doubtfully of what God hath wrought, but declare it before the children of God with all plainness and simplicity.

Do you set the Lord always before you Do you always see Him that is invisible Are you constantly sensible of His loving presence And is your heart praying without ceasing Have you power in everything to give Him thanks Does He bid you even in sleep go on What do you commonly dream of While you sleep, is your heart awake to Him Just when you have time and opportunity, send an answer to, my dear Betsy,

Yours affectionately.

To John Mason

LONDON, November 21, 1776.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--One of Mr. Fletcher's Checks considers at large the Calvinist supposition ' that a natural man is as dead as a stone '; and shows the utter falseness and absurdity of it, seeing no man living is without some preventing grace, and every degree of grace is a degree of life.

That, 'by the offence of one, judgement came upon all men' (all born into the world) ' unto condemnation,' is an undoubted truth, and affects every infant as well as every adult person. But it is equally true that, ' by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men' (all born into the world, infant or adult) ‘unto justification.' Therefore no infant ever was or ever will be ' sent to hell for the guilt of Adam's sin,' seeing it is cancelled by the righteousness of Christ as soon as they are sent into the world.

Labor on, especially by visiting from house to house, and you will see the fruit of your labor.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Carlill
CHATHAM, November 25, 1776.

TOMMY,--Be of good courage! Play the man! You have God on your side. If you do not immediately see the fruit of your labors, yet in due time you shall reap if you faint not. Preach Christian perfection, whether they will hear or whether they will forbear, and sooner or later God will bless His own word. Regard not those pert lads of my Lady's Charity School. In our own Societies be exact in discipline. Truth is great and will prevail. The books send to Bristol.--I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Joseph Benson
 

 
 

CHATHAM, November 26, 1776.
DEAR JOSEPH,--If any leader oppose, you see your remedy, --put another in his place: nay, if he does not join heart and hand; for ' he that gathereth not with you scattereth.' The Word to a Smuggler is plain and home, and has done much good in these parts

Taking opium is full as bad as taking drams. It equally hurts the understanding, and is if possible more pernicious to the health than even rum or brandy. None should touch it if they have the least regard either for their souls or bodies.

I really think you are in the right. It is better to help Robert Wilkinson where he is than to burthen the Dales with an additional weight. But then what shall we do We have no supernumerary preachers. See if you can do anything with Edward Jackson.--I am, dear Joseph,

Yours affectionately.

To William Minethorp

LONDON, November 29, 1776.

DEAR BILLY,--You have nothing to do with past sins. They are blotted out. Whoever tells you the contrary, answer him, ' Thou art a liar. Get thee behind me, Satan. I will not east away my confidence: Jesus hath lived, hath died for me.' T. Rutherford told you the very truth. There are three causes of your inward trials: (1) bodily disorder, by means of which the body presses down the soul; (2) Satan, who does not fail to avail himself of this; (3) your own frailty in reasoning with him instead of looking to the Strong for strength. None can advise you as to your body better than Dr. Hamilton. I am afraid you cannot spare this money. Whenever you want it send word to, dear Billy, Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. William Minethorp, At Chester Hall, Near Dunbar.

To Hannah Ball
LONDON, November 30, 1776.

MY DEAR SISTER,--By the account you give, about a fourth part of those near you that were saved from sin stand fast after a trial of several years in that glorious liberty. Of those who received the blessing here in 1762 and 1763, I fear we have hardly a sixth part that have not been moved from their steadfastness. Whereas out of two-and-twenty who received it in Bristol, seventeen or eighteen, I think, retain it to this day.

I should imagine most of those who have the advice and example of Mr. Valton would be in earnest: I mean, if he is of the same spirit he used to be; and I hope he does not go backward but forward. But there is something in the increase and decrease of the work of God among a people which all our wisdom cannot account for. However, we are to go on! We cannot stand still or turn back. There is the prize before us.—I am, my dear Hannah, Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Rutherford
 

LONDON, December 6, 1776.
DEAR TOMMY,--I am glad that you was in the neighborhood to pay the last office of love to Billy Minethorp. I had no doubt but he would die in peace, and it was good that he should die among those peculiar friends, who took care that everything should be done which possibly could be done for him. He was an honest, upright man. Now, Tommy, let us redouble our diligence! Let us do everything just as we would wish to have done it when we are stepping into eternity.--I am, dear Tommy,

Yours affectionately;

To Penelope Newman [22]
LONDON, December 13, 1776.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You do well in giving me as particular an account as you can of the blessed work in and about Stroud.' And surely the very same work, if the preachers are zealous, will spread through the whole circuit; especially if they are diligent in visiting from house to house, and so watering the seed that has been sown in public. But do you not see what a temptation you have been under Who is it that told you poor Cheltenham would be forgotten Tell him, ' Thou art a liar from the beginning. I will not hearken to thee.

I will hearken what the Lord

Will say concerning me.'

How soon can He make Cheltenham as Stroud, and Mr. Wells as Mr. Valton Look up, Prizzy, look up! Is not the cloud bursting--I am, my dear friend,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss P. Newman, In Cheltenham, Gloucestershire.

To Mrs. Bennis [23]

LONDON, December 21, 1776.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You are a great deal less happy than you would be if you did not reason too much. This frequently gives that subtle adversary an advantage against you. You have need to be continually as a little child, simply looking up for whatever you want.

It is devoutly to be wished for that we may rejoice evermore; and it is certain the inward kingdom of God implies not only righteousness and peace but joy in the Holy Ghost. You have therefore reason to ask for and expect the whole gospel blessing. Yet it cannot be denied that many times joy is withheld even from them that walk uprightly. The great point of all is an heart and a life entirely devoted to God. Keep only this, and let all the rest go; give Him your heart, and it sufficeth. I am, my dear sister,

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Joseph Benson [24]

NEAR LONDON, December 24, 1776.

DEAR JOSEPH,--The total suppression of that vile practice will doubtless be a difficult task: but it is worth all the labor; yea, though you should be obliged to cut off some of our oldest members. For you must absolutely go through with your work, leave neither root nor branch; else the reformation will be but for a season, and then the evil will sprout up again.

The case of John Reed is one of the most remarkable which has fallen under my notice. From the beginning it was my judgement that the disorder was more than natural. I wish he would take opportunities of writing down as many particulars as he can recollect, and send me as circumstantial an account as he can. You may much assist him herein.--I am, dear Joseph,

Yours affectionately.

To Mary Bishop

LONDON, December 26, 1776.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You are certainly clear concerning Miss Mahon. You have done all that was in your power; and if she will not any longer accept of your services, her blood is upon her own head. But I will not give her up yet. I have wrote to Mr. Valton at Oxford, and desired him to talk with Mrs. Mahon. Perhaps a letter from her may be of service. But I expect to hear no good of her daughter while she is ashamed to attend the preaching.

Either that text in Ezekiel xxxiii. 8 means literally or it has no meaning at all. And nothing is more certain, in fact, than that thousands perish through the neglect of others. And yet God is fully justified therein, because the principal cause of their destruction is their own neglect; their not taking care to work out their own salvation with fear and trembling.

Whatever other ends are answered by prayer, this is one, and it seems the primary one, that we may have the petitions which we ask of Him. Asking is the appointed means of receiving, and that for others as well as for ourselves; as we may learn partly from reason itself, but more fully from our own experience, and more clearly still from revelation. Reason teaches us to argue from analogy. If you (because you have a regard for me) would do more for a third person at my request than otherwise you would have done, how much more will God at the request of His beloved children give blessings to those they pray for which otherwise He would not have given! And how does all experience confirm this! How many times have the petitions of others been answered to our advantage, and ours on the behalf of others.

But the most decisive of all proofs is the scripture, ' Go to My servant Job, and he shall pray for you; for him I will accept.' It was not a temporal blessing which was here in question, but a spiritual, the forgiveness of their sin. So when St. Paul said,' Brethren, pray for us,' he did not desire this on a temporal account only, that ' he might be delivered out of the mouth of the lion,' but on a spiritual, 'that he might speak boldly as he ought to speak.' But the instances of this are innumerable. In proof of the general truth that God gives us both temporal blessings and spiritual blessings in answer to each other's prayers I need only remind you of one scripture more: ' Let them pray over him; and the prayer of faith shall save the sick; and if he hath committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.' The promise in the following verse is still more comprehensive: ' Pray one for another, and ye shall be healed' of whatsoever you have confessed to each other.

I lament over every pious young woman who is not as active as possible, seeing every one shall receive his own reward according to his own labor. O lose no time! Buy up every opportunity of doing good. And give more and more joy to, my dear friend,

Yours affectionately.

At Miss March's, In Bristol.

To Robert Costerdine

LONDON, December 27, 1776.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I think, as soon as you conveniently can, you should have full explanation with Thomas Warwick in the presence of two or three witnesses. Show him that his proceedings have been contrary to reason as well as to brotherly love. If you can convince him of this, all that is past should die and be forgotten. If not, you cannot give him another ticket.--I am, dear Robert,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Robert Costerdine, At the Rev. Mr. Wesley's

Preaching-house, In Manchester.