1786

To Adam Clarke

SHEFFIELD, July 2, 1786.

DEAR ADAM, - I really know not what to say. Many desire that you should be in Bradford Circuit next year; but I imagined it was your own desire, which, therefore, I intended to comply with. But if you think you could do more good in another place you may be in another. I commend you for staying in the Dock during the Conference. [That is, in his circuit at Plymouth Dock. John King was his colleague. Clarke was appointed to Jersey at Conference. He was in love with Mary Cooke, of Trowbridge. See letters of Sept. 14, 1785, and May 17, 1787.] Brother King may either come or stay with you, as you shah agree. Be much in prayer, and God will direct you right. - I am, dear Adam,

Yours affectionately.

To Mr. Adam Clarke, At the Preaching-house,

In Plymouth Dock.

To Francis Wrigley

NOTTINGHAM, July 7, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - You are to stay in Redruth Circuit another year. [Wrigley was Assistant there.] I think C. Bond [See letter in Jan. 1791 to Richard Rodda.] need not come to the Conference. You should not have paid for M. Moorhouse's [See letters of Sept. 28, 1779, and Sept. 10, 1789.] letters, but redirected them to him. I expect immediately after the Conference to go and take leave of my friends in Holland. [See letter of Aug. 8.] There is a considerable increase of the work of God this year almost in every part of the kingdom. Indeed, we have good encouragement to put forth all our strength. - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Wrigley, At the Preaching-house,

In Truro, Cornwall.

To Mr. ---- [1]

LONDON, July 15, 1785.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - For fear I should have less leisure when I come to Bristol, I write a few lines now. I shall be glad to see you and our brothers at the Conference the week after next. On the Wednesday or Thursday in that week we shall have finished our temporal business. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Sarah M'Kim

BRISTOI., July 21, 1786.

MY DEAR SISTER, - You do well to write. I am well pleased to hear you do not let go the blessing which God has given you. See that you hold fast the beginning of your confidence steadfast unto the end. And you know there are still greater blessings behind I There is no end of His goodness.

If any of our brethren in Sligo ['I presume it was to Sarah M'Kim, of Sligo' (C. H. Crookshank).] will give you a guinea, he may receive it again of Mr. Rogers in Dublin. - I am, dear Sally,

Yours affectionately.

To the Mayor of Liverpool [2]

BRISTOL, July 29, 1786.

SIR, - Some preachers in connection with me have thought it their duty to call sinners to repentance even in the open air. If they have violated any law thereby, let them suffer the penalty of that law. But if not, whoever molests them on that account will be called to answer it in His Majesty's Court of King's Bench. I have had a suit already in that court, with a magistrate (Heap), and if I am forced to it am ready to commence another. - I am, sir,

Your obedient servant.

To Mr. Torry

BRISTOL, July 30, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - We [Conference met in Bristol on July 25 and closed on Aug. 1.] entirely disapprove of such a division of the Hull Circuit as has been sent to us. We totally reject the thought of a preacher staying a fortnight together in one place. There is no precedent of this in England, nor shall be as long as I live. I have desired those of our Brethren who are acquainted with this and the neighboring county to draw up a Methodist Plan. [The following is the Plan, with the original spelling:

Hull, Wednesday.

Shorley, Thursday.

Wo'thering, Week Friday.

Ross or Remswell, Saturday.

Paterington, Sunday.

Melton, Munday.

Cave, Tuesday.

Gilberdike, Wednesday.

Laxton, Thursday.

Esterington, Friday.

Newbold, Saturday.

Beverley, Sunday & Munday.

Theton, Tuesday.

Hull, he that is in Hull. Skitby, Tuesday. Cottingham, Wednesday. Newland, Thursday. Hasel, Friday.

Pocklington, Saturday & Sunday.

Br. Wilton,} Munday.

Grimston,} Tuesday.

Acklam, Wednesday.

Bugthorp, Thursday.

Fankioss, Friday.

Assalby, Saturday.

Howden, Sunday noon.

Spanden, Sunday night.

Hoggerthorp, Munday.

Seetown, Tuesday.

Holm, Wednesday & Thursday.

Numberaura, Friday.

Shipton, Saturday.

Weigton, Sunday noon & night.

Drifteld, Monday.

Gatton, Tuesday.

Frodingham, Wednesday.

Nafferton, Thursday.

Reeston, Friday.

Burlington, Saturday, Sun. Mony.

Hunmanby or

Rudston, Tuesday.

Kilham, Wednesday.

Witewand, Thursday

Huggitt, Friday.

Millington, Saturday.] They have done so, and I like it well. No one of our preachers must be still while I live. - I am, my dear brother,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Torry, In Hull.

To Josiah Dornford

BRISTOL, August 1, 1786.

DEAR SIR, - Go on in the name of God and in the power of His might. If He sees, and when lie sees best, He will put more talents into your hands. In the meantime, it is your wisdom to make the full use of those which you have, only taking care not to trust in yourself but in Him that raiseth the dead. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Josiah Dornford0 Esq.,

In Philpot Lane.

To Elizabeth Briggs

[LONDON, August 7, 1786.]

MY DEAR BETSY, - You may do me a considerable piece of service by informing me of all you know concerning Mr. Fletcher, chiefly when he was abroad. Perhaps you can give me light from some letters or papers of your brother William's; as I suppose all his papers are in your hands. Perhaps you may have some valuable letters which he (Mr. F.) wrote to your good father. [See letter of Sept. 24; and for William Perronet (who died in 1746 at the age of twenty-two), Atmore's Memorial, pp. 320-1.] I think both for my sake and for Mr. F.'s sake you will give all the help you can herein to, my dear Betsy,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Briggs.

To Mrs. Fletcher [3]

LONDON, August 7, 1786.

MY DEAR SISTER, - Several of the fragments may be of use. I purpose to insert them in the Magazine. Some of the letters I think to insert in the Life. As to dates, you can probably help me:

(I) In what year did Mr. Fletcher come to England (2) In what year did he go to Germany (3) In what year did he go to Madeley (4) In what year did he travel with me (5) In what year did he go to Newington (6) In what year did he go to Switzerland (7) In what year did he return to England (8) In what month and year did he marry In what year did he go to Trevecca Return home

To-morrow we are to set out for Holland. I hope to return before the end of this month; and am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Samuel Bradburn [4]

HARWICH, August 8, 1786.

DEAR SAMMY, - I beg there may be no preaching at Deptford in church hours before my return. What need of any innovation there The case does not fall under any of those four that were allowed at the Conference.

And pray give an hint to Benj. Rhodes. I do not take it kindly that he should run his head against me. I fear he has underhand abetted the malcontents there. If he loves me, he should bid them 'know when they are well.'

We expect to sail in a few hours. [See letter of July 7.] - I am, with kind love to Sophy, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Dr. Coke [5]

LONDON, September 6, 1786.

DEAR SIR, - I desire that you would appoint a General Conference of all our Preachers in the United States, to meet at Baltimore on May the 1st, 1787. And that Mr. Richard Whatcoat may be appointed Superintendent with Mr. Francis Asbury.

To Mrs. Fletcher [6]

LONDON, September 6, 1786.

MY VERY DEAR SISTER AND FRIEND, - Excuse me if write just as I feel. I have not of a long season felt so tender an affection for you as I have done in reading your last. If love you much for the care you have taken of my dear Miss Ritchie. If she is worse, send me word to Bristol, where I hope to be on Monday. I would travel day and night to see her before she is called home. But as God has already heard the prayer, I trust He will permit her to stay a little longer with us. If the vomiting returns, apply half a slit onion warmed to the pit of her stomach.

The children of traveling preachers only are sent to Kingswood School. David Evans has had uncommon help. I gave him five-and-twenty pounds at once. Peace be with your spirit! - I am, my dear Sister,

Yours most affectionately.

Tuesday afternoon.

I have just received your last, and am glad to hear that my dear sister Ritchie is not worse.

My dear friend, Adieu.

To Mary Cooke [7]

BATH, September 9, 1786.

It gives me much satisfaction, my dear friend, to observe you are happier than when you wrote last. I do not doubt but you have at some times a rich foretaste of the state which your soul pants after. And even

These wandering gleams of light

And gentle ardors from above

Have made you sit, like seraph bright,

Some moments on a throne of love.

But you know you are not to rest here; this is but a drop out of the ocean. Only this has been known again and again, that one of those happy moments has been the prelude of pure love. It has opened into the full liberty of the children of God. Who knows but this may be your happy experience - but the next time your soul is so caught up He that loves you may touch your nature clean, and so take you into the holiest, that

You may never leave the skies,

Never stoop to earth again

I am now intent upon my own work, finishing the Life of Mr. Fletcher. This requires all the time I have to spare; so that, as far as it is possible, I must for two or three months shut myself up. Two weeks I give to Bristol; after that time I return to London. I cannot, therefore, have the happiness of seeing Trowbridge this autumn. But might I not see you or your sisters at Bristol If I am invisible to others, I would not be so to you. You may always command everything that is in the power of, my very dear friend,

Yours in life and in death.

To Walter Churchey

BRISTOL, September 20, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - At length Jenny has broke through, and given me the satisfaction of exchanging a few words with her. You send us strange news that the lions of Wales are become lambs! I really think a spirit of humanity and benevolence is gone forth upon the earth, perhaps intimating that the time is drawing near when men shall not know war any more. Mr. Wrigley has been detained here by a sore face ever since the Conference; but is now also on the mending hand, though he is not yet able to go abroad. [Francis Wrigley, Assistant at Redruth.] I am glad to hear that Dr. Powell, of Brecon, continues in the good way. He seems to be of a frank, open temper, and to be skilful in his profession. I am rather gaining than losing ground as to my health.

I think Mr. Cowper has done as much as is possible to be done with his lamentable story. I can only wish he had a better subject. [The Task was published in June 1785. See letter of July 22, 1788, to Churchey.] Peace be with you and yours! - I am

Your affectionate brother.

I set out for London on Monday.

To Elizabeth Briggs [8]

BRISTOL, September 24, 1786.

MY DEAR BETSY, - I thank you for the letters which you sent, and shall be glad to see those which you mention. There is no doubt but Shoreham is the place which God at present points out for your residence, and it is well that you have such an assistant there as honest Sampson Staniforth. Great care should be taken to preserve a perfect good understanding between him and the traveling preachers. I know not who in Shoreham is able to give me a night's lodging now. Tomorrow I expect to set out for London. - I am, my dear Betsy,

Yours affectionately.

To William Robarts

BRISTOL, September 25, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I doubt not but you could say in the hour of trial, 'The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away: blessed be the name of the Lord!'

Still, I really think you are not in your place. You are called to better things than standing behind a counter. Your spirit, your understanding, your gifts of various kinds, point out to you a more excellent way! O when will you break loose, and join heart and hand with, [See letters of Dec. 6, 1785, and Dec. 9, 1786, to him.] dear Billy,

Your affectionate brother.

I set out for London this afternoon.

To Freeborn Garrettson [9]

LONDON, September 30, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I trust before this comes to hand you and Dr. Coke will have met and refreshed each other's bowels in the Lord. I can exceedingly ill spare him from England, as I have no clergyman capable of supplying his lack of service; but I was convinced he was more Wanted in America than in Europe. For it is impossible but offences will come, and 'of yourselves will men arise speaking perverse things' and striving 'to draw away disciples after them.' It is a wonderful blessing they are restrained so long, till the poor people are a little grounded in the faith. You have need to watch over them with your might. Let those that have set their hands to the plough continually 'pray to the Lord of the harvest that He would send forth more laborers into His harvest.'

It is far better to send your journals as they are than not to send them at all. I am afraid it is too late in the season to send books this year, but I hope Dr. Coke has brought some with him to serve you for the present. I was far off from London when he set sail. Most of those in England who have riches love money, even the Methodists - at least, those who are called so. The poor are the Christians. I am quite out of conceit with almost all those who have this world's goods. Let us take care to lay up our treasure in heaven. Peace be with your spirit! - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To George Merryweather

LONDON, October 9, 1786.

DEAR GEORGE, - Do not wish to have a grain less of sensibility than you have. I love you the better for it; and so does He that is greater than all. That family I know and love well; we will help them all we can. I have no access to Mr. Thornton: the Calvinists take care to keep him to themselves. [John Thornton, of Clapham, the friend of Wilberforce and the Venns.] But ff you will give them five pounds from me, John Atlay will answer your draft here. - I am, with best wishes to all the family, dear George,

Your affectionate brother.

To John Valton [10]

LONDON, October 9, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I know not but I mentioned to you before that Jas. Timhock of Bath hates Jo. Fowler as he hates the devil and has for several years been constantly laboring to prejudice both preachers and people, against him and his wife. Therefore I desire of you three things: (1) that you will go to his house either seldom or not at all; (2) that you will talk largely with him and Sister Fowler, and give them opportunity of speaking for themselves; (3) that if the traveling preachers, as was agreed, fill up the Monday evenings, he may preach at some other time, whoever is offended. For God has owned his preaching more than that of most local preachers in England. One thing more. Unless Mrs. Pitt asks [See letter of Oct. 29.] Sister Fowler's pardon, I require you to expel her the Society. - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Valton, At the New Room,

Bristol.

To Thomas Carlill

LONDON, October 21, 1786.

DEAR TOMMY, - I apprehend those deeds cannot be altered without the consent of all the trustees. But do not say one word about enrolling them. They will probably let the time slip, and then they will be null and void. So new ones may be drawn without any lawyer at all.-I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

Now procure all the subscribers you can for Mr. Fiefchef's Life. [Wesley was busy finishing the Life. See letters of Oct. 22, 1785, and Nov. 11, 1786 (to Taylor).]

To Mr. Carlill, At the Preaching-house,

In Derby.

To Jasper Winscorn [11]

LONDON, October 23, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHR, - The sooner the affair is settled the better. I desire, therefore, that Mr. Ashman will receive what is in Mr. Smith's hands. You say you can borrow as much more than Mr. Gifford's ten pounds as will make up the hundred. As soon as this is paid the house may be transferred to five or more trustees on the Conference plan. I forbid engaging any attorney. [The new chapel at Winchester had been opened the previous November. See letter of Sept. 13, 1785.] You have the form of conveyance in the Minutes, which anyone may transcribe. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To the Rev. Mr. L. ---

LONDON, October 25, 1786.

Last night I had a long conversation with a few sensible men concerning going to church. [The conversation was evidently at Deptford. See Journal, vii. 217.] I asked them what objection they had to the hearing of Mr. L---. They answered, 'They could not hear him. He generally spoke so low that they lost a good part of what he said; and that what they could was spoken in a dead, cold, languid manner, as if he did not feel anything which he spoke.' This would naturally disgust them the more, because Dr. C[oke] leaned to the other extreme. I doubt there is some ground for their objection. But I should think you might easily remove it. I asked again, Have you any objection to anything in his behavior 'They answered, 'One thing we cannot approve of - his being ashamed of the Methodists. His never recommending or defending them at all, we think, is a full proof of this; for everyone knows his near relation and his many obligations to you. They know how you have loved and cherished him from a child.' They might have added, 'You owe your whole education to him; and therefore, in effect, your ordination, your curacy, your school, yea, and your wife: none of which you would in all likelihood have had had it not been for him.'

I would add a word upon this head myself. I do not think you act wisely. Not one of your genteel friends can be depended on: they are mere summer flies. Whereas, had you condescended to make the Methodists your friends, they would have clave to you, one and all. And they are already no inconsiderable body of people; besides that they are increasing more and more.

Suffer me now to speak a word between you and me. Is not the reason of your preaching so languidly and coldly, that you do not feel what you say And why not Because your soul is not alive to God! Do you know that your sins are forgiven I fear not. Can you say, 'I know that my Redeemer liveth' I doubt, if you did know it once, whether you know it now Have you fellowship with the Father and the Son Alas! 'tis well if you know what it means! And are you content to have your portion in this world Do you favor only earthly things Then I do not wonder that you are shy to the Methodists; for they are not to your taste! O think and pray to-day! For I do not promise you that you shall live another year! I now give you a full proof that I am

Your truly affectionate.

To John Valton [12]

LONDON, October 29, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - Striking a woman in the street, and crying amain, Strumpet, strumpet! was enough to enrage a woman, even to madness. It had not been strange if, instead of scolding, she had shot her husband or herself. I wonder she can sustain life. Do not cast water upon a drowning man; and take care of receiving anything upon Joseph Brundrell's testimony. Speaking is not the thing, but revealing what is spoken in band, had it been true. Unless Sister Pitt [See letter of Oct. 9 to Valton.] be convinced of this sin, I will expel her the Society the first time I come to Bath. I must do justice if the sky falls. I am the last resort. A word to the wise! I am sure Michael Griffith [See letter of Dec. 22.] is good enough for the place, if he is not too good. I hope Mr. Jones is set out for Brecon. [Thomas Jones had been appointed there.] See that Michael have fair play.

John Atlay knows nothing about the hundred pounds; neither do I. I am afraid it is a castle in the air, I am glad to hear you have so fair a prospect in the circuit. You will find all things work together for good. - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Wride [13]

LONDON, October 29, 1786.

DEAR TOMMY, - I am entirely of your mind. If any man (to waive everything else) can make me sleep without touching me, he may call the matter what he pleases; I know it is not magnetism, but magic.

Mr. Mears did not tell me (that I know) anything about letters one, two, three. Women told me at Chatham. 'We called on Mrs. Wride and offered her any service in our power; but she was so sullen and surly, we had not the heart to go again.'

But is it true, Tommy, that you have an estate left you I fear it is not so large as the Duke of Bedford's! I should be glad to bring you all to a good agreement. If I knew how. - I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Henry Moore [14]

LONDON, Novernber 4, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I am glad you spoke freely to Mr. Collins. He is a good man, but not very advisable. If he should declare open war in England, he will do little or no harm. Mr. Smyth will not be fond of him if he preaches at Plunkett Street. There will not soon be a coalition between Arminianism and Calvinism. This we found even in Holland. If Brother Rogers and you keep to the Church still, a few, I doubt not, will follow your example.

We made just allowance enough for leaving the Church at the last Conference. At all hazards let there be a free and open correspondence between Jeremy Rogers and you. I hope your Sister Becky is gaining ground, and that Nancy is not losing any. I have an affectionate letter from Mrs. Slack at Annadale. To save expense I send a few lines which you will forward to her. I hope your lawsuit is almost or quite at an end. - I am, with kind love to Nancy, dear Henry,

Yours affectionately.

To the Society at Epworth [15]

LONDON, Nouernber 5, 1785.

MY DEAR BRETHREN, - You did not well understand the case of John Fenwick; though I got down the name of James Watson before his. Yet I told him, 'You are to act as Assistant and to change the stewards in every place.' This deeply resented, and set himself to blacken him in every place and to prejudice the people against him; in which he has been but too successful. The fault of John Fenwick was the doing the right thing in the wrong manner. And I know not but when he was hunted like an hare he might be hurried to say something that was not strictly true. But what then In every circuit where he has been he has been one of the most useful assistants in England. I can remove him. But I have no preacher to send in his place. Therefore I would advise you for a time to make the best of him. But I desire those stewards may stand whom I appointed. - I am, my dear brethren,

Your affectionate brother.

Till that man who shut the preaching door owns his fault I desire none of our preachers will preach at Crowle. I dare not submit in such a case.

To Mr. Simon Kilham, In Epworth,

Near Thorne, Yorkshire.

To William Simpson [16]

NEAR LONDON, November 11, 1785.

DEAR BILLY, - Busy as I am, I snatch time to write a few lines, as I judge you had rather see my handwriting than John Broadbent's.

You must in any wise write a few loving lines to Brother Inglis, and tell him I desired you so to do. It may induce him to be a little more careful for the time to come.

The Sunday preaching may continue at Jervas for the present. I suppose the Society at Jervas is as large as that at Northallerton; and this is a point which is much to be considered.

You must needs expel out of the Society at Knaresborough those that will be contentious. [See letter of Nov. 23.] - I am, with love to Nancy, dear Billy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Joseph Taylor [17]

NEAR LONDON, November 11, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I am not afraid of your doing too little, but of your doing too much, either by preaching oftener than your strength will yet bear or by speaking too long or too loud. [See letter of Feb. 14, 1787.]

Our preachers have as great need of temperance in preaching as in eating or drinking; otherwise our grand enemy will carry his point, and soon disable us from preaching at all.

I hope my dear friends Mr. Smith and his wife [See letter of Oct. 3, 1784.] continue in the good way; and that you still earnestly exhort all the believers to go on to perfection. - I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

PS. - I have nearly finished Mr. Fletcher's Life [See letters of Oct. 21 and Dec. 9.]; now let Brother Watkinson and you exert yourselves and procure as many subscribers as you can.

To Jasper Winscom

LONDON, November 12, 1786.

DEAR JASPER, - I am glad to hear so good an account of the work of God in Witney. If the Lord will work, who shall hinder This should encourage you to still greater zeal and activity. The death of that miserable backslider was a signal instance of Divine Providence, and very probably might excite some others to flee from the wrath to come. - I am, dear Jasper,

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Warwick

NEAR LONDON, November 16, 1785.

DEAR TOMMY, - Whoever is pleased or displeased (as some win certainly be), it is your duty to remove every leader whom you judge to be unprofitable to the people, or indeed less profitable than another that lives at a convenient distance. [Warwick was Assistant at Burslem.] Some will likewise be displeased if you diligently exhort the believers to go on to perfection. But you need only secure one point - to please God. - I am, with love to Sister Warwick,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To William Simpson

LONDON, November 23, 1786.

DEAR BILLY,-YOU have taken in this intricate affair the very best method that could be taken. When you have to do with those stubborn spirits, it is absolutely necessary either to mend them or to end them; and ten persons of a quiet temper are better than thirty contentious ones. [The contentions were at Knaresborough. See letter of Nov. 11 to him.] Undoubtedly some of the eloquent men will be sending me heavy complaints. It is well, therefore, that you spoke first. - I am, dear Billy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To William Black

LONDON, November 26, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - It is indeed a matter of joy that our Lord is still carrying on His work throughout Great Britain and Ireland. In the time of Dr. Jonathan Edwards there were several gracious showers in New England, but there were large intermissions between one and another; whereas with us there has been no intermission at all for seven-and-forty years, but the work of God has been continually increasing.

The same thing I am in hopes you will now see in America likewise. [Black wrote from Halifax on Aug. 7 giving a pleasing account of the work. See Richey's Memoir, pp. 156-8.] See that you expect it, and that you seek it in His appointed ways - namely, with fasting and unintermitted prayer. And take care that you be not at all discouraged, though you should not always have an immediate answer. You know

His manner and His times are best.

Therefore pray always! Pray, and faint not. I commend you all to our Great Shepherd; and am

Your affectionate brother.

To Francis Wrigley [18]

LONDON, November 26, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER,-Now is the very time wherein you should earnestly exhort the believers to go on to perfection. Those of them that hunger and thirst after righteousness will keep their ground; the others will lose what God has wrought.

You may certainly give a note to the serious [house-keeper] tin you can do more.

I look upon that very common custom to be neither better nor worse than murder. I would no more take a pillow from under the head of a dying person than I would put a pillow upon his mouth. - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Freeborn Garrettson [19]

LOWESTOFT, November 30, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - You have great reason to be thankful to God that He lets you see the fruit of your labors. Whenever any are awakened you do well to join them together immediately. But I do not advise you to go on too fast. It is not expedient to break up more ground than you can keep, to preach at any more places than you or your brethren can constantly attend. To preach once in a place and no more very seldom does any good; it only alarms the devil and his children, and makes them more upon their guard against a first assault.

Wherever there is any church service, I do not approve of any appointment the same hour; because I love the Church of England, and would assist, not oppose, it all I can. How do the inhabitants of Shelburne, Halifax, and other parts of the province go on as to temporal things Have they trade Have they sufficiency of food and the other necessaries of life And do they increase or decrease in numbers It seems there is a scarcity of some things - of good ink, for yours is so pale that many of your words are not legible.

As I take it for granted that you have had several conversations with Dr. Coke, I doubt not you proposed all your difficulties to him, and received full satisfaction concerning them. Commending you to Him who is able to guide and strengthen you in all things, I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

PS.-Probably we shall send a little help for your building if we live till Conference. Observe the rules for building laid down in the Minutes.

I see nothing of your Journal yet. I am afraid of another American Revolution. I do not know how to get the enclosed safe to Dr. Coke; probably you know. On second thoughts I think it best not to write to him at present.

To Samuel Bradburn [20]

December, 1786.

DEAR SAMMY, - You know I love you. Ever since I knew you I have neglected no way of showing it that was in my power. And you know how I esteem you for .your zeal and activity, for your love of discipline, and for your gifts which God has given you - particularly quickness of apprehension, and readiness of utterance, especially in prayer.

Therefore I am jealous over you, lest you should lose any of the things you have gained, and not receive a full reward; and the more so because I fear you are wanting in other respects. And who will venture to tell you so You will scarce know how to bear it from me unless you lift up your heart to God. If you do this, I may venture to tell you what I fear without any further preface. I fear you think of yourself more highly than you ought to think. Do not you think too highly of your own understanding of your gifts, particularly in preaching, as if you were the very best preacher in the Connection of your own importance, as if the work of God here or there depended wholly or mainly on you and of your popularity, which I have found, to my surprise, far less, even in London, than I expected

May not this be much owing to the want of brotherly love With what measure you mete, men will measure to you again. I fear there is something unloving in your spirit - something not only of roughness, but of harshness, yea of sourness! Are you not also extremely open to prejudice, and not easy to be cured of it so that whenever you are prejudiced you commence bitter, implacable, unmerciful If so, that people are prejudiced against you is both the natural and the judicial consequence.

I am afraid lest your want of love to your neighbors should spring from want of love to God, from want of thankfulness. I have sometimes heard you speak in a manner that made me tremble; indeed, in terms that not only a weak Christian but even a serious Deist would scruple to use.

I fear you greatly want evenness of temper. Are you not generally too high or too low Are not all your passions too lively, your anger in particular Is it not too soon raised And is it not too impetuous, causing you to be violent, boisterous, bearing down all before you

Now, lift up your heart to God, or you will be angry at me. But I must go a little further. I fear you are greatly wanting in the government of your tongue. You are not exact in relating facts. I have observed it myself. You are apt to amplify, to enlarge a little beyond the truth. You cannot imagine, if others observe this, how it will affect your reputation.

But I fear you are more wanting in another respect: that you give a loose to your tongue when you are angry; that your language then is not only sharp but coarse and ill-bred. If this be so, the people will not bear it. They will not take it either from you or me.

To Mrs. Fletcher

LONDON, December 9, 1786.

MY DEAR SISTER, - The book is now finished; I have the last proof now before me. Two of the three accounts you give I have at large. I only wait a few days, to see if my brother will write his Elegy. [See letter of April 6. Charles did not write anything.]

I am clearly satisfied that you will do well to spend a considerable part of your time at Madeley. But I can by no means advise you to spend all your time there. I think you are a debtor to several other places also, particularly to London and Yorkshire. Nay, and if we live I should rejoice if you and I can contrive to be in those places at the same time; for I feel a great union of spirit with you. I cannot easily tell you how much. I am, my very dear sister,

Yours invariably.

To William Robarts [21]

LONDON, December [9], 1785.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - In all probability you would now have been a wealthy man; and if so, your money would have paved your way to hell. God saw this, and prevented it. It is certainly the best way now to make a fair surrender. Place that money either in mine or any other name; it is little matter which. Undoubtedly this is the best, if not the only way for the salvation of your soul. But it is plain. God seeth not as man seeth. He judges by far other measures. Oh that you had continued an itinerant I Never man was better qualified for it. I commend you to Him who can make all things work together for good; and am, dear Billy, Your affectionate brother.

To Mary Cooke

LONDON, December 12, 1786.

MY DEAR SISTER AND FRIEND, - Once or twice I have been a little out of order this autumn; but it was only for a day or two at a time. In general my health has been better for these last ten years than it ever was for ten years together since I was born. Ever since that good fever which I had in the North of Ireland, [In 1775.] I have had, as it were, a new constitution. All my pains and aches have forsaken me, and I am a stranger even to weariness of any kind. This is the Lord's doing, and it may well be marvelous in all our eyes. You oblige me much (and so your very dear sisters) by being so solicitous about my health: I take it as a mark of your sincere affection. Meantime I wonder at you I I am almost ashamed that you should love me so well. It is plain how little you know me.

I am glad to find that the hunger and thirst after righteousness which God has given you does not abate. His promise cannot fail. You shall be filled, yea satisfied therewith. But when you express it, not many will understand you, except Mrs. Bailward [Of Bradford-on-Avon. See Journal, vii. 434-5.] and our dear Betsy Jolmson. [Miss Johnson, of Bristol. See Wesley's Veterans, vi. 101; and letters of Dec. 15, 1763, and Nov. 7, 1788 (to Brackenbury).] However, do not fall to encourage all the believers round about you to press on to this mark. Some will gladly receive the word of exhortation; and surely a few witnesses will be raised up. I cannot tell you how much I am

Yours.

To Ann Bolton

NEAR LONDON, December 15, 1786.

MY DEAR NANCY, - There can be no possible reason to doubt concerning the happiness of that child. He did fear God, and according to his circumstances work righteousness. This is the essence of religion, according to St. Peter. His soul, therefore, was 'darkly safe with God,' although he was only under the Jewish Dispensation.

When the Son of Man shall come in his glory and assign every man his own reward, that reward will undoubtedly be proportioned, first to our inward holiness our likeness to God, secondly to our works, and thirdly to our sufferings; therefore for whatever you suffer in time, you will be an unspeakable gainer in eternity. Many of your sufferings, perhaps the greatest part, are now past; but the joy is to come ~ Look up, my dear friend, look up, and see the Crown before you I A little longer, and you shall drink of the rivers of pleasure that flow at God's right hand for evermore. - My dear Nancy, Adieu!

To Samuel Mitchell [22]

LONDON, December 17, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - You have great reason to praise God for his marvelous works, and to take care that you do not grieve His Holy Spirit by taking any glory to yourself. But I see a danger which you are not aware of. Many in England have thought they attained to something higher than loving God with all their hearts. But this all came to nothing. It is a snare of the Devil. I wish you could ask Dr. Crommelin's advice what kind of truss you should wear. Write to Mr. Rogers concerning a fourth preacher. - I am, dear Sammy,

Yours affectionately.

To Mr. Saml. Mitchell,

Near Iniskillen.

To William Shepherd [23]

LONDON, December 20, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - You did exceeding well in sending us so circumstantial an account of our dear sister Peck's death. We can only say, 'The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away.' He knows what is best for all His children. This is a loud call to all that knew her as a burning and a shining light, to you of Oxford in particular. Stir up the gift of God that is in you. Provoke one another to love and to good works. Who can tell which of you will be called next O be ready I Let Him find you watching! - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Zachariah Yewdall

LONDON, Deeember 20, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - You do well to tell me where you are and what you are doing. Do not you know that several envy you, because, they say, you are one of my favorites I am glad to hear that you find some fruit again even at poor Musselburgh. I expect more from the new than the old hearers, most of whom are as salt that has lost its savor. Possibly some good may be done at Dalkeith too; but you will have need of patience. I do not despair even of Preston Pans if you can procure a tolerable place. [See letter of Nov. 1, 1787.]

It is a great point gained if Mr. Coilis is diligent in attending his lectures. If he has likewise resolution to refrain from gay company, there is reason to hope that he will be a valuable man. [See letter of May 30, 1787. This was apparently his stepson, though his wife's first husband was a Mr. Mackrill. See also Methodist Magazine, 1930, p. 43.]

You cannot have a better adviser than Mr. Pawson. [Yewdull was at Betwick, John Pawson at Edinburgh.] Take care to husband your time. Peace be with you and yours! - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Hall [24]

LONDON, Dec,mber 22, 1785.

This is to certify whom it may concern that I give my full and free consent to the sale of our old preaching-house in Bury, Lancashire.

Witness my hand,

JOHN WESLEY.

Mr. Thomas Hall, junr., Bury, Lancashire. Pray deliver this with speed.

To John Valton

LONDON, December 22, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - When I was quite worn down, it pleased God to make my marriage a means of restoring my health and strength. I trust yours will have the same effect upon you; though not by natural but divine efficacy. But this cannot be, unless you intermit preaching. I therefore positively require you, for a month from the date of this, not to preach more than twice in a week; and if you preach less, I will not blame you. But you should at all hazards ride an hour every day, only wrapping yourself up very close. Take care not to lodge in too close a room and not to draw your curtains. For Medicine I should chiefly recommend stewed prunes, and either beef tea or a small cup of fresh churned buttermilk four times a day. Let my dear friend Sister Valton take note of this.

As we are just entering upon the affairs of the poor at London, I want to know what has been done at Bristol. A particular account of the steps which have been taken there may both animate and instruct our friends here.

That grace and peace may be multiplied upon you both is the prayer of

Your affectionate friend and brother.

I will speak to Dr. Whitehead.

It is amazing that we cannot find in the three kingdoms a fit master for Kingswood School! Talk largely with Michael Griffith, then pray with him and for him; and God will give him gifts. [See letter of Oct. 29 to Valton.] Peace be with your spirits! Adieu!

We have great reason to rejoice at the prosperity of the work of God in Bristol. And I hope you have also reason to rejoice for your union with an Israelite indeed. [Valton had married Mrs. Judith Purnell. See letter of Sept. 5, 1785.] Pray do as much as you can, and don't attempt to do more, or you will very soon do nothing.

To Mr. Valton, At the Preaching-room,

In Bristol.