1787

A DELIGHTFUL OLD AGE

JULY 24, 1787, TO DECEMBER 26, 1789

To Arthur Keene [1]

MANCHESTER, July 24, 1787.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- It would be strange if I did not write to you the first of any one in Ireland. For is it not natural to take notice first of those whom we love but especially when you have my two dear friends, one on one side, and the other on the other side You have all need of patience while you hear every day that poor little maid bemoaning herself. [See letters of April 20 and Aug. 5] She is permitted thus to linger in pain, not only for her own sake (seeing the greater her sufferings are here the greater will be her reward); but likewise for your sakes, that your 'wills may be melted 'down and take the mould divine.' I hope your dear neighbouts Mr. and Mrs. D'Olier are likewise profiting

by all the providences of God. Peace be with you and yours! -- I am, dear Arthur,

Yours most affectionately.

To John Ogilvie [2]

NEAR MANCHESTER, July 24, 1787.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- As there are so few preachers in the isle I think Mr. Crook's judgment is right. It will not be expedient for you to quit your station for the present. The work of God would very probably suffer if Mr. Crook and you should be absent at the same time. I believe it may be contrived for you to labor the ensuing year in some part of Yorkshire. Be zealous! Be active for God! -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Adam Clarke

MANCHESTER, Saturday, July 28, 1787.

DEAR ADAM,--On Monday fortnight, if God permit, Dr. Coke, Mr. Brackenbury, and I shall set out for Southampton in order to embark for Jersey, on board the first packet. I do not know but we shall bring your friend John King [King did not go with them, but to Thirsk. See letters of April 21 and Oct. 31, 1787, to him.] with us. -- I am, dear Adam,

Yours affectionately.

To Mr. Adam Clarke, At Mr. Walker's, In St. Peter's,

Isle of Guernsey.

To Jane Bisson [3]

MANCHESTER, August 4, 1787.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- Although it is probable I shah see you in a few days, yet I must write a few lines. I rejoice to hear that you are still happy in God; and trust that happiness will never cease but rather increase more and more till your spirit returns to God. Be assured there is no necessity that it ever should cease. He is willing to give it you always; and He can purify you by the fire of His love as well as by the fire of affliction. Do not therefore expect or desire affliction, but let the joy of the Lord be your strength. That your joy and peace may flow as a river is the prayer of, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Howton ()

MANCHESTER, August 5, 1787.

MY DEAR SISWER, -- It would have given me pleasure to spend a little time with you. But since it could not be, we are to submit. I am glad you are placed, at least for a season, among them that love and fear God. As you are naturally of an easy, flexible temper, you have great need to converse as often as possible with those that are truly alive to God; which may be a counterbalance to the conversation you will .be obliged to have with those of a different character. [See letter of Oct. 3, 1783.] But perhaps Mr. H. will not always be of the same spirit that he has been in time past. What has hitherto been may have been permitted for the trial of your faith. And if you are like Him ‘Who ne’er forsook His faith for love of peace,’ the God of peace will in His own time do great things for you. To His tender care I commit you; and am, my dear sister,

Yours in much affection.

To Arthur Keene [4]

MANCHESTER, August 5, 1787.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- We may see the mercy .of God in removing your little one into a better world. [See letter of July 24 to him.] It was a mercy for you as well as for her. I was afraid she would have continued in pain long enough to have taken her mother with her. But God does all things well. You must now take care that she may have more air and exercise than she has lately had. Otherwise she may find many ill effects of her late confinement.

I do not wonder that your Dublin newswriters were afraid of stirring up a nest of hornets. Ours in England are not so fearful; they are glad to have anything from me. They know how it increases the sale of their paper. Pay peace be multiplied upon you, and all that are with you I -- I am, dear Arthur,

Yours most affectionately.

To Mr. Arthur Keene,

Ranelagh Road, Dublin.

To the Rev. Mr. Heath

BIRMINGHAM [August 6, 1787].

DEAR SIR, -- In your way to London I believe you must spend the first night at Oxford. You may inquire in the preaching-house in New Hall Lane for Mr. Harper, [ Joseph Harper was Assistant at Oxford in 1786-7.] who is the Assistant in that circuit. You have then four-and-twenty miles to High Wycombe, where Mr. Battin will entertain you hospitably by a word of recommendation from Mr. Harper. You have then thirty miles to London. At my house near Moorfields I hope you will be at home; and Mr. Bradburn there will recommend you to our friends at Reading, Newbury, Bath, and Bristol.

At Bristol I hope you will find your family well, and probably a ship ready to sail.[ See letters of July 10, 1787, and Oct. 20, 1788.] I commend you to the grace of God. -- I am, dear sir, Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Clarkson [5]

LONDON, August 1787.

‘Mr. Wesley informed the Committee of the great satisfaction which he also had experienced when he heard of their formation. He conceived that their design, while it would destroy the slave trade, would also strike at the root of the shocking 'abomination of slavery. He desired to forewarn them that they must expect difficulties and great opposition from those who were interested in the system, that they were a powerful body, and that they would raise all their forces when they perceived their craft to be in danger. They would employ hireling writers, who would have neither justice nor mercy. But the Committee were not to be dismayed by such treatment, nor even if some of those who professed goodwill toward them should turn against them. As to himself, he would do all he could to promote the object of their institution. He would reprint a new large edition of his Thoughts upon Slavery, and circulate it among his friends in England and Ireland, to whom he would add a few words in favor of their design. And then he concluded in these words: “I commend you to Him who is able to carry you through all opposition and support you under all discouragements.”’

To Jane Bisson

PENZANCE, September 7, 1787.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- Almost as soon as we were in the ship the wind entirely died away. But we knew our remedy: we went into the cabin and applied ourselves to Him that has all power. Immediately a fair wind sprung up, which never ceased till it brought us to Penzance Bay. Our brethren here were not a little surprised, having given up all hopes of seeing us this year; but so much the more thankful they were to the Giver of every good gift. [See Journal, vii. 324; and letter of Sept.]

I have thought of you much since I had the satisfaction of conversing with you; and I will tell you every thought that passed through my mind, as I wish always to do. It seems to me that our blessed Lord is willing to show all the power of His grace in you, even His power of saving to the uttermost those that come unto God through Him. But there is a mountain that stands in the way: and how you will get over it I know not: I mean pride. O my sister, what can save you from this but the mighty power of God! I almost tremble for you. If you give way to it, yea but a little, your grace will wither away. But still, that God whom you serve is able to deliver you; and He really will if you continue instant in prayer. That other temptation which did formerly beset you I trust will assault you no more; or if it should, you are now better prepared for it, and you will know in whom your strength lieth. [See letter of Aug. 4.] When you have opportunity, my dear Jenny, write freely to

Your affectionate brother.

I hope my dear Miss Lempriere has recovered her health.

To Miss Bisson, In St. Heliers,

Isle of Jersey.

To Mary Cooke

BATH, September 15, 1787.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- On Monday, the 24th instant, I shall (with God's assistance) be at Bradford; and on Tuesday morning I hope to have the pleasure of waiting upon you at Trowbridge. Adieu!

On second thoughts I purpose preaching at Trowbridge on Monday noon and Bradford in the evening.

To James Currie

BATH, September 15, 1787.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- The account of the dying malefactors which you sent me is exceeding remarkable. I think it is worthy to have a place in the Arminian Magazine, and hope it may be of use to others.

Your God is well pleased with your using the strength you have, and does not send you a warfare at your own cost. Continue to declare the whole gospel and to aspire after all the promises. [See letter of Feb. 19, 1788, to him.] -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. James Currie, At Cottam End,

Northampton.

To George Holder [6]

BATH, September 15, 1787.

DEAR GEORGE, -- Upon mature deliberation I judge it most advisable that John Barber should remove to Edinburgh (for I can trust him in any part of Great Britain) and that you should supply his place at York. As soon as may be inform him and Mr. Rutherford of this, that there may be as little delay as possible. -- I am, dear George,

Yours affectionately.

To Ann Bolton

BRISTOL, September 18, 1787.

MY DEAR NANCY, -- Yesterday I received yours of August 24 at my return from a little tour to the islands of Alderney, Jersey, and Guernsey, where we were long shut up by contrary winds. At length a ship returning from France and touching at Guernsey took us in and carried us to Penzance, where we were received as if we had just risen from the dead, and found God was with us wherever we went.[ See letter of Sept. 7.] So I pressed on and will be with you. My Nancy, look up ! The Lord of Hosts is at hand! He has delivered, He does deliver, and He will yet deliver ! He chastens you long for your profit, that you may be a partaker of His holiness. He chastens you also for your profit that you may be more holy and consequently more happy. But His ways are in the deep waters and His footsteps are not known.

It is probable I shall see you at Witney in about a month. If I do, remember you are to tell me all your trials that we may both grieve and rejoice together. I cannot well tell you how much I love you; you are e1ceeding near and dear to me. But I am sometimes ready to think that you do not love me so well as you did once. However, I believe you have still some regard for me.

Let us still provoke one another to love and to good works. The good Lord be ever with you and unite you more and more to Himself! Then you will not forget, my dear Nancy,

Yours in tender affection.

To Henry Moore [7]

BRISTOL, September 18, 1787.

DEAR HENRY, -- This is nothing strange. Considering the great work of God which has lately been wrought in Dublin, we might reasonably expect Satan would fight in defense of his tottering kingdom. It is our part calmly and steadily to resist him. In such a case as you have mentioned you are justified before God and man for preaching at Eleven o'clock on Sunday morning, only earnestly advising them that have heretofore received the sacrament at church to do so still. But I do not imagine any barefaced Calvinism will be soon preached at Bethesda.[ Edward Smyth had opened Bethesda in June 1786.]

I am glad Sister Moon and Dobson are not idle, and that you preach abroad on Sundays. The death of that sailor may be a warning to others. Tenderly watch over . . . [Name tom out.] and his coming to Dublin may be the saving of his soul. Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am, with kind love to Nancy, dear Henry,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Elizabeth Padbury

BRISTOL, September 19, 1787.

MY DEAR BETSY, -- If I do not mistake, one of our preachers desired the justice to give him the oath and was refused. If this is true, I desire as soon as possible to know, Who was the preacher who was the justice on what day did he offer himself to the justice; was this before or after the prosecution began was any distress made, or were the goods sold after he offered to take the oath I believe your answer to these questions will open a scene which the good justice little expects.

You have lately had a noble exercise of your faith and patience. So have several of your neighbors. This calls you to much and earnest prayer. Then God will arise and maintain His own cause. I advise you all in the meantime to say little; you have better things to talk of. I suppose the rector and the justice are now quiet. Their turn will come by and by. -- I am, my dear Betsy,

Yours most affectionately.

To Miss Padbury, At Witflebury,

Near Towcester, Northamptonshire.

To Jonathan Crowther [8]

NEAR BATH, September 25, 1787.

DEAR JONATHAN, -- The sum of the matter is, you want money; and money you shall have, if I can beg, borrow, or anything but steal. I say, therefore, ‘Dwell in the land and be doing good, and verily thou shalt be fed.’ [See letter of Aug. 31, 1775.] I should be sorry for the death of Brother Burbeck but that I know God does all things well; and if His work prospers in your hands, this will make your labors light. Oar preachers now find in the North of Scotland what they formerly found all over England; yet they went on; and when I had only blackberries to eat in Cornwall [In Sept. 1743. See Wesley’s Veterans, iii. 81.] still God gave me strength sufficient for my work. -- I am, dear Jonathan,

Your affectionate brother.

PS.--To Mr. Atlay: Pay to Jonathan Crowther or his order, five guineas.

To James Barry

NEAR BATH, September 26, 1787.

My DEAR BROTHER, -- I think you misunderstood what a Papist at Lisbon asked a Protestant, ‘Do you say I can’t be saved in my religion’ He replied, ‘I say, Possibly you may be saved in that religion. But I could not.’ So I say in the present case to one that asks, ‘Can’t I be saved if I dance or play at cards’ I answer, ‘Possibly you may be saved though you dance and play at cards. But I could not.’ So far you may safely speak; but no further. So much and no more I advise our preachers to speak. But I cannot advise them to speak this to unawakened people. It will only anger, not convince them. It is beginning at the wrong end.[ Barry lived at Shelburne, Nova Scotia. See letter of July 3, 1784.] A plain preacher in London used to say, ‘If you take away his rattles from the child, he will be angry; nay, if he can, he will scratch or bite you. But give him something better first, and he will throw away the rattles of himself.’ Yet I do not remember that I call these things ‘innocent amusements.’ And you know we do not suffer any that use them to continue in our Society. Yet I make allowance for those that are without. Else I might send my own father and mother to hell, though they not only lived many years, but died in the full assurance of faith.

You do not seem to observe that it has pleased God to give such a measure of light to the Methodists as He has hardly given to any other body of men in the world. And He expects us to use all the light we have received, and to deal very tenderly with those who have not received it.

I do not wonder that Dr. Walter is not clear with regard to the doctrine of the New Birth. Neither was I when I had been in Orders many years. Bear with him, and he may see more clearly by-and-by. I see no reason why you should not communicate with Brother Garrettson and with him too. I receive the Lord's supper in every church that I can.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To William Black [9]

NEAR BATH, September 26, 1787.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You have great reason to praise God for the great things that He hath done and to expect still greater things than these. Your grand difficulty now will be to guard your flock against that accomplished seducer. When you mentioned a person came from Scotland, I took it for granted that he was a Calvinist. But I find it is not so well: for I take a Socinian to be far worse than even a Predestinarian; and such one may easily conclude him to be from the heads of that miserable sermon. Nevertheless I advise you and all our preachers never oppose him openly. Doing thus would only give the unawakened world an advantage against you all. I advise you farther, never speak severely, much less contemptuously, of him in any mixed company. You must use no weapons in opposing him but only those of truth and love. Your wisdom is (x) strongly to inculcate the doctrines which he denies, but without taking any notice of him or seeming to know that any one does deny them; (2) to advise all our brethren (but not in public) never to hear him at the peril of their souls; and (3) narrowly to inquire whether any one is staggered, and to set such one right as soon as possible. Thus, by the blessing of God, even those that are lame will not be turned out of the way. Peace be with your spirit! -- I am, dear Billy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Henry Moore

BRISTOL, September 30, 1787.

DEAR HENRY, -- I know you are a man of feeling. You can sympathize with the afflicted. Therefore I employ you in a labor of love. Dear John Bull [See letter of July 1, 1789.] is now in the Marshalsea Prison. How far he was formerly to blame is not now the question. But what can be done for him now for one who through a course of many years deserved well of the Methodists We cannot deliver him from his confinement. That is too hard for us. But possibly something might be done to make it a little easier to him. I desire you would go and talk with him. You will find acceptable words. Tell him I desired you to call upon him in consequence of his letter, and try to make him sensible of the hand of God in all this. Now especially he stands in need of such a friend. -- I am, dear Henry, with kind love to Nancy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

Pray give him a guinea on my account, and another whenever you see proper.

To Mrs. Tighe

BRISTOL, October 2, 1787.

DEAR MADAM, -- I have no doubt at all of the uprightness of Mr. Tozer and his wife: but I have more acquaintance with Mr. Harper. He is a truly good man, and has a considerable share of knowledge; so that if he was willing to take the charge of this little school. [Was this John Harper who had been a preacher Mrs. Tighe lived at Rosanna, near Wicklow. See letter of Feb. 7, 1789, to her.] I know of no one that is more likely to promote the design of it. -- I am, dear madam,

Your very affectionate servant.

Next week I expect to be in London.

To Hannah Ball

BRISTOL, October 4, 1787.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- You have great reason to praise God, who has kept you for so many years a witness of His great salvation. And you must never be afraid or ashamed to declare it, especially to those that love God. Some will believe your report; some will not, for which they never want patience. For it is impossible to cut off occasion of offense from them that seek occasion. When we speak for God, we should speak with all mildness and yet with all earnestness. But by those who do not profit thereby this earnestness will be accounted anger. But still, you have only to go on warily and steadily between the two extremes.

Certainly you may expect to see such a work in High Wycombe as never was yet. On Monday next I expect to set out for London. This winter I shall not have time to take many journeys; but I shall undoubtedly find time to visit you. Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Sarah Mallet [10]

BRISTOL, October 6, 1787.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- Ever since I saw you I have felt a great love for you and a desire to see you again. When I come to Harwich I hope you will find means to be there; afterwards probably I may visit you at Long Stratton. I am glad you wrote. I have lately seen a young woman [Miss Bisson, of St. Heller. See letters of Aug. 4 and Dec. 17 to her. Compare those of July 4, 1787, and Aug, 8, 1788, to Lady Maxwell.] in the Isle of Jersey whose experience is as extraordinary as yours; in one thing it seems to be more clear than yours -- namely, in her communion with the blessed Trinity, with God the Father and God the Son and God the Holy Ghost.

It seems to me that no weapon that is formed against you shall prosper if you keep clear of inordinate affection. O keep your heart with all diligence! Mark the first risings of desire. Roll yourself (as David speaks) upon the Lord, and He is and always will be your sufficient portion.

On Monday I am to return to London. Whenever you have leisure write freely to, my dear Sally,

Yours affectionately.

To Isaac Brown

BRISTOL, October 7, 1787.

DEAR ISAAC, -- It was at the request of Brother Holder himself that I ordered him to be removed from Whitby; and I have wrote once or twice to that effect. But if his mind is altered, and if you judge it safe for him to remain there, I have no objection to it.

To-morrow I am to set out for London. When I come thither, I will consider with the preachers what is to be when the circuits will not bear the expense allotted to them. Peace be with you and yours! [Brown was Assistant at Whitby, with George Holder as his colleague. (See letter of Sept. 15 to him.)] -- I am, dear Isaac,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Granville Sharp [11]

LONDON, October 11,1787.

SIR, -- Ever since I heard of it first I felt a perfect detestation of the horrid Slave Trade, but more particularly since I had the pleasure of reading what you have published upon the subject. Therefore I cannot but do everything in my power to forward the glorious design of your Society. And it must be a comfortable thing to every man of humanity to observe the spirit with which you have hitherto gone on. Indeed, you cannot go on without more than common resolution, considering the opposition you have to encounter, all the opposition which can be made by men who are ‘not encumbered with either honor, conscience, or humanity, and will rush on per fasque ne fasque, through every possible means, to secure their great goddess, Interest. Unless they are infatuated in this point also, they will spare no money to carry their cause; and this has the weight of a thousand arguments with the generality of men.

And you may be assured these men will lay hold on and improve every possible objection against you. I have been afraid lest they should raise an objection from your manner of procuring information. To hire or to pay informers has a bad sound and might raise great, yea insurmountable' prejudice against you. Is it not worth your consideration whether it would not be advisable to drop this mode entirely, and to be content with such information as you can procure by more honorable means

After all, I doubt the matter will turn upon this, ‘s the Slave Trade for the interest of the nation’ And here, the multitude of sailors that perish therein will come to be considered. In all these difficulties what a comfort it is to consider (unfashionable as it is) that there is a God! Yea, and that (as little as men think of it!) He has still all power both in heaven and on earth! To Him I commend you and your glorious Cause; and am, sir,

Your affectionate servant.

To Mrs. Rogers

LONDON, October 12, 1787.

MY DEAR HETTY, -- I do not doubt but your calling at Dublin would be in an acceptable time, especially as Rowland Hill was there. Jemmy Rogers did exceedingly well in advising our people to go to their own church. [Rogers had moved from Dublin to Cork. They spent a week in Dublin on their return from the Manchester Conference.]

After we left you at Manchester we pushed on and in all haste set out for the Isle of Jersey. But a storm drove us into Yarmouth, in the Isle of Wight. There Dr. Coke and I preached in the market-place by turns two evenings and two mornings. A second storm drove us to the Isle of Purbeck,. just where the Indiaman was lost. There I had an opportunity of preaching to a little Society, which I had not seen for thirteen years. We hoped to reach Guernsey the next evening, but could get no further than the Isle of Alderney. I preached on the beach in the morning, and the next afternoon came safe to Guernsey. Here is an open door: high and low, rich and poor receive the word gladly; so that I could not regret being detained by contrary winds several days longer than we intended. The same thing befell us in the Isle of Jersey, where also there was an open door, even the Governor and the chief of the people being quite civil and friendly.

Jane Bisson [See letter of Aug. 4.] I saw every day. She is nineteen years old, about the size of Miss Ritchie, and has a peculiar mixture of seriousness, sprightliness, and sweetness, both in her looks and behavior. Wherever we were she was the servant of all. I think she exceeds Madame Guyon in deep communion with God.

I hope you will see a revival in Cork also. See that you take particular care of the tender lambs, not forgetting poor Patty Laffan. Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am, with kind love to James Rogers, my dear Hetty,

Yours most affectionately.

To Alexander Mather () [12]

LONDON, October 19, 1787.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You did well in sending Benjamin Light into Epworth Circuit. Pray send Michael where you judge proper.

You gave exactly right advice to Brother Greenwood, and, as I can absolutely confide in you, with Brother Pawson, Thompson, Allen, and Goodwin to assist you, what you shall agree with the trustees of Dewsbury I shall make no difficulty to. But remember that this is a leading case; and whatever concessions we make here, we must make to all other trustees that shall require them.

I pray consider too what Brother Thompson says to me concerning his circuit; and if you think it reasonable that those places should be given back, let them be given back. -- I am Your affectionate friend and brother.

I think the contentious spirit in Birstall and Dewsbury Circuits is what has hindered the work of God there.

To Robert Carr Brackenbury

LONDON, October 20, 1787.

DEAR SIR, -- Mr. De Queteville is undoubtedly a good young man, and has a tolerably good understanding. But he thinks it better than it is, and in consequence is apt to put himself in your or my place. For these fifty years, if any one said, ‘If you do not put such an one out of Society, I will go out of it,’ I have said, ‘Pray go; I, not you, are to judge who shall stay.’ I therefore greatly approve of your purpose to give Mr. Walker [See letter of Dec. 18.] full hearing in the presence of all the preachers. I have often repented of judging too severely, but very seldom of being too merciful.

As the point is undoubtedly of very great importance, it deserved serious consideration; and I am glad you took the pains to consider it, and discussed it so admirably well according to Scripture and sound reason.

I enclose a few lines for Mrs. ----, for whom I feel an affectionate concern.

The God whom you serve will shortly deliver you from the heaviness you feel.--I ever am, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To David Gordon

LONDON. October 19, 1787.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- When I was there myself, I expected there would be a considerable work of God in the Waterford Circuit. So I am not disappointed of my hope. But it will not be easy to secure an additional preacher at this time of the year, as all the preachers are now stationed and we have none to spare. I hope neither you or your colleague preach too loud or too long; otherwise you will soon do the devil a singular pleasure by disabling yourselves from preaching at all. I never myself bought a lottery ticket; but I blame not those that do. -- I am, dear David,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. David Gordon, At the Preaching-house,

In Waterford.

To John King

NEAR LONDON, October 31, 1787.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Both in Jersey, Alderney, and Guernsey the fields are white to the harvest. Hitherto there is an open door into many places without any considerable opposition. And I am not sorry we were detained there by contrary winds longer than we intended.

There is no need at all that Thirsk Circuit should ever be in debt. You have several persons there that are of considerable ability and that love the cause of God. Represent things to them in a proper manner, and nothing will be wanting.

If any of the class-leaders teaches strange doctrine, he can have no more place among us. Only lovingly admonish him first. -- I am

Yours affectionately.

To Zachariah Yewdall

LONDON, November 1, 1787.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You send me good news indeed. So even poor Dalkeith will at last receive the gospel! I have no hope of our doing any good at Preston Pans for the present. Wherever a door is open there press forward. I do not despair of having some fruit at Musselburgh. [See letters of May 3o, 1787, and Dec. 27 1787.] If my health is continued, I hope to pay you a visit in Scotland next summer. You may have some books to give away. Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

Sister Bradburu is alive and well.

To Adam Clarke [13]

NEAR LONDON, November 9, 1787.

DEAR ADAM, -- I am glad to hear that there is a prospect of a good work in the Isle of Alderney as well as in the Isles of Jersey and Guernsey. I do not despair of seeing our Jersey and Guernsey friends once more if it should please God to prolong my life. I love them dearly; particularly the family [The De Jerseys.] at Mont Plaisir in Guernsey and Jenny Bisson in Jersey. I would take some pains and undergo some fatigue were it only to spend two or three days with them.

One would wonder that the prince of this world was so slow and that he did not sooner fight lest his kingdom should be delivered up. He will at length do what he can. But if you continue instant in prayer God will put the bridle in his mouth. It is well we should be convinced that we have need of Him. Our safety will we ascribe to Him alone. [See next letter.]

As the case of Sister Horne is too singular to be credited without the fullest evidence, I think you would do well to write the account fair, and have it formally attested by Mrs. Johnson, Mr. Arrive, and three or four more who were eye-witnesses of the whole. You must not believe all you hear concerning the circumstances of Mr. L----‘s marriage. Indeed, you should believe nothing about them till you have told it to themselves. Envy will invent a thousand things, and with the most plausible circumstances. Save them if it be possible, which can never be done by harshness; but love will ‘break the bone.’

The Bailiff was talking of building you an house at St. Peter’s; I think it may be done by-and-by. Be exact in every point of discipline. Keep your rules, and they will keep you. -- I am, dear Adam,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Adam Clarke [14]

LONDON, November 21, 1787.

My DEAR BROTHER, -- I answer Mr. De Jersey and you together. I am unwilling to discourage you in anything.

But I really think it would be the most Christian and the most prudent way to conclude this matter amicably. I should advise you not to force the course of the river, but to let the Valle parish alone. Shake off the dust of your feet against them, and go where you are welcome. The main point seems to be to remove the prejudice of the Batlift. If possible, this should be done by fair means. Law is the last and the worst means, though it is sometimes necessary. But I should expect far more from prayer. I will order Mr. Atlay to-day to send the books. Peace be with your spirits ! -- I am, dear Adam,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Funnell

November 24, 1787.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Whatever assistance I can give those generous men who join to oppose that execrable trade I certainly shall give. I have printed a large edition of the Thoughts on Slavery, [See letter in Aug. to Thomas Clarkson.] and dispersed them to every part of England. But there will be vehement opposition made, both by slave-merchants and slave-holders; and they are mighty men. But our comfort is, He that dwelleth on high is mightier. --I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Alexander Suter [15]

LONDON, November 24, 1787.

My DEAR BROTHER, -- It was an idle thing to send cassocks into Scotland, where the ministers do not use them. But a cassock may be easily made into a gown only adding to it a yard or two of stuff.

As we have not yet made a precedent of any one that was not ordained administering baptism, it is better to go slow and sure.

Our Sunday schools at Bolton contain upward of eight hundred children, and are all taught by our own brethren without pay. I love Sunday schools much. They have done abundance of good. I will give you Instructions and Tokens for Children. We are just now printing a large edition. O be zealous for God! -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Rev. Mr. Al. Suter,

Aberdeen.

To Francis Asbury [16]

LONDON, November 25, 1787.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- A glorious work, indeed, God has been working for several years and is still working in America. But one thing has often given me concern: God is visiting the progeny of Japhet (the English), who now dwell in the tents of Shem, according to the prophecy of Noah. Nay, He does

The servile progeny of Ham

Seize as the purchase of His blood.

But in the meantime the progeny of Shem (the Indians) seem to be quite forgotten. How few of these have seen the light of the glory of God since the English first settled among them! And now scarce one in fifty of them among whom we settled, perhaps scarce one in an hundred of them, are left alive! Does it not seem as if God had designed all the Indian nations not for reformation but destruction How many millions of them (in South and North America) hive already died in their sins! Will neither God nor man have compassion upon these outcasts of men Undoubtedly with man it is impossible to help them. But is it too hard for God Oh that He would arise and maintain His own cause! that He would first stir up the hearts of some of His children to make the conversion of these heathens also matter of solemn prayer! And then

Eternal Providence, exceeding thought,

When none appears will work itself a way.

Pray ye likewise the Lord of the harvest, and He will send out more laborers into His harvest. But beware you do not grudge two brethren out of an hundred to help your northern brethren. [In Nova Scotia.] It is enough that we send out two to your one, considering the enormous expense. But let us all do what we can, and we do enough. And see that no shyness or coldness ever creep in between you and

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Rev. Mr. Asbury, At Mr. Wells's, Merchant,

No. 11 , near the Exchange, Chariestown, South Carolina.

To be preserved carefully till he arrives.

To Robert Dall [17]

LONDON, December 1, 1787.

DEAR ROBERT, -- You have reason to praise God, who has prospered you and given you to see the fruit of your labors. Our all-dispensing God has called us to preach the plain gospel. I am glad your hands are strengthened in corresponding with the brethren. I will desire any to change with you when you see it best [See letters of Jan. 9 and Feb, 11, 1788.]; and if I live till spring, please God, I will visit you at Dumfries.--I am, with love to Sister Dall,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Adam Clarke

LONDON, December 8, 1787.

My DEAR BROTHER, -- Again and again we have followed our Lord's direction, which is plain and express. You was ‘persecuted in one city.’ You should then doubtless have fled to another. The consequences of so doing you should have left to our Master. We have followed the direction over and over, and found no ill consequences at all. If there had been a Society already formed in the place, it had been a very different case. I should have advised you to give no pretense or handle to the court to intermeddle with your affairs. At present I see no remedy but prayer. [Wesley's advice was followed, and for some years the Methodists did not visit the parish. See letters of Nov. 21 and Dec. 17.] Peace be with all your spirits--I am, dear Adam,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

[On the fly-leaf of the letter this note is added:]

Brother De Queteville and you do not mind what I say. I do not wonder at him (he does not know me), but I do at you. His natural temper is stern [See letter of Dec. 18.] : yours is not. Therefore I expect you to regard me, whether he does or no. We have no such custom among our Societies, nor ever had, as for a man to acknowledge his fault before a whole Society. There shall be no such custom while I live. If he acknowledge it before the preachers, it is enough.

To Thomas Wride [18]

LONDON, December 11, I787.

DEAR TOMMY,--Distilled liquors have their use, but are infinitely overbalanced by the abuse of them; therefore, were it in my power, I would banish them out of the world.

It is no wonder that young man should be ruined who connected himself with that execrable bill trade. In London I expel every one out of our Society who has anything to do with it. Whoever endorses a bill (that is, promises to pay) for more than he is worth is either a fool or a knave [See letters of Nov. 6, 1781, and June 7, I788.] --I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Jane Bisson

LONDON, December 17, 1787.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I have a great union of spirit with you. I love to hear from you, especially when you send me that good news that you still stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free. I have a good hope that you will never lose any of the things which He has wrought in you, but that you will receive a full reward! Do you always find a clear sense of the presence of the ever-blessed Trinity [See letter of Oct. 6.] Are you enabled to rejoice evermore In what sense do you pray without ceasing And can you in everything give thanks, seeing it is the will of God concerning you in Christ Jesus What you speak of your communion with Him comforts and warms my heart. I love to read or to hear any part of your experience. If I doubted of anything you say, I would tell you so. I want to be more acquainted with you and to know everything wherein I can serve you. My dear Jenny, do not forget to pray for

Yours in tender affection.

To Robert Carr Brackenbury

LONDON, December 17, 1787.

DEAR SIR, -- Considering that the god of this world will not fail to fight when his kingdom is in danger, I do not wonder that persecution should come to Jersey and Guernsey. [See letter of Dec. 8.] I agree with you that the best method to be used in this exigence is fasting and prayer. It is plain your labors in those places have not been in vain. And I am in hopes Guernsey will overtake Jersey.

Wishing you all every possible blessing, I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To James Ridall

LONDON, December 17, 1787.

DEAR JAMES, -- If you would not murder yourself, take particular care never to preach too loud or too long. Always conclude the service within the hour. Then preaching will not hurt you. [See letters of March 25, 1787, and April 18, 1789.]

The doubt whether you are called to preach or not springs wholly from the temptation of the devil. Give not place to his voice -- no, not for an hour! Do not reason with him, but look unto Jesus. He will supply all your wants. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Ridall, At the Octagon,

Chester.

To Adam Clarke

LONDON, December 18, 1787.

DEAR ADAM, -- I thank you for the use of your books. They contain many ingenious observations; but I think very few of them are solid. Much may be said on both sides.

I am afraid you have been too severe with Mr. Walker. [Clarke says in a letter to Wesley on Dec. 20, 1786, that George Walker furnished his board gratis. See Dunn’s Clarke, p. 32; and letters of Oct. 2o, 1787, and Jan. 8, 1788.] I am persuaded there is much good in him, otherwise he would have washed his hands of the Methodists. -- Take care you do not contract something of Brother De Queteville's temper! [See letter of Dec. 8.] -- I am, dear Adam,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mary Cooke

LONDON, December 21, 1787.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- You have unspeakable reason to praise God for His late manifestations to you. And you will generally observe that large consolations are preceded by deep exercises of soul. And we all have reason to praise Him for the many tokens we see of His approaching kingdom. It is plain Satan, the murderer and the deceiver of mankind, is in a great measure bound already; he is not now permitted to deceive the nations, as in the past ages. And even in the Romish countries scarce any are now called to resist unto blood. If two or three of you continue instant in prayer, the work will revive at Trowbridge also. When you are met together, boldly lay hold on the promise: His word will speak, and will not lie. Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am, my dear sister,

Yours most affectionately.

To Thomas Roberts [19]

LONDON, December 22, 1787.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Supposing Miss Christian Davenport answers the description of her which you give, and suppose both hers and your parents are now willing, then I do not see that any reasonable objection can be made against your marriage.--I am

Yours affectionately.

To Arthur Keene

LONDON, December 25, 1787.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- It was, I suppose, about the time that you was in the North, I was in the Southern Islands, which I think are abundantly the pleasantest part of His Majesty's dominions. [His visit to the Channel Islands in August.] And the people in general are just prepared for the reception of true religion. For, with regard to their circumstances, they are in the happy medium, neither rich nor poor; and with regard to their temper, most of them have the French courtesy joined to the English sincerity; a great deal resembling many of our friends both in Dublin and in the North of Ireland.

We have every reason to be thankful to God on behalf of our poor widows. [The Widows' Home in Dublin. See letter of April 20, 1787.] One thing I cannot but particularly wish, that all their rooms may be kept as clean as possible. I have not had the pleasure of seeing Mr. Handy. I suppose he called here when I was out of town.

Wishing every blessing to you and your dear family, I am, dear Arthur,

Ever yours.

I have just seen Mr. Handy, who informed me that James Whitestone [Of Dublin. See reference to his wife in Crookshank’s Methodism in Ireland, i. 157-67.] is gone hence. Let us also be ready!

To Joseph Benson [20]

LONDON, December 27, 1787.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- I greatly rejoice in the erection of your new preaching-house and in the tokens of the divine presence with which you and the people were favored at the opening; but if it be at all equal to the new chapel in London, I will engage to eat it. -- I am

Yours affectionately.

To Zachariah Yewdull

LONDON, December 27, 1787.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You are in the right. You can have nothing at all to do with the chapel upon those terms. [Yewdull was at Musselburgh. See letter of Nov. 1.] Nay, a dovecote above it would be an insufferable nuisance, as it would fill the whole place with fleas. ‘What is to be done then’ Why, continue instant in prayer, and God will show what you are to do. But he that believeth doth not make haste. I cannot advise you to set about building an house unless you could find one or two responsible men who would engage themselves to finish the building in such a manner for an hundred and fifty pounds. Otherwise I think you would be more bold than wise. -- I am, with kind love to Mrs. Yewdull,

Your affectionate brother.

