1769

To Joseph Benson

[1]

[LONDON], January 2, 1769.

You forget John Jones, Mr. Sellon, and Mr. Rouquet were far better scholars than Mr. Parkinson; and T. Simpson, yea and P. Price [See letter of Nov. 7, 1768.] (when he was well) were very properly qualified. But change of masters it is impossible to prevent, unless we could bribe them with much money, which I neither can nor will. The case lies here: A master may be weary on other accounts, but he certainly will if he do not grow in grace. Again, the devil is more deeply concerned against this school than against any other in England.

If I cannot get proper masters for the languages, I shall let the school drop at the Conference. I will have another kind of school than that at Trevecca or none at all. I would within this year but for want of two things--time and money. So we must creep till we can fly.

Again, in another letter:

Your grand point is, Bring the boys into exact order, and that without delay. Do this at all hazards. I think we have found another master. In the meantime let John Whitehead learn all he can. [Whitehead was then stationed as a preacher in Bristol. see letter of Jan. 27, 1770, to him.]

To Christopher Hopper

[2]

LONDON, January 5, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--If Joseph Cownley or you have a mind to step over to New York, I will not say you nay. I believe it would help your own health and help many precious souls. Tho. Taylor is very well at Alnwick. However, if you could raise a little money for his family I should be glad.

Now let us see what you can do in the Grand Affair, the Lord being your Helper. I shall doubt whether your name be Christopher Hopper if Birstall Circuit does not subscribe more [Another hand has written above this in faded ink, 'Towards paying the General Debt.'] this year than the last. And take honest Tommy Lee and Daniel Bumstead by the hand. Go on in the name of the Lord. Speak, and speak again. Take no denial. Be as active as Sister Hopper would be if she was in your place. You love to do whatever contributes to the comfort of

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ann Bolton

January 12, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--That you have been exceedingly tempted is no bad sign. It puts you upon your guard. It makes you more sensible of your own weakness, and shows you where your strength lies. But take care of reasoning against yourself and against Him that loves you. See Him willing as well as able to save! Willing to save you now. Do not shrink back! Do not stagger at His promise, or fancy it to be far off. The word is nigh thee: look up, and take knowledge of His love. Believe, and thou shalt be saved.

I believe Henry Tucker will call upon you in a few days, and, if it would be of use, will procure what he spoke of [Probably some medicine he had recommended.]. I was pleasing myself with the hopes of seeing you next week, and had laid out all my journey. But I had forgotten the day which we have desired all our brethren to observe as a day of thanksgiving. I must not be out of London then. So both you and I have need of patience. Your last visit [See letters of April 7, 1768, and Feb. 4, 1769, to her.] endeared you to me exceedingly. I hope it will not be the last. You say nothing about your health: so I am in hopes it rather grows better than worse. Pray do not stay a month before you write again to, my dear Nancy,

Your affectionate brother.

My dear Nancy, adieu!

To Miss Bolton, At Mr. Bolton's, In Witney, Oxfordshire.

To Samuel Levick

LONDON, January 19, I 769.

DEAR SAMMY,--Let there now be an honest contention between Tommy Rankin and you which shall be most diligent with regard to the General Debt. Undoubtedly the Eastern Circuit shall be assisted out of the collection made in the Western, provided they do all they can themselves. Go on in faith, and you will prosper in this and all things.

The comfort is that whatever you want is already purchased for you. All is ready. For Christ is ready. And He is yours. --I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Sam. Levick, At Mr. Nehem. Jane's, [See letter of Feb. 9, 1765.]

In Plymouth Dock.

To Ann Bolton

LONDON, February 4, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You may be assured it is not want of inclination which keeps me from calling at Witney. [He had been kept in London.] But my time falls short. On Monday, March 6, I am to leave London to preach at Bath on Tuesday evening; in the residue of the week to visit the classes at Bristol; and on the Monday following to set out for Ireland. So that my time is little enough for my work, though I go the shortest way I can.

With regard to yourself, you make me say more than I intended to say. I could not but admire your behaviour in London [See letter of Jan. 12.]: so affectionate, and yet so prudent. If we live till the latter end of the year, I hope we shall spend a little more time together. And surely it will be useful, not hurtful. But in the meantime take care of your health. Colds [See letter of Feb. 12.] are dangerous things to you, particularly at this time of the year. Ride as much as possible. Drink the bran water, and follow the other advices I have given you from time to time.

I hope your having a convenient place for preaching will be much for the furtherance of the gospel. A blessing is ready for many; for you in particular. I say still, Dare to believe! Believe, and feel Him near! Put forth your hand and touch Him! Is He not standing at the door of your heart And do not forget, my dear Nancy,

Your affectionate brother.

PS.--Don't think of sending me anything; your love is sufficient.

To Robert Costerdine

[3]

LONDON, February 6, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--By the former rule of Conference you must not undertake any building till two-thirds of the money it will cost are subscribed. Now, I doubt you would hardly with all your strength be able to procure one-third at Doncaster. If you read publicly on any Sunday that letter from New York, you may then receive what the hearers are willing to give. I am not at all sorry that our brother Southwell [Serjeant Southwell, of Kendal, with whom Wesley spent a comfortable evening on March 21, 1767. See Journal, v. 201.] purposes settling at New York. On the 6th of March I am to set out for Bristol and Ireland.--I am, dear Robert,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Edward Bolton

[4]

LONDON, February 12, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--A preaching-house can't be too light or too airy. Therefore your windows must be large. And let them be sashes, opening downward; otherwise the air coming in would give the people cold. I do not know but it might be best to have either a paved or a boarded floor. And see that whatever is done be done neat and strong. It is the Lord's work, and He will provide. I will give you ten pounds towards it; for which you may draw upon Mr. Franks when you please. [See Journal, v. 345.]

I hope my dear Nancy is recovered from her cold. Don't let her omit riding. [See letters of Feb. 4, 1769, and Jan. 25, 1770.] And make the best use of both her advice and example; for you know not how soon she may be taken away.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse

LONDON, February 15, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You are not incapable of speaking just what you feel, just what nature and grace dictate. And you need never think of any difference between us; for we love one another. And it is a true observation,

Love, like death, makes all distinctions void. [Prior's Solomon, ii. 242. See letter of Aug. 9, 1772.] Think we are just sitting by each other as when I saw you last at Owston. And write just as you would speak to me-- as free, or, if you can, more freely. Meantime stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free. Let temptations come as they will. Let them fly all round you. But they cannot enter unless you please. What temptations do you find the most troublesome Sometimes the most troublesome are not the most dangerous. But no danger can hurt you while you watch and pray: so long you are unconquerable. I know not why your name is not in the paper, if you are not ashamed of the gospel of Christ. O be bold for a good Master!--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

Mrs. Woodhouse, Owston, Lincolnshire.

To Robert Costerdine

NORWICH, February 18, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--If Jer. Cocker now lives in any known sin, he must not be in our Society. If he does not, you did not act wisely in putting him out of it. Stewards are not to govern our Societies; it is no part of their office. This belongs to the Assistant only, under my direction. I myself directed before that Jer. Cocker should have another trial. And you did not do well in running your head against me to please any man living. I say again, unless he now lives in sin, give him another trial.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Philothea Briggs

[5]

LONDON, February 25, 1769.

DEAR PHILLY,--You have no need to take thought for the morrow: as your day so your strength will be. With regard to little compliances, I should be of Miss March's mind; only, if we begin, we know not where we shall stop. If you plead your conscience for not complying with anything, you must use the most mild and respectful expressions you possibly can, and God will order all things well. You will want no help which is in the power of, dear Philly,

Yours affectionately.

To Jane Hilton

LONDON, March I, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I rejoice that I have confidence in you in all things. I believe you do not willingly lose any opportunity of speaking for a good Master. I apprehend you should particularly encourage the believers to give up all to God, and to expect the power whereby they will be enabled so to do every day and every moment. I hope none of your preachers speak against this, but rather press all the people forward.

Do you now feel anything like anger, or pride, or selfwill, or any remains of the carnal mind Was your second deliverance wrought while I was at Beverley at the time of the sermon or after it You did not tell me in what manner you found the change, and whether it has continued without any intermission from that moment. Certainly there never need be any decay; there never will if you continue watching unto prayer. Continue to pray for

Your affectionate brother.

To John Valton

[6]

LONDON, March 1, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Wherever you are I do not doubt but you will find something to do for God. But I think you are not always to stay at Purfleet; a larger field of action is prepared for you. Indeed, the time is not yet fully come. For the present, therefore, labour where you are. But be ready, that, whenever our Lord shall call, you may reply, 'Lo, I come to do Thy will, O God.'--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Lady Maxwell

[7]

LONDON, March 3, 1769.

MY DEAR LADY,--To be incapable of sympathizing with the distressed is not a desirable state. Nor would one wish to extirpate either sorrow or any other of our natural passions. And yet it is both possible and highly desirable to attain the same experience with the Marquis De Renty, who on occasion of his lady's illness told those who inquired how he could bear it, 'I cannot say but my nature is deeply affected with the apprehension of so great a loss. And yet I feel such a full acquiescence in the will of God, that, were it proper, I could dance and sing.'

I have heard my mother say, 'I have frequently been as fully assured that my father's spirit was with me as if I had seen him with my eyes.' [Dr. Annesley died in 1696, just before his daughter moved from South Ormsby to Epworth.] But she did not explain herself any farther. I have myself many times found on a sudden so lively an apprehension of a deceased friend that I have sometimes turned about to look; at the same time I have felt an uncommon affection for them. But I never had anything of this kind with regard to any but those that died in faith. In dreams I have had exceeding lively conversations with them; and I doubt not but they were then very near.

It gives me pleasure to hear that you did not neglect our own preaching in order to attend any other. The hearing Mr. F. at other times I do not know that any could blame; unless you found it unsettled your mind, or weakened your expectation of an entire deliverance from sin. And this, I apprehend, it did not.

You never 'take up too much of my time.' To converse with you even in this imperfect way is both agreeable and useful to me. I love your spirit, and it does me good. I trust God will still give you that hunger and thirst after righteousness till you are satisfied therewith. And who knows how soon--I am, my dear Lady,

Your ever affectionate servant.

To Mrs. Crosby

CHESTER, March 18, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--The westerly winds detain me here, I care not how long: good is the will of the Lord. When I am in Ireland, you have only to direct to Dublin and the letter will find me.

I advise you, as I did Grace Walton [See letter of Sept. 8, 1761, to her.] formerly, (1) Pray in private or public as much as you can. (2) Even in public you may properly enough intermix short exhortations with prayer; but keep as far from what is called preaching as you can: therefore never take a text; never speak in a continued discourse without some break, about four or five minutes. Tell the people, 'We shall have another prayer-meeting at such a time and place.' If Hannah Harrison [See letters of Nov. 26, 1768, and March 31, 1781 (to Lancelot Harrison).] had followed these few directions, she might have been as useful now as ever.

As soon as you have time, write more particularly and circumstantially; and let Sister Bosanquet do the same. There is now no hindrance in the way; nothing to hinder your speaking as freely as you please [His wife was not near to open his letters.] to, dear Sally,

Your affectionate brother.

To John Valton

DUBLIN, March 23, 1769,

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Certainly the Lord is preparing you for a more extensive work and showing that He can and will give you a mouth. Take care you do not cleave to any person or thing I God is a jealous God. And stay where you are as long as you can stay; but do not resist when He thrusts you out into His harvest. That God has called you to a more extensive work I cannot doubt in the least. [See letter of March 1 to him.] He has given you an earnest of it at Stroud; and your weakness of soul or body is no bar to Him. Leave Him to remove that when and as it pleases Him. But I doubt concerning the time; it does not seem to be fully come. At present you are to do all you can where you are, and to be always hearkening to His voice and waiting till He makes plain the way before your face.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Barton (Jane Hilton)

LISBURN, April 9, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I thank Brother Barton [Miss Hilton had recently married William Barton, of Beverley. See letter of Sept. 30, 1768.] for his letter. Both of you have now more need than ever continually to watch and pray that you enter not into temptation. There will be a great danger of so cleaving to each other as to forget God, or of being so taken up with a creature as to abate your hunger and thirst after righteousness. There will be a danger likewise of whiling away time, of not improving it to the uttermost, of spending more of it than needs in good sort of talk with each other which yet does not quicken your souls. If you should once get into an habit of this, it will be exceeding hard to break it off. Therefore you should now attend to every step you take, that you may begin as you hope to hold on to the end. And beware you are not entangled with worldly care any more than worldly desire. Be careful for nothing, but in everything make your request known to God with thanksgiving. Your affectionate brother.

To Richard Steel

[8]

LONDONDERRY, April 24, 1769.

DEAR BROTHER,--I shall now tell you the things which have been more or less upon my mind ever since I have been in the North of Ireland. If you forget them, you will be a sufferer, and so will the people; if you observe them, it will be good for both.

1. To begin with little things. If you regard your health, touch no supper but a little milk or water gruel. This will entirely by the blessing of God secure you from nervous disorders; especially if you rise early every morning, whether you preach or no.

2. Be steadily serious. There is no country upon earth where this is more necessary than Ireland; as you are generally encompassed with those who with a little encouragement would laugh or trifle from morning to night.

3. In every town visit all you can from house to house. I say 'all you can,' for there will be some whom you cannot visit; and if you examine, instruct, reprove, exhort as need requires, you will have no time hanging on your hands. It is by this means that the Societies are increased wherever Thomas Ryan [Thomas Ryan was Assistant at Armagh in 1767. See Journal, iv. 500.] goes: he is preaching from morning to night; warning every one, that he may present every one perfect in Christ Jesus.

4. But on this and every other occasion avoid all familiarity with women. This is deadly poison both to them and you. You cannot be too wary in this respect; therefore begin from this hour.

5. The chief matter of your conversation as well as your preaching should doubtless be the weightier matters of the law. Yet there are several (comparatively) little things which you should earnestly inculcate from time to time; for 'he that despiseth small things shall fall by little and little.' Such are,--

(1) Be active, be diligent; avoid all laziness, sloth, indolence. Fly from every degree, every appearance of it; else you will never be more than half a Christian.

(2) Be cleanly. In this let the Methodists take pattern by the Quakers. Avoid all nastiness, dirt, slovenliness, both in your person, clothes, house, and all about you, Do not stink above ground. This is a bad fruit of laziness; use all diligence to be clean, as one says,

Let thy mind's sweetness have its operation

Upon thy person, clothes, and habitation.[George Herbert's The Temple, 'The Church Porch,' stanza 62.]

(3) Whatever clothes you have, let them be whole; no rents, no tatters, no rags. These are a scandal to either man or woman, being another fruit of vile laziness. Mend your clothes, or I shall never expect you to mend your lives. Let none ever see a ragged Methodist.

(4) Clean yourselves of lice. These are a proof both of uncleanness and laziness: take pains in this. Do not cut off your hair, but clean it, and keep it clean.

(5) Cure yourself and your family of the itch: a spoonful of brimstone will cure you. To let this run from year to year proves both sloth and uncleanness. Away with it at once. Let not the North be any longer a proverb of reproach to all the nation.

(6) Use no tobacco unless prescribed by a physician. It is an uncleanly and unwholesome self-indulgence; and the more customary it is the more resolutely should you break off from every degree of that evil custom.

(7) Use no snuff unless prescribed by a physician. I suppose no other nation in Europe is in such vile bondage to this silly, nasty, dirty custom as the Irish are. But let Christians be in this bondage no longer. Assert your liberty, and that all at once: nothing will be done by degrees. But just now you may break loose through Christ strengthening you.

(8) Touch no dram. It is liquid fire. It is a sure though slow poison. It saps the very springs of life. In Ireland, above all countries in the world, I would sacredly abstain from this, because the evil is so general; and to this and snuff and smoky cabins I impute the blindness which is so exceeding common throughout the nation.

I might have inserted under the second article what I particularly desire wherever you have preaching--namely, that there may be a little house. Let this be got without delay. Wherever it is not, let none expect to see me.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Lady Maxwell

LONDONDERRY, April 29; 1769.

MY DEAR LADY,--A while ago I was concerned at hearing from Edinburgh that you were unwell [Lady Maxwell had been confined to her house by sickness in March, but was now restored.]; although I could not doubt but it was ordered well by an unerring Providence as a means of keeping you dead to all below and of quickening your affections to things above. And, indeed, this is the rule whereby the inhabitants of a better world judge of good and evil. Whatever raises the mind to God is good, and in the same proportion as it does this. Whatever draws the heart from its centre is evil, and more or less so as it has more or less of this effect. You have accordingly found pain, sickness, bodily weakness to be real goods, as bringing you nearer and nearer to the fountain of all happiness and holiness. And yet it is certain nature shrinks from pain, and that without any blame. Only in the same moment that we say, 'If it be possible, let this cup pass from me,' the heart should add like our great Pattern, 'Nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou wilt.' Lady Baird [See letter of Sept. 9, 1768.] I did not see before I left London; and Lady K. B. I did not understand. She was exceedingly civil, and I think affectionate; but perfectly shut up, so that I knew no more of her state of mind than if I had never seen her.--I am, my dear Lady,

Your ever affectionate servant.

To Miss March

May 1769.

By comparing your own outward state with Miss Thornton's [See letter of Aug. 12.] you now see clearly the advantages you enjoy: you have nothing external to hinder your waiting upon God without carefulness and without distraction. None has a right to interrupt you while you are exercised in things divine and labouring to be holy in body and spirit. You may have just so much and no more connexion with any one as experience shows is profitable for you. O stand fast in this liberty, glorifying God with all you have and all you are!

It is remarkable that St. Paul places this the last of all, that 'love endureth all things '; and this is the sum of his wish with regard to the Colossians, 'that they might be strengthened unto all patience and longsuffering with joyfulness.' They who have attained this are ripe for the inheritance and ready to salute their friends in light. There is a time when we grow up towards this, even without any sensible increase; as in the parable, the seed groweth and springs up he knoweth not how. At many times, indeed, we do know how the power of the Highest suddenly overshadows us, while either the first or the pure love is shed abroad in our hearts. But at other times He confirms and increases that love in a gradual and almost insensible manner.

Death has had a large commission this year with regard to our Societies in Ireland as well as England. Just as I left Dublin [He left on April 3.] four or five of our members there were taken away in four or five days; three elder, and two in the bloom of youth, one of whom had been filled with love for some years. They all witnessed a good confession at the last, and died in full assurance of hope. Nancy Rogers, [See Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, i. 223; and for Jane Cooper, letter of Sept. 11, 1765.] whom I saw just before I left the town, breathed the very spirit of Jane Cooper. I think their kindred spirits are now acquainted with each other better than you and I are, but not better than we shall be when we meet together in the paradise of God.

To Peggy Dale

[9]

[NEWMARKET], May 20, 1769.

The hearing from my dear Peggy at this critical time gives me a particular satisfaction. I wanted to know how you bore such a trial, a wound in the tenderest part. You have now a first proof that the God whom you serve is able to deliver you in every trial. You feel, and yet conquer. We conquer all when we can say, 'Not as I will, but as Thou wilt.' I hope you are delivered not only from repining with regard to her, but from reasoning with regard to yourself. You still see the more excellent way and are sensible of the advantages you enjoy. I allow some single women have fewer advantages for eternity than they might have in a married state. But, blessed be God, you have all the advantages which one can well conceive. You have affectionate, wise, and pious friends deeply experienced in the way of God. You have leisure and opportunity for every good work and for improvement in all holiness. O may you improve every advantage to the uttermost! And give more and more comfort to, my dear Peggy,

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Joseph Benson

CORK, May 27, 1769,

DEAR JOSEPH,--You have now (what you never had before) a clear, providential call to Oxford. [He entered at St. Edmund Hall, Oxford, and kept some of his terms whilst Head Master at Trevecca.] If you keep a single eye and have courage and steadiness, you may be an instrument of much good. But you will tread on slippery ground, and the serious persons you mention may do you more hurt than many others. When I was at Oxford, I never was afraid of any but the almost Christians. If you give way to them and their prudence an hair's breadth, you will be removed from the hope of the gospel. If you are not moved, if you tread in the same steps which my brother and I did, you may be a means under God of raising another set of real Bible Christians. How long the world will suffer them (whether longer than they did us or not) is in God's hand.

With regard to Kingswood School, I have one string more: if that breaks, I shall let it drop. I have borne the burthen one-and-twenty years; I have done what I could: now let someone else do more.--I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Bennis

[10]

CORK, May 30, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER BENNIS,--Some years since, I was inclined to think that one who had once enjoyed and lost the pure love of God must never look to enjoy it again till they were just stepping into eternity. But experience has taught us better things. We have now numerous instances of those who had cast away that unspeakable blessing and now enjoy it in a larger measure than ever. And why should not this be your case Because you are unworthy So were they. Because you have been an unfaithful steward So they had been also; yet God healed them freely: and so He will you. Only do not reason against Him. Look for nothing in yourself but sin and unworthiness. Forget yourself. Worthy is the Lamb; and He has prevailed for you. You shall not die, but live-- live all the life of heaven on earth. You need nothing in order to this but faith. And who gives this He that standeth at the door.

I hope to see you at Limerick on Monday evening; probably we shall be at Brough soon after one o'clock. [On Monday, June 5, Wesley writes: 'Having been much importuned to give them a day or two more, I rode to Limerick. . . . On Thursday, the 8th, I once more took my leave of this loving people.' See Journal, v. 319.] And I pray let there never more be any reserve between you and, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To John Mason

CORK, May 30, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--By last Friday's post we sent you word that I hoped to see you at Limerick [Mason was stationed there.] once more. We purpose with God's leave to set out early on Monday morning, and hope to reach Brough soon after one. O let us work while the day is! Our Father worketh hitherto.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Howell Powell, Bandon

[11]

CORK, June 3, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--If Mr. Freeman [James Freeman of Dublin. See letter of June 7, 1762.] complies with your proposal, you cannot avoid removing to Castle Townsend, and it will be a clear providential token that God calls you to that place. I have sent you a few little tracts by the bearer.

Wishing you all health of soul and body, I remain,

Your affectionate brother.

Brother Dillon will probably be in Bandon next week.

To John Furz ()

[12]

ATHLONE, June 25, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Brother Langdon and you are not much mistaken concerning Thomas Wride. A great part of the accusation against Thomas Wride is owing to prejudice. But it is only his own zeal and activity and patiently blameless behaviour which can effectually speak for him. He may, if he has an horse, come to the Conference, and I will try him another year.--I am, my dear brethren,

Your affectionate brother.

To an Irish Lady

[13]

TULLAMORE, June 27, 1769.

DEAR MADAM,--When I had the pleasure of conversing with you some years since, you had a regard both for me and the people called Methodists. If I am rightly informed, you are now of another mind. May I ask, When did that change begin Was it at your last journey to Dublin Whenever it was, suffer me to ask, What were the reasons of it I will tell you what I conjecture, and I do it in writing because I may not have an opportunity of talking with you; because I can write more freely than I could speak; because I can now say all I have to say at once; whereas, if we were talking together, I might probably forget some part; and because you may by this means have the better opportunity of calmly considering it.

I conjecture (to tell you just what rises in my heart) that this change was owing to several causes. Some admired and commended you as a person of uncommon sense and uncommon attainments in religion. Others told you at large from time to time all the real or supposed faults of the Methodists, in particular the jars which had lately been in Dublin on account of Mr. Morgan and Olivers. This naturally tended to breed and increase pride on the one hand and prejudice on the other. Riches increased; which not only led you step by step into more conformity to the world, but insensibly instilled self-importance, unwillingness to be contradicted, and an overbearing temper. And hence you was of course disgusted at those who did not yield to this temper and blamed that conformity. Perhaps some of these professed or expected to be perfected in love; they at least believed perfection. Now, this you seemed to hate with a perfect hatred; and on that account disliked them the more.

Permit me to add a few words on each of these heads. And first, would it not be well if you started back from every appearance of admiration (which you know is deadly poison), whether on account of your sense or piety and if you utterly discountenanced all who directly or indirectly commended you to your face yea, and all who told you of the jars or faults of the Methodists, or indeed of any absent person

Should you not earnestly strive and pray against thinking highly of your own understanding or attainments in religion Otherwise this, by grieving the Holy Spirit, would expose you to still more prejudice; especially towards those who might seem to vie with you in religion, if not in understanding.

Can you be too sensible how hardly they that have riches enter into the kingdom of heaven Yea, or into the kingdom of an inward heaven into the whole spirit of the gospel How hard is it for these (whether you do or no) not to conform too much to the world! how hard not to be a little overbearing, especially to inferiors!

Is it right to be disgusted at those who fear you conform too far, who do not sink down before you--nay, perhaps oppose your judgement or blame your practice

And with regard to perfection. Have not they that hold it the same right to be angry with you for denying it as you with them for affirming it

But what is it you are angry at What is it you object to Let us understand the question before we dispute about it.

By Christian Perfection I mean (1) loving God with all our heart. Do you object to this I mean (2) an heart and life all devoted to God. Do you desire less I mean (3) regaining the whole image of God. What objection to this I mean (4) having all the mind that was in Christ. Is this going too far I mean (5) walking uniformly as Christ walked. And this surely no Christian will object to. If any one means anything more or anything else by perfection, I have no concern with it. But if this is wrong, yet what need of this heat about it, this violence--I had almost said fury--of opposition, carried so far as even not to lay out anything with this man or that woman who professes it 'Nay,' says Mrs. --, 'I did not refrain from it for this only, but for their espousing Mr. Olivers's cause against Mr. Morgan.' Worse and worse! What! are people to starve (at least for me), unless they think as I think or like whom I like Alas, what religion, what humanity, what common sense is this

But I have done. I have once for all taken upon myself a most unthankful office. I have spoken with all plainness and simplicity, and now leave the event to God. May He open your heart, that you may discern His holy and acceptable and perfect will, that you may have a right judgement in all things, and evermore rejoice in His holy comfort.--I am, dear madam,

Your affectionate servant.

To John Whitehead

COOLALOUGH, July 4, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--One from every circuit must be at Conference; but it may be either Brother Whitwell [William Whitwell was Whitehead's colleague at Bristol.] or you. I think the money need not be brought; only let us have exact accounts, and lists of the Societies.

When you mentioned, first your apprehension that you could manage the Kingswood School, and then your thoughts concerning Nancy Smith, [Mr. Smith was an apothecary at Bristol (Journal, iii. 254). Did Whitehead marry his daughter] it seemed to me that there might be a providential connexion between the one and the other--though not to the exclusion of James Hindmarsh: that I never thought of.

Good will follow from the disagreement of Brother Proctor and Palmer. I should be apt to believe a dying woman. Be zealous! Be watchful!--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Bennis

[15]

DUBLIN, July 24, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--If the reading over your papers has no other effect, this it certainly has--it makes me love you abundantly better than I did before: I have now a more intimate knowledge of you; I enter more into your spirit, your tempers and hopes and fears and desires, all which tends to endear you to me. It is plain one of your constant enemies, and the most dangerous of all, is evil reasoning. Accordingly the thing which you chiefly want is Christian simplicity. Brother Bourke [The Assistant at Limerick.] and you should carefully watch over each other in that respect, and let each deal faithfully with the other; let there be no reserve between you; encourage one another also to pray for and expect the continual and direct witness of the Spirit. They are by no means the best part of our preachers in any sense who doubt of this. I know but of one who had experienced the work that doubted concerning the witness-- namely, James Oddie [See letter of March 29, 1766.]; and I am afraid that for some time he has experienced neither the one nor the other. Two of your written books I send back by that lovely woman Jenny Moore [Mrs. Moore, of Augher. She received these safely after some delay. See Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, i. 200.]; the third I must borrow a little longer.

My dear friend, remember

Your affectionate brother.

To Ann Bolton

[16]

LEEDS, July 30, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You see, God gives you a token for good. But I doubt whether your sister will recover. It is probable He gives her this reprieve both that she may be ripe for glory and that she may bear a faithful testimony to Him before He calls her hence. So she has not a moment to lose. With regard to her paralytic disorder, I wonder they have not advised bathing; that often avails when nothing else will.

After the Conference I have to traverse all Wales; so that I do not expect to see Bristol before September. I have then all the West of England to visit, which will take me up at least six weeks longer. In October, if it please God to prolong my life, I am in hope of seeing you at Witney. I was almost afraid you had forgotten me; but I think you will not soon. I think death itself will not separate you from, my dear Nancy,

Your affectionate brother.

To the Travelling Preachers

[17]

LEEDS, August 4, 1769.

MY DEAR BRETHREN,--1. It has long been my desire that all those ministers of our Church who believe and preach salvation by faith might cordially agree between themselves, and not hinder but help one another. After occasionally pressing this in private conversation wherever I had opportunity, I wrote down my thoughts upon the head and sent them to each in a letter. Out of fifty or sixty to whom I wrote, only three vouchsafed me an answer. [See heading to letter of April 19, 1764.] So I give this up: I can do no more. They are a rope of sand; and such they will continue.

2. But it is otherwise with the travelling preachers in our Connexion. You are at present one body. You act in concert with each other and by united counsels. And now is the time to consider what can be done in order to continue this union. Indeed, as long as I live there will be no great difficulty. I am under God a centre of union to all our travelling as well as local preachers.

They all know me and my communication. They all love me for my work's sake; and therefore, were it only out of regard to me, they will continue connected with each other. But by what means may this connexion be preserved when God removes me from you

3. I take it for granted it cannot be preserved by any means between those who have not a single eye. Those who aim at anything but the glory of God and the salvation of men, who desire or seek any earthly thing, whether honour, profit, or ease, will not, cannot continue in the Connexion: it will not answer their design. Some of them, perhaps a fourth of the whole number, will secure preferment in the Church. Others will turn Independents, and get separate congregations, like John Edwards and Charles Skelton. [Edwards, an able Irishman, left Wesley about 1753, having adopted Calvinistic views, and settled at Leeds, where he attracted 'a very considerable and respectable congregation, who erected him a very large and commodious chapel.' He died about 1784. See letter of Nov. 20, 1755; and for Skelton, July 17, 1751.] Lay your accounts with this, and be not surprised if some you do not suspect be of this number.

4. But what method can be taken to preserve a firm union between those who choose to remain together

Perhaps you might take some such steps as these:--

On notice of my death, let all the preachers in England and Ireland repair to London within six weeks.

Let them seek God by solemn fasting and prayer.

Let them draw up articles of agreement to be signed by those who choose to act in concert.

Let those be dismissed who do not choose it in the most friendly manner possible.

Let them choose by votes a committee of three, five, or seven, each of whom is to be Moderator in his turn.

Let the Committee do what I do now; propose preachers to be tried, admitted, or excluded; fix the place of each preacher for the ensuing year and the time of the next Conference.

5. Can anything be done now in order to lay a foundation for this future union Would it not be well, for any that are willing, to sign some articles of agreement before God calls me hence Suppose something like these:--

'We, whose names are under-written, being throughly convinced of the necessity of a close union between those whom God is pleased to use as instruments in this glorious work, in order to preserve this union between ourselves, are resolved, God being our Helper,--

'I. To devote ourselves entirely to God; denying ourselves, taking up our cross daily, steadily aiming at one thing--to save our own souls and them that hear us.

'II. To preach the old Methodist doctrines, and no other, contained in the Minutes of the Conferences.

'III. To observe and enforce the whole Methodist discipline laid down in the said Minutes.'

To Robert Wilkinson

[18]

LEEDS, August 5, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I believe God calls you to labour in a quieter part of His vineyard--namely, in the North of Ireland, in the Augher Circuit, among a simple, earnest, loving people. Your best way is to carry your own horse over from Whitehaven, or rather Portpatrick, where you have a short and sure passage; then ride on to the widow Cumberland's in Lisburn, and any of our preachers whom you meet with will direct you to Charlemount or Augher.

Be all in earnest!--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse

[19]

BRADFORD, August 5, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--If the trials you have met with had only produced that effect, a free intercourse between you and Sister Hutton, I should think they had been of unspeakable service. For how valuable is a tried friend! If you find any hurt with regard to your health, there is a medicine in the Primitive Physick which I never remember to have failed in any single instance. But above all see that your soul receives no hurt. Beware of murmuring. David saw God's hand in Shimei's tongue, and therefore he was quiet. I send you John Ellis again, and I hope you will be free with him. Was John Shaw shy Then be not like him when you write or speak to, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Barton

BIRSTALL, August 6, 1769.

Indeed, Jenny, I began to be jealous of you. I began to be almost afraid that a new situation in life and worldly cares had cooled the affection which you once had. I am glad to find the case is not so, but that you still retain your former friendship. Indeed, why should not the word 'Love never faileth' have place in this as in other instances

In your last you said something which I did not understand. Last year you certainly was saved from sin. And this you testified for several months. Have you since then doubted of it Do you suppose you never received that blessing

If you did, when or how did you lose it [See letter of Sept. 9.] Send me as particular an account as you can, that I may be able to form a more certain judgement. Wherever I am, you need only direct to the Foundery. Peace be with your spirits!--My dear Jenny,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss March

CARMARTHEN, August 12, 1769.

At some times it is needful to say, 'I will pray with the Spirit and with the understanding also.' At other times the understanding has little to do, while the soul is poured forth in passive prayer. I believe we found the answer to many prayers at the Conference, particularly on the last two days. At the conclusion all the preachers were melted down while they were singing those lines for me,--

Thou who so long hast saved me here,

A little longer save;

Till, freed from sin and freed from fear,

I sink into a grave.

Till glad I lay my body down,

Thy servant's steps attend;

And, oh, my life of mercies crown

With a triumphant end!

Various scriptures show that we may pray with resignation for the life or ease of a friend: it is enough that every petition be closed with, 'Not as I will, but as Thou wilt.' It is true that a believer knows the devices of Satan to be many and various. But the Apostle means more than this--namely, that those who have the unction of the Holy One are thereby enabled to discern his devices whenever they occur, and to distinguish them from the influences of the good Spirit, how finely soever they are disguised. To answer for ourselves is often a cross; and we had much rather let people think and talk as they please: but it is a cross we must often take up; otherwise we 'walk not charitably ' if we do not 'reprove our brother '; if we 'suffer sin upon him ' we 'hate our brother in our heart.'

If Miss Thornton be arrived at London, I wish you would take the first opportunity of conversing with her. She will have more need of a faithful friend now than ever she had in her life. I expect she will hear reasons upon reasons why she ought as a point of duty to conform a little to the world, to have a few trifling acquaintance, and not to be so particular in her dress. Now, as you have heard all these things before, and have been enabled by the grace of God to discover Satan even with his angel's face, and to stand firm against all his assaults, you will be better able to assist and confirm her if you seek her before she is much shaken.

It has a little surprised me that several who are, I believe, filled with love, yet do not desire to die. It seems as if God generally does not give this desire till the time of death approaches. Perhaps in many it would be of little use. First let them learn to live.

Doubtless that rest was given 'to support you under your sickness.' Yet that is no reason why it should be ever taken away: it was certainly a degree of that rest which remaineth for the people of God. But it may be called by this or any other name; names are of little consequence: the thing you need never let go. You may live in and to Jesus; yea, and that continually, by simple faith and holy, humble love.

Let Mary Thornton [Miss Thornton was now living with Miss March. See Methodist Magazine, 1805, p 37; and letter in May 1769, also July 6, 1770.] be as sensible as ever she will or can be of her own helplessness and poverty. But let her not cast away that confidence which hath great recompense of reward. She did experience the pure love of God; let none take advantage from her being tried by fire (if it should be so) to reason her out of it. That general promise, 'In blessing I will bless thee,' certainly contains all the promises, whether relating to this life or the next; and all are yours! Peace be multiplied upon you!

To Mary Yeoman, of Mousehole, Cornwall

[20]

ST. Ives, September 2, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Your case is not peculiar. I have known many who were just as you are now; and the same God who delivered them is as ready to deliver you. I advise you to continue in the way whether you find any benefit or not. Pray, as you can, though you are ever so cold or dead. Hear the preaching; keep to your class. The Lord is at hand; He will abundantly pardon.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Barton

BRISTOL, September 9, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Now I understand you well; but I did not understand you before. I thought you meant that you had not now the love that you had once. [See letter of Aug. 6.] I am glad to find that I was mistaken, and that you still retain that precious gift of God. Undoubtedly you may retain it always; yea, and with a continual increase. You may have a deeper and deeper fellowship with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ. You may have more and more of the mind which was in Him and be more fully renewed in His likeness. You should send me word from time to time what your present experience and your present trials are. Peace be with your spirits!--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Edward Spencer

[21]

FROME, September 13, 1769.

REVEREND AND DEAR SIR,--I expect to be at Bradford on Tuesday and Wednesday next. In returning from thence to Bath to-morrow se'nnight, the 21st instant, I will preach if you please in your church. I remember preaching some years since at Combe Grove. [On Sept. 17 and 19 and Oct. 1, 1764. See Journal, v. 94-8.] Peace be with you and yours.-- I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate brother and servant.

To Mr. --

[22]

BRISTOL, September, 17, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I hope you will not be disappointed any more. On Thursday se'nnight I propose with God's leave to preach at Pill at three o'clock.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Bennis

BRISTOL, September 18, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I wrote a longer letter to you than I usually do before I set out from Dublin: where or how it stopped I cannot imagine. [She evidently received it. See letter of July 24.] I think of you every day; indeed, I do not know that I ever loved you so well as since I was at Limerick last. [June 5-8. See note in letter of May 30 to her.] The more we are acquainted with each other the more we ought to love one another.

I hope Brother Bourke and you faithfully endeavour to help each other on. Is your own soul all alive, all devoted to God Do you find again what you found once And are you active for God Remember you have work to do in your Lord's vineyard; and the more you help others the more your soul will prosper.--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse

[23]

BRISTOL, October 4, 1769.

How long is it since Mr. Whitelamb died What disease did he die of Did he lie ill for any time Do you know any circumstances preceding or attending his death Oh, why did he not die forty years ago, while he knew in whom he had believed! Unsearchable are the counsels of God, and His ways past finding out.

To Mrs. Woodhouse, At Mr. Hutton's, In Epworth, Near Thorne, Yorkshire.

To Mrs. Barton

NORWICH, November I, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Have you been tried with bodily weakness or with outward afflictions If with the latter, have you found a deliverance from them It is certain, in every temptation He will make a way to escape, that you may be able to bear it. When you are tempted, it is an unspeakable blessing that there is nothing in your heart which joins with the temptation. And there never need be more: the enemy is thrust out, and cannot re-enter if you continue to watch and pray. Continue likewise to be useful in your generation; as you have time, do good unto all men. Snatch all the opportunities you can of speaking a word to any of your neighbours. Comfort the afflicted, support the weak, exhort the believers to go on to perfection. Never be weary of well doing; in due time you shall reap if you faint not.--I am, dear Jenny,

To Mrs. Jane Barton, In Norwood, Beverley, Yorkshire.

Your affectionate brother.

To Ann Bolton

November 1, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I do not advise you to reason whether you have faith or not, but simply to look up to Him that loves you for whatever you want. And He cannot withhold from you any manner of thing that is good. Oh how nigh is He to deliver you out of all temptation and to supply your every need. Only trust Him in all things, and you shall praise Him in all things.--I am, my dear Nancy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Hannah Ball

[24]

November 5, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Need I tell you that I found a particular satisfaction in my late conversations with you Perhaps you observed such a freedom in my behaviour as I never showed to you before. Indeed, it seemed to me as if I had just recovered a dear friend whom I had been in fear of losing. But you sweetly relieved me from that fear and showed me that your heart is as my heart.

Do you still find a clear deliverance from pride, from anger, from your own will, and from the love of earthly things Have you an uninterrupted sense of the presence of God as a loving and gracious Father Do you find your heart is continually ascending to Him And are you still enabled in everything to give thanks You must expect various trials. We know nature is variable as the wind. But go on. Be never weary of well doing; in due time you shall reap if you faint not.--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Joseph Benson

NORWICH, November 5, 1769.

DEAR JOSEPH,--I heard that tale, and answered pointblank, 'It is mere invention.' However, I wrote to inquire at the school, so you did well to send a real account both to me and to Ireland. [See letter of Jan. 2.]

'This gives any one enough of Kingswood School.' [Benson had used these words in his letter to Wesley.] 'Ah! simple Master Shallow!' as Shakespeare has it, should not I then have enough of it long ago You put me in mind of Sir John Phillips's [Sir John was a devout Christian who attended the Religious Societies in London. He was a benefactor of the Holy Club and one of the Georgia Trustees. See Journal, i. 186, 297; viii. 278-82, 301.] exclamation when a puff of smoke came out of the chimney, 'Oh, Mr. Wesley, these are the trials which I meet with every day.'--I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mary Bishop

[25]

IPSWICH, November 5, 1769.

DEAR MISS BISHOP,--When I was last in Bath, [About Sept. 21.] Mr. Hodsal told me Miss Bishop would be glad to see me. But as I did not know you at all, and I had not an hour to spare, I did not think of it any farther till yesterday, when I heard from Miss March, who gave me a particular account of your situation.

We have had a Society in Bath for about thirty years, sometimes larger and sometimes smaller. [See Wes. Meth. Mag. 1846, pp.1088-1825. The chapel was then in Avon Street.] It was very small this autumn, consisting only of eleven or twelve persons, of whom Michael Hemmings was leader. I spoke to these one by one, added nine or ten more, divided them into two classes, and appointed half of them to meet with Joseph Harris. But if you are willing to cast in your lot with us, I had rather that those single women in both classes who desire it should meet with you and any others who are not afraid of the reproach of Christ. In that little tract A Plain Account of the People called Methodists you see our whole plan. [See letter in Dec. 1748 to Vincent Perronet.] We have but one point in view--to be altogether Christians, scriptural, rational Christians. For which we well know, not only the world, but the almost Christians, will never forgive us. From these, therefore, if you join heart and hand with us, you are to expect neither justice nor mercy. If you are determined, let me know. But consider what you do. Can you give up all for Christ the hope of improving your fortune, a fair reputation, and agreeable friends Can He make you amends for all these Is He alone a sufficient portion I think you will find Him so. And if you was as entirely devoted to God as my dear Jenny Cooper was, you would never have cause to repent of your choice either in time or in eternity.

I never had one thought of resigning up our room to any person on earth. What I wrote to Lady Huntingdon [See letter of Nov. 22.] was, 'I am willing your preachers should have as full and free use of it as our own.' I could not go any farther than this: I have no right so to do. I hope you will send me as particular an account as you can of all that has lately passed and of the present state of things. The more freely you write, the more agreeable it will be to

Your affectionate brother.

PS.--You may direct to London. To Miss Bishop, In the Vineyard, Bath.

To Professor John Liden, of Lund

[26]

LONDON, November 16, 1769.

To answer those questions throughly would require a volume. It is partly done in the little tracts: on the points wherein they are defective I will add a few words as my time permits.

1. There are many thousand Methodists in Great Britain and Ireland which are not formed into Societies. Indeed, none are but those (or rather a part of those) who are under the care of Mr. Wesley. These at present contain a little less than thirty thousand persons.

2. The places at which there is constant preaching (three or four times a week at least) are the Foundery near Moorfields, the French Church [in West Street] near the Seven Dials (at these two places there is preaching every morning and evening), the French Church in Spitalfields, the Chapel in Snowsfields, Southwark, the Chapel in Wapping, and one not far from Smithfield.

3. They have many schools for teaching reading, writing, and arithmetic, but only one for teaching the higher parts of learning. This is kept in Kingswood, near Bristol, and contains about forty scholars. These are all boarders, and might be abundantly more, but the house will not contain them. The Rules of Kingswood School give an account of the books read and the method pursued therein.

4. I believe some of the best preachers are James Morgan, Peter Jaco, Jos. Cownley, T. Simpson, John Hilton, John Pawson, Alex. Mather, Tho. Olivers, Sam. Levick, Duncan Wright, Jacob Rowell, Christopher Hopper, Dan. Bumstead, Alexander M'Nab, and William Thompson. Each of these preachers has his food wherever he labours and twelve pounds a year for clothes and other expenses. If he is married, he has ten pounds a year for his wife. This money is raised by the voluntary contributions of the Societies. It is by these likewise that the poor are assisted where the allowance fixed by the laws of the land does not suffice. Accordingly the Stewards of the Societies in London distribute seven or eight pounds weekly among the poor.

5. Mr. Whitefield is a Calvinist, Messrs. Wesley are not; this is the only material difference between them. And this has continued without any variation ever since Mr. Whitefield adopted those opinions. The consequences of that difference are touched upon in the letter sent two or three years ago to the persons named therein.

6. There are only three Methodist Societies in America: one at Philadelphia, one at New York, and one twelve miles from it. There are five preachers there; two have been at New York for some years. Three are lately gone over. Mr. Whitefield has published a particular account of everything relative to the Orphan House [in Georgia].

7. The most eminent writers against the Methodists are the late Bishop of London (Dr. Gibson), Dr. Church, the Bishop of Gloucester (Dr. Warburton), and Bishop Lavington. Bishops Gibson and Lavington were throughly convinced of their mistake before they died. I believe Dr. Church was so too. None, I think, but Mr. Perronet has wrote for the Methodists.

8. No Moravians belong to their Societies. They have no considerable settlements in England but at London, Bedford, and Pudsey, a little town near Leeds, in Yorkshire. They make a profound secret of everything relating to their community. What I know of them I have published in the Journals. The Count's house at Chelsea is a palace for a prince. Truly they are wise in their generation.

To Peggy Dale

[27]

LONDON, November 17, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not. That particular branch of wisdom, readiness of thought, he is as willing to give as any other; yea, and ready utterance whenever it will be for His glory and the furtherance of His kingdom. And if you want more courage and boldness in His cause, make your requests known to Him with thanksgiving. Perhaps He will first answer you by giving you a deeper sense of want, with an increase of desire and resignation together. And afterwards you shall have the petition which you asked of Him. But there is one rule which our Lord constantly observes,--'Unto him that hath shall be given.' 'Unto him that uses what he hash.' Speak, therefore, as you can; and by-and-by you shall speak as you would. Speak, though, with fear; and in a little time you shall speak without fear. Fear shall be swallowed up in love!--I am, my dear Peggy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Joseph Benson

LONDON, November 19, 1769.

Indeed, Joseph, I am not well pleased at all. You seem quite ruffled and discomposed because a story was invented of you (if it was from invention; for your taking it so deeply makes me fear it was not). I thought it kindest to reprove you rather in jest than in earnest, and this very thing you take ill! What, are you seeking to pick a quarrel with me Well, if you require me to be serious, I will be serious. I am ashamed you should have it to learn still that if you are a Christian you are to expect men will say all manner of evil of you falsely. So they have done of me for at least these forty years. You was not of this spirit when you came into that House. [Wesley thought Kingswood was spoiling him.] Honour and power have done you no good; I am sorry for you, but I know not how to help you. If you will go, you must go.

[28]

To Various Friends

[29]

LONDON, November 20, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Two years ago many of our brethren, who considered the number of the people called Methodists and the circumstances which a great part of them were in, believed we should pay off the debt at once. I myself was fully persuaded that between twenty and thirty thousand people were well able to do this; but I was not at all persuaded that they were willing. However, I said little upon that head, being unwilling to weaken the hands of those who were of another mind.

It was a good step which was made the first year. Upwards of 5,000 were contributed; by which means the most pressing debts were paid, and many of our brethren were firmly persuaded we should make an end of the whole the second year. I well knew the Methodists could do this; but I saw no reason to think they would. And when the collection was brought in, amounting to above 2,000, it was full as much as I expected.

'But what can be done this third year 5,000 remain unpaid. Are the Methodists able to clear this in one year' Yes; as well as they are able to clear 50. But are they willing That I cannot tell: I am sure a few of them are; even of those who have a large measure of worldly goods; yea, and of those who are lately increased in substance, who have twice, perhaps ten or twenty times, as much as when they saw me first. Are you one of them Whether you are or not, whether your substance is less or more, are you willing to give what assistance you can to do what you can without hurting your family

'But if I do so, I cannot lay out so much in such and such things as I intended.' That is true. But will this hurt you What if, instead of enlarging, you should for the present contract your expenses spend less, that you may be able to give more Would there be any harm in this

'But neither can I lay up so much.' This likewise is most true. But is it ill husbandry to lay up treasure in heaven Is that lost which is given to God Whether you go to Him soon, or whether He gives you a few years longer here--in either case is it not wise to lay up for yourself a good foundation, that you may attain eternal life

'But I thought we should have paid the debt in one year, and so need no farther collections.' I never thought so. I knew it might be paid in one year, but never expected it would. There is more likelihood of its being paid this year. It will, if our brethren exert themselves: do you, for one; let nothing be wanting on your part. Yet do not imagine 'we shall need no farther collections.' Indeed we shall, though we owed not one shilling. Do not you remember the original design of the Yearly Subscription [See Works, viii. 335-6.] Paying our debts is but one branch of the design. It answers several other valuable ends equally necessary. It enables us to carry the gospel through the three kingdoms. And as long as we pursue that glorious design, this subscription will be necessary; though it is true, when once this burthen is removed, a far smaller contribution will suffice.

However, let the morrow take thought for the things of itself: to-day do what you can, for the love of God, of your brethren, of the cause of God, and of

Your affectionate brother.

PS.--This is the letter, a copy of which I intend sending this or next post to each of the chief persons in your circuit. You will second it in good earnest. Try what you can do, going on in the cheerfulness of faith. Probably you will take in subscriptions by Christmas, and receive what is subscribed between Easter and Midsummer. Be not weary in well doing; you shall reap if you faint not.

To Christopher Hopper

[30]

LONDON, November 20, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--If she will return of her own accord, I will receive her with open arms. But I will not hire her to return. I think that would be foolish, nay sinful. [Mrs. Wesley often left him and returned again in answer to his entreaties. She was with her daughter in Newcastle. See letters of Dec. 17, 1768, and Jan. 15, 1770.]

Brother Fazzard was a good man, though for some years his head was a good deal wrong. I hope Brother Greenwood continues right, and is no longer puzzled by the smooth speakers.

If you love the souls or bodies of men, recommend everywhere the Primitive Physick and the small tracts. It is true most of the Methodists are poor; but what then Nine in ten of them would be no poorer if they were to lay out an whole penny in buying a book every other week in the year. By this means the work of God is both widened and deepened in every place.--I am, with love to Sister Hopper,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To John Valton

[31]

LONDON, November 21, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--It is a great thing to be open to the call of God. It really seems as if He were now calling you. When I wrote last, you was not willing to go out; and probably He is now thrusting you out into His harvest. If so, take care you be not disobedient to the heavenly calling. Otherwise you may be permitted to fall lower than you imagine.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mary Bishop

LONDON, November 22, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--It is exceedingly strange. I should really wonder (if I could wonder at any weakness of human nature) that so good a woman as Lady Huntingdon, and one who particularly piques herself on her catholic spirit, should be guilty of such narrowness of spirit. Let it teach us a better lesson! [Henry Venn was then preaching to crowded audiences in the Countess of Huntingdon's chapel at Bath. See letter of Dec. 26.] Let us not vary in thought or word from the old Methodist principle, 'Whosoever doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother and sister and mother.'

We have other instances of persons who now enjoy the peace of God and yet do not know the time when they received it. And God is sovereign: He may make what exceptions He pleases to His general rule. So this objection is easily set aside; and so is that of your age. The Spirit of the Lord can give understanding either in a longer and shorter time. And I doubt not but He will give you favour in the eyes of your sisters. You have only to go on in simplicity, doing the will of God from the heart and trusting in the anointing of the Holy One to teach you of all things.

I am glad you are acquainted with the Miss Owens. [Wesley says on Sept. 16, 1772: 'I went to Publow, which is now what Leytonstone was once. Here is a family indeed. Such mistresses, and such a company of children, as, I believe, all England cannot parallel!' See Journal v. 484; and letter of Aug. 22, 1772.] Encourage one another to be altogether Christians. Defy fashion and custom, and labour only

To steer your useful lives below

By reason and by grace.

Let not the gentlewoman entrench upon the Christian; but be a simple follower of the Lamb.

I expect to hear soon what has occurred since you wrote last. And I hope you will always speak without any reserve to, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss Bishop, In the Vineyard, Bath.

To Professor John Liden, of Lund

[32]

THE FOUNDERY, November 30, 1769.

DEAR SIR,--Though I hope shortly to have the pleasure of seeing you, yet I cannot but write a line to return you thanks for your favour of the 24th instant. If any other of the tracts which we have written or published would be acceptable to you, I will order them to be sent to Mr. Ley's, or any other place which you are pleased to appoint. Never was there anything which I less desired or expected some years since than virum volitare per ora, [Virgil's Georgics, iii. 9: 'To hover on the lips of men.'] having from my infancy loved silence and obscurity. But we came not into the world to do our own will. Happy are we if we are always ready to do and to suffer the will of Him that sent us! Desiring a remembrance in your prayers, I remain, dear sir,

Your affectionate servant.

To Robert Bell

[33]

LONDON, December 2, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Upon the first moving of the thing, Mr. Ball seemed cold, saying he had just procured the same favour for another. But he added, 'Do you make a point of this' I told him I did. 'Then,' said he, 'I will do what I can.' So I hope there is little reason to doubt but the thing will soon be accomplished.

You have cause to bless God upon many accounts; particularly for the friendliness of your collector and supervisor; above all, for His revealing His love in your heart and giving you a word to speak in His name.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Bell, Officer of Excise, In Longtown, Cumberland.

To John Valton

LONDON, December 2, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Certainly you are not called to go out now. I believe you will be by-and-by. Your inabilities are no bar; for when you are sent you will not be sent a warfare at your own cost. Now improve the present hour where you are. [See letter of Nov. 21. 'This letter,' says Valton, 'was as pleasant as the grapes of Eshcol to my soul.' ]--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Joseph Benson

LONDON, December 3, 1769,

DEAR JOSEPH,--You must not expect that I should answer particularly a letter of a sheet long. I have only time to take notice briefly of two or three of the mistakes it contains. [See letter of Nov. 19.]

1. I have been told an hundred times, 'You love those that flatter you, and hate all that deal plainly and honestly with you.' [See letters of March 25, 1764, and Sept. 12, 1766.] For J. Oliver told Jo. Hilton, who (with many others) cordially believed it. But nothing under heaven can be more false. What man did I ever love like T. Walsh What woman do I now regard like Miss Bosanquet And what human creatures have dealt so plainly and honestly with me What preacher now deals so plainly with me as John Fenwick and whom do I love and trust more

2. The first spring of the reproach cast on Kingswood School was not any mismanagement there. It was the hatred of good which is in the devil and his children. Therefore even Mr. Parkinson never did or could escape it. Therefore a fresh flood of it has been poured out even since you was there.

3. This you had reason to expect, and therefore ought not to have been surprised, much less discouraged at it. For this I gently reproved you in my first letter. That reproof you took heinously ill, and reproached me for unmercifulness and want of sympathy. This I should think was extremely wrong.

4. 'Is this all the thanks I receive for serving you' Nay, I think the thanks are due to me. When I first sent you to Kingswood, it was to serve you at least as much as myself. Nay, it was not to serve myself at all. For what is the school to me It has been and may be of use to many. But it is no more to me than to you or Lady Huntingdon.

There are other mistakes in your letter (which is all wrote in a spirit of discontent), but I have no time to point them out. You told me you would stay at the school till March. Till then you should be as much at Kingswood as you can.-- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Barton

LONDON, December 24, 1769.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Some of the trials which you must frequently have are of a delicate nature. You will need much of the wisdom from above, or you would suffer loss under them. Those who are very near to you were (and probably are still) prejudiced against William Fallowfield beyond all sense and reason. And how extremely difficult it is for you not to drink in a little of their spirit! Only what is ill-will in them may in you be a simple error of judgement. Yet there is danger lest it should weaken your soul and insensibly lead you to some wrong temper.

I believe you may speak without reserve to Brother Howard. [Robert Howard, Assistant at York, was received on trial as a preacher in 1768, and ceased to travel in 1770.] He is a cool, thinking man. But does he preach Christian perfection clearly and explicitly Which of your other preachers does

Your affectionate brother.

To Joseph Benson

LONDON, December 26, 1769.

DEAR JOSEPH,--Every man of sense who reads the rules of the school may easily conclude that a school so conducted by men of piety and understanding will exceed any other school or academy in Great Britain or Ireland. In this sentiment you can never be altered. And if it was not so conducted since you was there, why was it not You had power enough. You have all the power which I have. You may do just what you please. Dirue, edifica; muta quadrata rotundis.[Horace's Epistles, i. 100: Diruit, aedificat, mutat quadrata rotundis ('He pulls down,he builds,he changes square things to round')] And I will second you to the uttermost.

Trevecca is much more to Lady Huntingdon than Kingswood is to me. It mixes with everything. It is my college, my masters, my students. I do not speak so of this school. It is not mine, but the Lord's. I look for no more honour than money from it.

But I assure you you must not even mutter before her anything of deliverance from all sin. Error errorum, as Count Zinzendorf says; 'heresy of heresies.' 'I will suffer no one in my Society that even thinks of perfection.' However, I trust you shall not only think of but enjoy it. I am glad you defer your journey.--I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate brother.

To Walter Sellon

[34]

LONDON, December 30, 1769.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--It is not yet determined whether I should go to America or not. I have been importuned some time; but nil sat firmi video. ['I see nothing sufficiently strong.' See letter of Jan. 25, 1770.] I must have a clear call before I am at liberty to leave Europe.

You should heat your milk, but never let it boil. Boiling robs it of the most nutritious particles. Take care to keep always your body moderately open, and your stomach will not often complain. Mr. Viner did you great honour. Do not make too much haste in dealing with Elisha Coles. I am afraid the treatise will be too short. And pray add a word to that lively coxcomb Mr. Toplady, not only with regard to Zanchius, but his slander on the Church of England. You would do well to give a reading to both his tracts. He does certainly believe himself to be the greatest genius in England. Pray take care, or notus sit pro suis virtutibus. ['Let him be known in proportion as he deserves.' ]

Mr. Johnson [Thomas Johnson, the Assistant in Lincolnshire East. The Minutes for 1769 give details of the way in which 2,458 19s. 7d. was used in discharging debts.] was grievously short in not mentioning that 'other thing' at the Conference or not till all the money was gone. However, the matter is not much. I think we can procure you thirty pounds in February. I believe you strengthen the hands of our preachers all you can. You will find Billy Minethorp a right man. His resolution in the late affair was admirable. I have scarce ever seen such another instance in the kingdom.--I am

Your affectionate brother.