1786

A DELIGHTFUL OLD AGE

JANUARY 2, 1786, To DECEMBER 27, 1787

To Rev. Mr. Root [1]

LONDON, January 2, 1786.

DEAR SIR, - I am glad you are connected with so good a man as Dr. Stonhouse and that you do not want employment. But I am not at all of your mind that you will be useless therein, although you do not immediately see the fruit of your labor.

I could send you a clergyman directly, but I won't, because he is a dead man. But I have another in my eye whom I will send to immediately to know if he is willing to accept the offer. [Peard Dickinson.]

If I can get time in going to or returning from Bristol, I will call upon you at Cheverell. Peace be with your spirits! - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Rev, Mr. Root, At Great Cheverell,

Near the Devizes.

To Joshua Keighley [2]

LONDON, January 8, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - Poor James seems to have lost al] conscience. You may speak of him in the congregation pro. vided you do not name his name. But I think he will soon have spent his fire. Go you calmly and steadily on your way.

Brother Hoskins is a good man and not a bad preacher. He may change with Brother Warrener for a month or two. - I am, dear Joshua,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Keighley, At the Preaching-house,

In Carmarthen.

To Mrs. Fletcher [3]

LONDON, January 13, 1786.

MY DEAR SISTER, - When I receive letters from other persons, I let them lie perhaps a week or two before I answer them; but it is otherwise when I hear from you. I then think much of losing a day, for fear I should give a moment's pain to one of the most faithful friends I have in the world. The circumstance you add respecting the behavior of those Custom House officers is very well worth relating. Oh, what pity that it was not then made known to their superiors, that those inhospitable wretches might have been prevented from misusing other strangers!

I think your advice is exactly right. With the materials I have already, or can procure in England, I will write and publish as soon as I conveniently can. - I am, my very dear sister,

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Fletcher, At Madeley,

Near Shifnal, Salop.

To Samuel Mitchell [4]

LONDON, January 24, 1786.

DEAR SAMMY, - George Dice desired to be heard face to face with his accusers. I ordered it should be done; but are all the people out of their senses Why does not either he or someone else send me an account of the issue You say, 'The strength of my colleague and brother is almost exhausted.' What wonder, if you continue the service four hours! A mere trick of the devil's to make you murder yourselves. Keep sacredly to the Methodist rules. Conclude the service in an hour. Then your strength will not be exhausted, and then you will have leisure to write down from time to time all the remarkable particulars of the work of God. - I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Sam. Mitchell, of Maguiresbridge,

Near Lisnaskea, Ireland.

To Robert Cart Brackenbury [5]

LONDON, January 28, 1786.

DEAR SIR, - We have great reason to praise God for giving you so open a door in Guernsey: this was, indeed, more than could have been expected, as undoubtedly the father of lies had taken care to send that virulent pamphlet before you. If John Wills continues alive to God, I make no question but he will be useful there.

I am in great hopes that the labors of Dr. Coke (though his time is short) will be attended with a blessing. As long as we insist on the marrow bf religion, Christ reigning in the heart, He will certainly prosper our labors, to His care I commit you; and am, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

R. C. Brackenbury, Esq., St. Helyar's,

Isle of Jersey.

Forwd by yr Hble Servt, 5d. T. Dunn.

To Adam Clarke

LONDON, February 3, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER,-You do well in insisting upon full and present salvation, whether men will hear or forbear; as also in preaching abroad, when the weather permits, and recommending fasting, both by precept and example. But you need not wonder that all these are opposed not only by formalists but by half Methodists. [Clarke was second preacher at Plymouth.] You should not forget French [See letter of Feb. 21.] or anything you have learned. I do not know whether I have read the book you speak of; you may send your translation at your leisure. Be all in earnest, and you shall see greater things than these. - I am, my dear Adam,

Your affectionate brother.

To Samuel Bradburn [6]

LONDON, February 14, 1786.

DEAR SAMMY,-It is well we know that trouble springeth not out of the dust, but that the Lord reigneth. But still, even when we can say, 'It is the Lord,' it is hard to add, 'Let Him do what seemeth Him good.' I remember formerly, when I read these words in the church at Savannah, 'Son of man, behold, I take from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke.' [See letters of Dec. 23, 1782, and Feb. 12, 1789.] I was pierced through as with a sword, and could not utter a word more. But our comfort is, He that made the heart can heal the heart. Your help stands in Him alone. He will command all these things to work together for good. To His tender care I commend you; and am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Adam Clarke [7]

LONDON, February 21, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I like the extract from Mr. Bridaine's Sermon well. Probably it may have a place in the Magazine. It is well you have broken into Stonhouse. Now enlarge your borders while I am with you. Probably you will have rougher weather when I am gone. You may come to the Conference.

You and your fellow laborers should spend some time in consulting together how you may enlarge your borders. This mild weather is almost as good as summer; I preached abroad last Monday. Oh let us snatch every means of redeeming the time! Eternity is at hand! - I am, dear Adam,

Your affectionate brother.

In a few days I shall set out for Bristol.

To Mr. Adam Clarke, At Mr. Walters,

In Plymouth Dock.

To J. Dobson [8]

WEST STREET, February 21, 1786.

My DEAR BROTHER, - If you do not choose to act as steward for our School any longer, give the money which remains in your hands to George Whitfield, who will take the labor upon himself. If you do choose it, pay Sister Mitcham her week's salary, - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To John Ogilvie

LONDON, February 21, 1786.

My DEAR BROTHER, - You see God orders all things well. You have reason to thank Him both for your sickness and your recovery. [He had been ill soon after his appointment to the Isle of Man, but was now recovered.] But whether sick or in health, if you keep in His way you are to prepare your soul for temptations. For how shall we conquer if we do not fight Go on, then, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. Fight the good fight of faith, and lay hold on eternal life! Salvation is nigh ! Seek, desire nothing else! - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Taylor

LONDON, February 21, 1786.

DEAR TOMMY, - Mr. Madan was the person who informed me that adding new stamps is sufficient. Probably other lawyers would deny this. Why To make work for themselves.

'Why can't these gentlemen,' said wise Bishop Gibson, [The Bishop of London. See letters of June 11, 1747, and June 14, 1786.] 'leave the Church Then they could do no more harm.' Read 'no more good,' I believe, if we had then left the Church, we should not have done a tenth of the good which we have done. But I do not insist upon this head. I go calmly and quietly on my way, doing what I conceive to be the will of God. I do not, will not concern myself with what will be done when I am dead. I take no thought about that. If I did, I should probably shut myself up at Kingswood or Newcastle and leave you all to yourselves. - I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Peter Walker

LONDON, February 21, 1786.

DEAR PETER, - Our Lord saw it good to humble you first, and then in due time to lift up your head. But the increase of His work which you have hitherto seen you may look upon as only the promise of a shower. If you and your fellow laborers are zealous for God, you will see greater things than these. Only exhort all that have believed to go on to perfection, and everywhere insist upon both justification and full sanctification as receivable now by simple faith. - I am, dear Peter,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Peter Walker, At the Preaching-house,

In St. Ives, Cornwall.

To Mrs. Middleton [9]

LONDON, February 21, 1786.

MY DEAR SISTER, - If it please God to continue my health and strength, I hope to be at Yarm about the 10th of May and the next day at Darlington. But I shall be obliged to make the best of my way from thence via North of Scotland. I have now so many places to visit that the summer hardly gives me time for my work. How differently does it please Him, who orders all things well, to dispose the lot of his children!

I am called to work: you are called to suffer. And if both these paths lead to the same parish, it is enough; only let us take heed that we lose not the things which we have gained, but that we insure a full reward.

To be under the same roof with you, whether in a palace or a cottage, will be a pleasure to, my dear sister,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Moon

LONDON, February 22, 1786.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I expect (if it pleases God to continue my health and strength) to be at York from the 4th to the 8th; of May. On Monday the 8th I shall probably be at Thirsk, and the next day (Tuesday) at Potto and Hutton. [See Journal, vii. 159-60.]

My business is continually increasing, [See letter of Feb. 25.] so that I am obliged to hasten along. It is a satisfaction to me to think of our meeting once more on earth, for I sincerely love you; and am glad you have not forgotten, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Emma Moon, At Potto,

Near Yarm, Yorkshire.

To Mary Cooke

LONDON, February 23, 1786.

By your manner of writing you make me even more desirous of seeing my dear friend than I was before. I hope to have that pleasure next week. On Tuesday evening I expect to be at Bath (probably I shall preach about six o'clock), and on Wednesday noon at Trowbridge. And remember what I told you before! You are not to have a jot of reserve about you.

I have frequently observed the passage to which you refer in the 3rd chapter to the Romans; and I have always thought there is no manner of difference between by faith and through faith. So that I still believe the meaning is, It is one God who will show mercy to both, and by the very same means.

I shall be glad if it should be in my power to do any service to Miss Martins. If it was convenient for you to be at Bath on Tuesday, I could take you with me to Trowbridge on Wednesday.

Peace be with all your spirits. Adieu!

To Elizabeth Ritchis [10]

LONDON, February 24, 1786.

MY DEAR BETSY,-It is doubtless the will of the Lord we should be guided by our reason so far as it can go. But in many cases it gives us very little light and in others none at all. In all cases it cannot guide us right but in subordination to the unction of the Holy One. So that in all our ways we are to acknowledge Him, and He will direct our paths.

I do not remember to have heard or read anything like my own experience. Almost ever since I can remember I have been led in a peculiar way. I go on in an even line, being very little raised at one time or depressed at another. Count Zinzendorf observes there are three different ways wherein it pleases God to lead His people: some are guided almost in every instance by apposite texts of Scripture; others see a clear and plain reason for everything they are to do; and yet others are led not so much by Scripture or reason as by particular impressions. I am very rarely led by impressions, but generally by reason and by Scripture. I see abundantly more than I feel. I want to feel more love and zeal for God.

My very dear friend, adieu!

To William Sagar

BRISTOL, February 25, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I expect to be at Manchester on Wednesday, April 5; at Chester, Monday, 10th; at Liverpool, Wednesday, 12th; at Warrington, Saturday, 15th; at Preston, Monday, 17th; at Blackburn, Tuesday, 18th; Wednesday, 19th, at Padiham; Burnley, 12 [o'clock], Colne 6 [o'clock]: so as to lodge with you on Thursday, 2oth. I am to be in the evening at Keighley. I am obliged to make haste. [See letter of Feb. 22 to Mrs. Moon.] Concerning building and other matters, I hope we shall have time to talk when we meet. [ Sager was the principal means in building the chapel at Burnley. See letter of March 12, 1780.] - I am

Your affectionate brother.

If you know how to mend my plan, send me word Manchester.

To John Stretton [11]

LONDON, February 26, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - It pleases God that my health and strength are just the same now that they were forty years ago. But there is a difference in one point: I was then frequently weary, my body sunk under my work; whereas now, from on week or month to another, I do not know what weariness means.

By removing such instruments as Arthur Thorney [Arthur Thorney, or Thomey, appears to have fallen a victim to hardship and persecution.] and Mr. Fletcher, our Lord puts us in mind of what we are eve prone to forget - that the help which is done upon earth He doeth it Himself, and that He has no need of man. The pillars fall, yet the building stands. Why The hand of the Most High supports it.

'If an angel,' says one, 'could be sent down from heaven, and were to dwell in a body threescore years, and in that time converted but one immortal soul, it would be worth all his labor.' But you have now seen more than one sinner converted to God. Probably the number now is not small Of those who are translated into the kingdom of God's dear Son. Go on, my brother! Be your present success more or less, be not weary! In due time you shall reap if you faint not! I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Stretton, Harbor Grace,

Newfoundland.

To Charles Atmore

BRISTOL, March 3, 1786.

DEAR CHARLES, - Mr. Sagar, I doubt not, has shown you before this what places I propose visiting in the Colne Circuit. [See letter of Feb. 25.] If you think it best that any alteration should be made, you may send me word in time. I expect to be at Birmingham on Saturday, the 25th instant, and the day after at Manchester. I will administer the Lord's Supper wherever you see good.

O be zealous, especially in enforcing Christian perfection! - I am, dear Charles,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Atmore, At the Preaching-house,

In Colne, Lancashire.

To Samuel Bardsley

BRISTOL, March 4, 1786.

DEAR SAMMY, - I am glad to hear that God has been pleased to enlarge His work in Scarborough, where I hope to be (on my return from Scotland) about the 14th of June. How the circuits may be more advantageously [divided] is proper to be considered at the Conference. [Pocklington Circuit was formed in 1786. See letter of Feb. 23, 1785.]

The alteration which has been made in America and Scotland [The ordinations of 1784.] has nothing to do with our kingdom. I believe I shall not separate from the Church of England till my soul separates from my body.

The Life of Mr. John Fox [The Life of John Foxe the Martyrologist, bearing his son's name, was prefixed to the 1641 edition of Acts and Monuments.] is really remarkable. I do not know but it may be worth while to republish it.

If Mr. Fletcher [See letter of Sept. 15, 1785.] had traveled like you or me, I believe he would have lived these twenty years. - I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Bardsley, At Capt. Robinson's,

In Bridlington Quay, Yorkshire.

To Mrs. Bowman [12]

BRISTOL, March 4, 1786.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I write freely to you because I love you. While you are providentially called to this confinement, it will be sanctified to you, and will prove a greater blessing than it would prove if you had more liberty. In this case private exercises will supply the want of public; so that you will see our Lord does all things for your profit, that you may be a partaker of His holiness. You have only one thing to do - leaving the first principles of the doctrine of Christ, go on to perfection. Expect continually the end of your faith, the full salvation of your soul. You know, whenever it is given, it is to be received only by naked faith. Therefore who knows but you may receive it now The Lord is nigh at hand, my dear Hannah. Trust Him and praise Him! - I am

Yours affectionately.

To Dr. Coke [13]

BRISTOL, March 12, 1786.

DEAR SIR, - I greatly approve of your proposal for raising a subscription in order to send missionaries to the Highlands of Scotland, the Islands of Jersey and Guernsey, the Leeward Islands, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and Newfoundland. It is not easy to conceive the extreme want there is, in all these places of men that will not count their lives dear unto themselves, so they may testify the gospel of the grace of God. - I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Tattershall

March 20, 1786.

DEAR TOMMY, - I expect to be at Macclesfield, April 1; Manchester, Wednesday, 4; Warrington, Saturday, 15; Halifax, Monday, 24; York, Thursday, May 4; Newcastle, Friday, 12; at Newcastle again June 3; at Nottingham, Saturday, July 8. Then I am to visit Derby, Hinckley, and Birmingham. I allow two nights for Derby. Dispose of them in the manner you think best. But I am apt to imagine it would be most advisable to preach at Belper about noon. [Tattershall was Assistant at Derby. See Journal, vii. 185, for the arrangement as to Belper made without Wesley's knowledge.]

But is it not best to take Derby in my way from Sheffield to Nottingham - I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

PS.-Blessed is the man that endureth temptation.

To his Brother Charles

MANCHESTER, April 6, 1785.

DEAR BROTHER, - I am glad you are again able to officiate at the chapels. Let us ' anage wisely the last stake.' [See letter of June 27, 1755.]

For some years John Davis was a mere mule; he would neither lead nor drive. But it is enough that he finished his course well; and we are sure Nancy Sharland did so. [See letter of Nov. 15, 1780.]

Sammy Bradburn thought of going further with me. But the frost and snow drove him back. I believe the loss of his wife will be one of the greatest blessings which he has ever met with in his life. [On March 13 he had taken Bradburn to travel with him. On the 2ist at Gloucester he proposed marriage to Sophia Cooke (who suggested to Raikes his Sunday-School efforts), and they were married on Aug. 10. See letters of Feb. 14 and June 20.]

Mrs. Fletcher will not be in haste to remove from Madeley, though her light is there almost hid under a bushel. Mr. Ireland will give me no help with regard to writing Mr. Fletcher's Life, 'because he intends to publish it himself!' [He was at Madeley on March 26. See letters of Oct. 2 and Dec. 31, 1785.] Let him do it, and I will follow him. Where is your elegy [See letter of Dec. 9 to Mrs. Fletcher.] You may say as my father in his verses on Mr. Nelson [Robert Nelson, the Nonjuror, who did much to promote schools and parochial libraries. See letter of June 13, 1733, n.]

Let friendship's sacred name excuse

The last effort of an expiring muse.

Can you or I ever have such another subject Melville Horne hopes to be ordained on Trinity Sunday.

Indeed, I love the Church as sincerely as ever I did; and I tell our Societies everywhere, 'The Methodists will not leave the Church, at least while I live.' I doubt I shall not half agree with our friends in Scotland; but I shall know more and you will hear more when I see them.

While I live Dr. Coke and I shall go through Ireland by turns. He will have work enough this year with gentle Edward Smyth. [Smyth opened Bethesda Chapel, Dublin, on June 25.] I doubt Edward 'needs a bridle'; but who can put the bit into his mouth I am not sorry your concerts are come to an end. [The concerts given by his sons in their father's house; Wesley attended one on Jan. 25, 1781. Samuel had become a Roman Catholic; his father's dream probably had been on this subject, and the text points to Wesley's hope of a coming restoration. See Journal, vi. 303; and letters of Aug. 19, 1784, and March 18, 1788, to his nephew.] Remember 'your dream concerning Sammy! 'The damsel is not dead, but sleepeth!'

Mr. Pennant's I know, and Dr. Johnson's I know; but I know nothing of Mr. Boswell's Tour to the Hebrides. [Boswell's Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides was published in 1786.] I should imagine it was worth reading. Peace be with all your spirits! Adieu!

To Hannah Ball

LIVERPOOL, April 13, 1785.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I am glad to hear that your Society prospers and that the work of God continues to increase in the town. It always will if prayer-meetings are kept up (without interfering with the classes and bands). These have been and still are attended with a blessing in every part of England. And Sister Coussins, [Jonathan Coussins was now Assistant in Oxfordshire.] joining heart and hand with you, may greatly forward the work of God. See that there never be any shyness or coldness between you, Still provoke one another to love and to good works.

But I am sorry that you do not love me. You did once, or I am much mistaken. But if you did so still, you would not barely tell me, and that in general terms only, that you had been in distress, but you would have enlarged upon it and told me all the particulars. [Miss Ball's journal shows that she was passing through much anxiety and spiritual struggle at this time. See Memoir, p. 156.] What! Do you think I do not care for you that my love to my dear friend is grown cold! Nay; surely I am as much interested in your happiness now as I was ten years ago. Therefore use as a friend, my dear sister,

Yours as ever.

My kind love to Nancy. [Her sister Ann. See letter of Aug. 14, 1771.]

To Lancelot Harrison [14]

BLACKBURN, April 17, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - When I return out of Scotland, I shall be able to fix my journey through Lincolnshire, of which you will have notice time enough. You may be at the Conference. I would be glad if you would take as particular an account as you possibly can of the disturbances at Brother Wilson's house from the beginning till now. When these accounts are sufficiently attested, they may be of great use. I expect to be at York from May the 4th to the 8th. - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Lancelot Harrison, At Mr.

Robert Green's, In Louth, Lincolnshire.

To his Brother Charles [15]

KEIGHLEY, April 18, 1786.

DEAR BROTHER, - My fever lasted hardly three days, and then went away in a violent fit of the cramp. [He was ill after reaching Manchester on Friday afternoon, April 7, and slept much; on Monday he was able to resume his work. See Journal, vii. 154d.] So did a fever I had a year ago.

Eight or ten preachers, it is probable (but I have not reel with one yet), will say something about leaving the Church before the Conference ends. It is not unlikely many will be driven out of it where there are Calvinist ministers. The last time I was at Scarborough I earnestly exhorted our people to go to church; and I went myself. But the wretched minister preached such a sermon that I could not in conscience advise them to hear him any more.

They will ordain no one without my full and free consent. It is not true that they have done it already. As to the Scots, I have no hopes of winning them by fair means. If I see Scotland again, I shall fight with a flail. The work of God goes on gloriously in many places, and most of the preachers are much devoted to God. Peace be with you and yours!

To Thomas Carlill [16]

NEAR BIRSTALL, April 30, 1786.

DEAR TOMMY, - (1) Where will you get five hundred pounds (2) I like the Gainsborough proposal well. (3) We are not a little obliged to Mrs. Fisher; but advise her that she may not build a [fine] house. Epworth House is the prettiest I remember in Lincolnshire.

If I live till June I hope to see both Gainsborough and Epworth.-I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Thomas Carlill,

At Gainsborough.

To his Brother Charles

LEEDS, May 3, 1786.

DEAR BROTHER, - If there be a man in England who understands Mrs. Horton's case, it is Dr. Wilson. I advise John Horton to find him out if he be above ground. [Mary, daughter of Henry Durbin, a chemist in Bedminster and a Bristol preacher, whom Wesley married to John Horton, of Highbury Place, London, on Sept. 21, 1780. Her husband was a merchant and on the Common Council. He was one of the executors of Wesley's Will. Mrs. Horton died on May 26, 1786, at the age of thirty-four. Charles Wesley wrote a long poem on his friend:

And through a blameless life expressed

The tempers of the Lamb.

See Journal, vii. 295; C. Wesley's Journal, if. 412-18; letter of May 18, 1786; and for Dr. Andrew Wilson, Oct. 13, 1770, to Lowes.]

I do not know that anyone opens your letters. They come to me with the seal unbroken.

As you observe, one may leave a church (which I would advise in some cases) without leaving the Church. Here we may remain in spite of all wicked or Calvinistical ministers. [See letter of April 18.]

Commonly, when I am in London, I am so taken up, that I cannot often spare time to go three miles backward and forward. That was the πρώτον ψεύδος, ['The first false step.' Charles lived in Marylebone, where Mrs. Gumley had given him the lease of her house in Chesterfield Street. See letter of May 18.] the getting you an house so far from me as well as hr from both the chapels.

I cannot help it if people have no docity. Seven guineas Patty has had from me within this month, besides ten or eleven which she has worried me to give Nancy Jervas this winter. [Mrs. Hall had a small income of her own, but was a good deal dependent on her brother. See Stevenson's Wesley Family, pp. 380-1.]

It is a bad dog that is not worth whistling for. In the times I have been at Bedford, Mr. Barham [Charles Wesley mentions Mr. Barham in a letter to his son Charles from Bristol in 1782. See his Journal, ii. 273.] never owned me, much less invited me to his house. I do not know him if I meet him. Perhaps he loves me - at a distance. Peace be with you and yours!

Pray tell Brother Horton and Kemp [Richard Kemp, one of the original trustees of City Road Chapel, had a large business as a framework-knitter in Whitecross Street. He died on Sept. 4, 1787, aged sixty-six. See Stevenson's City Road Chapel, p. 530.] I have had two letters from Mrs. Holmes (Mr. Holmes's widow) informing me that John Price has been for some time quite sober and very diligent in attending the school. In consequence of which she pleads hard for payment of his salary.

My route is: Monday, 8, Thirsk; Wednesday, 10, Barnard Castle; Saturday, 13, and Wednesday, 17, Edinburgh; and Wednesday, 31, Tuesday, 23, Aberdeen. Adieu.

To the Earl of Leven [17]

RICHMOND, May 9,1786.

MY LORD, If it be convenient, I purpose to wait upon upon [sic] your Lordship at Melville House about two in the afternoon on Friday on the 22nd .instant. Wishing all happiness to your Lordship and all your good family. - I am, my Lord,

Your Lordship's obedient servant.

To Mrs. Brisco () [18]

RICHMOND, May 10, 1786.

DEAR SISTER, - The work of God is, I am afraid, much hindered in Thirsk by the misunderstanding between Mr. Oastler and Mr. Taylor. If it be possible, an end should be put to this. They should in any wise meet and compromise matters. That things should stand as they are is a scandal to religion. I have known you for many years. You love to do good. Forward this reconciliation, and you will oblige many, as well as, my dear sister,

Yours affectionately.

To James Copeland [19]

GLASGOW, May 14, 1786.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - There is no reasonable doubt you had at the time you mention a real blessing from God. I make no question but He did then give you a taste of His pardoning love; but you was not then thoroughly convinced of inbred sin - of the sin of your nature. God is now convincing you of this in order to give you a clean heart; and Satan strives hereby to drive you to despair. But regard him not. Look unto Jesus; dare to believe I On Christ lay hold! Wrestle with Christ in mighty prayer. Yea,

A sigh will reach His heart; a look

Will bring Him down from heaven.

He is at hand! - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To his Brother Charles

NEAR EDINBURGH, May 18, 1786.

DEAR BROTHER, - So Sister Horton is in peace. This may be a blessed visitation for Mr. Horton. Perhaps it will prove in the event one of the greatest blessings which he ever receive in his life. I hope you have wrote to Mr. Durbin. Alas what do riches avail him! [See letter of May 3.]

Certainly Providence permitted injudicious men to you three miles from me, who should rather have been always at my elbow. [See letter of May 3.]

I doubt whether there be not an anachronism in the of John Price i; whether they do not now impute to him what was done long ago.

My Journal should have been sent several days since but Joseph Bradford trusted another person to transcribe it. [The portion ready for the printer. The 1779-82 extract was dated end 'Newington, Jan. 19, 1786.'] This Society flourishes much. I hope to be here again the 31st instant. Peace be with you all! Adieu.

To Lancelot Harrison

NEWCASTLE, June 4, 1785.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I hope to be at Epworth on Wednesday, the 21st instant, at Grimsby on Thursday the 22d, at Horncastle on Friday 23d, and at Gainsborough on Saturda the 24th. You will take care that timely notice be given every place.

Strongly and explicitly exhort all the believers to go on perfection: then their soul will live. - I am, with love to Sister Harrison,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Kitty Warren

SUNDERLAND, June 8, 1785.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I am glad our brethren are aware, that bold, bad man who has bid adieu both to conscience and shame. Their wisdom is now not to think of him or talk of him at all. I am afraid he would turn Calvinist, Turk, or anything for food and idleness.

Mr. Valton has not been able to preach in two years so much as he used to do in eight or ten months. Every year I have many applications for the continuance of profitable preachers more than two years in a circuit. I have had several such within these two or three months: as well as the continence of two preachers in the same circuit. But I dare not comply. I advise Mr. Cole [The second preacher in the Pembroke Circuit. He remained there Assistant at the next Conference.] to instruct the next preachers thoroughly in the nature of the case, and to encourage them to persist in the whole Methodist discipline.

I hope you are not weary of well-doing, and that you will never bury your talent in the earth. Your labor has not been in vain, [See letter of July 31, 1782.] and in due time you will reap if you faint not. It is always a pleasure to me to see you, and I love to converse with you. But sometimes it has been a concern to me that I could see you so seldom. There is something in your spirit that is exceedingly agreeable to me. I find in you sprightliness and sweetness joined together. May you be filled, my dear Kitty, with the whole fruit of the Spirit! This is the constant wish of

Yours most affectionately.

To Henry Brooke [20]

WHITBY, June 14, 1786.

DEAR HARRY, - I will give you an answer to your heart's content.

In the year 1729 four young gentlemen joined together at Oxford, all zealous members of the Church of England, and all determined to be Bible Christians. In six years they increased to sixteen, and were exactly of the same mind still. In 1738, only two of these were left together; but a few more joined them, who continually increased till some hundreds were joined together. But they still constantly attended the Church; only if any Dissenter desired to unite with them they had no objection to his attending that worship to which he had been accustomed.

But in 1740 Dr. Gibson, then Bishop of London, said, 'Cannot Messrs, Wesleys leave the Church Then they could do no more harm.' This we well understood. It meant,' They could do no more good; for not one in ten of their present hearers would hear them.' [See letter of Feb. 21 to Thomas Taylor.] But, whether they would or no, we would not leave it; our conscience would not permit.

In 1743, the Rules of our Society were published; one of which was, 'to attend the Church and Sacrament.' This all our members (except Dissenters) were required to do, or they could not remain with us.

In 1744, at our first Conference, we considered ourselves (Methodist preachers), as extraordinary messengers whom God had raised up to provoke to jealousy the ordinary messengers, the clergy; to preach the gospel to the poor, and to call all men of every denomination to worship Him in spirit and in truth. But it did not once come into our mind to separate from the Church or form ourselves into a distinct party. And herein was a new phenomenon in the earth, a thing never seen before - a body of men highly favored of God, who yet chose to abide in their own religious community, and not to separate themselves, from this very motive, that they might be servants of all.

But it was not easy to keep to this resolution. For those among us who had been Dissenters were frequently urging those words, 'Come out from among them, and be ye separate.' And many of the clergy strengthened their hands either by their railing and lying accusations or by their wicked lives or false doctrines; whereby many were hardened in sin, and many who began to run well returned as a dog to his vomit.

These objections were so frequently and strongly urged, that in the year 1758 it was fully considered in the Leeds Conference' whether we should separate from the Church or no.' After weighing the whole matter calmly, we determined upon the negative. Mr. Ingham, being present, commended our determination in very strong terms; concluding whenever the Methodists leave the Church God will leave them. [See letter of Aug. 19, 1785.]

To prevent it we all agreed (1) to exhort all our people constantly to attend the church and sacrament; and (2), still to preach on Sundays, morning and evening, not in the church hours. Indeed, by taking the contrary steps, by exhorting our people not to go to Church, or (which came to the same thing) by appointing to preach in the church hours, we should separate from it at once.

Last year the case of our brethren in North America was considered, wholly cut off both from the English Church and State. In so peculiar a case I believed it my duty to take an extraordinary step in order to send them all the help I could. [See letter of Sept. 10, 1784.] And I bless God it has had an admirable effect.

'But why,' say some, 'should not you take the same step here 'Because it is not the same case. They separate from nobody. They had no Church! alas! no King! We have both.

'Well, but weigh their reasons. Should we go to church to hear ourselves abused, by railing, yea and lying accusations 'What said that blessed man Philip Henry, [See letter of Oct. 18, 1778.] when his friend said (after hearing such a sermon), 'I hope, sir, you will not go to church any more' 'Indeed, I will go in the afternoon; if the minister does not know his duty, I bless God I know mine.'

We are members of the Church of England, we are no particular sect or party, we are friends to all, we quarrel with none for their opinions or mode of worship, we love those of the Church wherein we were brought up, but we impose them upon none; in some unessential circumstances we vary a little from the usual modes of worship, and we have several little prudential helps peculiar to ourselves; but still we do not, will not, dare not separate from the Church till we see other reasons than we have seen yet. Till then I say with St. Austin (only taking the word 'Heretic' in the scriptural sense, which has nothing to do with opinions), Errare possum, hreticus esse nolo.-I am, dear Harry,

Yours very affectionately.

To Jasper Winscom

EPWORTH, June 17, 1786.

DEAR JASPER, - I am afraid your attorney at the Assizes was greatly wanting either in skill or honesty. Otherwise why did he not move the court for costs of suit. These ought to be borne by those that are cast in any trial. As to commencing another prosecution, I know not what to say. I can neither advise one way nor the other. [See letters of May 9, 1785, and Sept. 30, 1788.] --I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Samuel Bradburn

CROWLE, June 20, 1786.

DEAR SAMMY, - As soon as I saw you and Sophy Cooke together at Gloucester it came into my mind at once, There is a wife for Bradburn (though I did not tell anybody). [See next letter.] I was therefore nothing surprised the other day when I received hers and your letters, and I am inclined to think London will be the best place both for you and her. It will be safer for you to visit Gloucester now and then than it would be to reside there. As to your children, two of them may be kept abroad, as they are now; and I imagine that, as our family is not very large, Sophy would very well supply the place of an housekeeper. But this should be a time of much prayer to you both. - I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Sophia Cooke [21]

CROWLE, June 20, 1786.

Surely you never can have need to use any ceremony with me. You may think aloud and tell me all that is in your heart. As soon as ever I saw Mr. Bradburn and you together I believed you would be more nearly united. His former wife never wanted anything; neither need any of our preachers' wives. They neither want nor abound. They have all things needful for life and godliness. But I am not a fair judge. I am partial. I long so much to have you under my own roof that I cannot divest myself of prejudice in the matter. I can only say,' Give yourself to prayer; and then act, in the name and in the fear of God, as you are fully persuaded in your own mind.' - I am

Yours affectionately.