CONTENTS.
SERMON I.
He that winneth souls is wise. Prov. xi. 30 1
SERMON II.
He shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee
in all thy ways. Psalm xci. 11 22
SERMON III.
He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also
in much : and he that is unjust in the least is un
just also in much. Luke, xvi. 10 4f!
SERMON IV.
I say unto you, that except your righteousness shall
exceed the righteousness of the scribes and pha-
risees, ye shall in no case enter the kingdom of
heaven. Matthew, v. 20 68
SERMON V.
One thing is needful. Luke, x. 42 8L
SERMON VI.
What I do thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know
hereafter. John, xiii. 7 95
SERMON VII.
He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious
seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing,
bringing his sheaves with him. Psalm cxxvi. 6. . Hi
xxxvi CONTENTS.
SERMON VIII.
The light of the body is the eye : if therefore thine
eye be single, thy whole body shall be full, of light.
But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be
full of darkness. Matt. vi. 22, 23 125
SERMON IX.
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and
with all thy strength. Mark, xii. 30 136
SERMON X.
Remember the sabbath-day, to keep it holy. Exodus,
xx. 8 165
SERMON XI.
Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended :
but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which
are behind, and reaching forth unto these things
which are before, I press towards the mark for the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
Philip, iii. 13, 14 186
SERMON XII.
And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, How
long halt ye between two opinions ? If the Lord be
God, then follow him : but if Baal, follow him.
1 Kings, xviii. 21 207
SERMON XIII.
By the Rev. John Wesley.
There the wicked cease from troubling ; and there the
weary be at rest. Job, iii. 17 227
ON THE SIGHT OF A CORPSE.
By the Rev. Charles Wesley .213
SERMONS.
SERMON I.
(Preached before the University of Oxford.)
He that winneth souls is wise.
Prov. xi. 30.
In a place where philosophy or the love of
wisdom is so universally professed and so care,
fully cultivated, where so many are obliged by
their office to study and practise this particular
sort of wisdom, and where more are designed
and endeavouring to qualify themselves for the
same sacred function, it cannot but be highly
proper to make that wisdom the subject of our
consideration, which so great a part of us are
B
2 SERMON I.
engaged by such peculiar ties to recommend
both by our lives and doctrines ; and to explain
and enforce this important truth, " He that
winneth souls is wise." He that winneth souls—
that draweth them from vice to virtue, from
rebellion against God to obedience to his holy
laws—that recovers them from darkness and
the shadow of death to the paths of light and
peace—that disentangles them from the fatal
snare from which they had no hope, nay, no
desire of escaping—that disappoints the de
stroyer of his prey, even when he said, " there
is none to help them "—he is wise indeed ! as
will be evident if we consider : First, the end
he proposes ; Secondly, the means that lead
to it.
First, the end he proposes.—Winning souls
may be considered first as bringing glory to God.
It is true, no action of any created being can do
this in a strict sense, can at all add to that essen
tial glory wherewith hisCreator was clothed from
eternity : yet, in a lower sense, whatever we do
may be done to the glory of God; that is, may
at least remotely tend to manifest his glory, to
increase the honour paid to him by his creatures,
SERMON I. 3
to make him more known and more beloved by
spreading his holy name, and adorning his
gospel. And in this sense he that winneth
souls eminently advances the glory of God,
by displaying his glorious nature and attributes
to the sons of men, who alone of all the visible
creation are capable of contemplating them.
Man alone of all the inhabitants of this world
can acknowledge and praise Him that made it ;
can raise his thoughts and affections from sen
sible objects to Him " whom no man hath
seen or can see:" and to persuade him to make
this true use of the privileges he enjoys, to
declare to him the wonderful \vorks which
God hath done, the wisdom and goodness he
hath shown in all his works, is as noble a
way of advancing his glory as any to which
any creature can aspire.
It was for this very thing that God wrought
those works, that his eternal power and god
head might be known; that the invisible
nature of him might be seen in them:—" He
spake and they were made." With this de
sign were the heavens and the earth created,
and all the hosts of them ; for this, the Al
ii 2
4 SERMON I.
mighty formed man of the dust of the ground,
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of
life ; with the same great view he preserves
what he has made, and upholds all things by
the word of his power—with the same view, he
withheld not from us his Son, his only Son !
He gave Him to us after he had freely given us
all things ! that his name might be known and
glorified amongst men. This purpose it is
which the Omnipotent God hath uniformly
pursued through our creation, preservation, and
redemptions; and this purpose it is (seeing the
glory of God is inseparably connected with
the winning of souls) which the wise man, of
whom we are speaking, is continually pro
moting, as well as its necessary consequence :
with regard to which, we may, in the second
place, consider the end he proposes, namely,
the good it confers on every person whom he
wins to glorify God. Now this is of two sorts;
deliverance from misery and advancement to
happiness. Of the former we need only ob
serve this one circumstance, that it is eternal:
this alone is abundantly sufficient to show us
the greatness of it ; to evince that, if it were
SERMON I. 5
proposed either to save the whole world, or to
save a soul—to preserve ten thousand millions
from suffering pain sixty years, or to save one
man from being in pain, though but equal
pain, to all eternity—a wise man would not
pause a moment which were the nobler in
stance of mercy; seeing, although as many
men as there are sands on the sea shore were
to be miserable for sixty years, the whole sum
of misery they sustained would bear no pro
portion to the endless misery of one, than
finite to infinite, than time to eternity.
This simple consideration is enough to give
us a general notion of that happiness, the en
joyment of which is secured to him who is
rescued from endless misery. That this happi
ness is eternal we know, and therefore need not
inquire into the particulars ; nor indeed can
we know, if it were possible to man to utter
them. St. Paul, doubtless, after having been
in the third heaven, would have been best able
to have done it ; but since even he was unequal
to such a task, well may we decline so fruitless
an attempt : only we are expressly told that no
pain is there, but inexhaustible rivers of plea
6 SERMON I.
sure ; that the soul that hungers and thirsts
after righteousness shall there be satisfied
with good, and no desire return unsatisfied
and empty ; and that part of this happiness
will be an intimate union with the spirits of
just men made perfect, of the general assem
bly of the first-born, of an innumerable com
pany of blessed angels, and lastly, the pre
sence of God, the judge of all, and of Jesus,
the adorable mediator of the new covenant.
Here is wisdom ; the pursuing such an end
as this ; the recovering him that was just sink
ing into the gulf of misery to happiness in
comprehensible, eternal! This is the good
which he is the means of procuring to that
soul which is brought into the path of holi
ness, over and above the delight and good
which results to himself ; which is thirdly to
be considered. And no small part of this
is the honour of answering the end of his cre
ation, promoting at once the glory of God and
the good of mankind ; of sharing in the office
of those superior natures who continually
minister to the heirs of salvation ; of working
together with God! of being a fellow-labourer
t
SERMON 1. 7
with the ever blessed Spirit, and Jesus Christ
the righteous ! —an honour, which, however
lightly it be esteemed by those who account
zeal to be madness, is justly prized by all
whose supposed foolishness is wiser than the
wisdom of this world !—an honour which shall
not fail to be repaid them, in part, at the very
moment they endeavour to rescue the fallen, if
not by men, yet by those more discerning
beings who disdain not to call good men their
fellow-creatures; and by their common master,
who hath expressly declared, " Those who
honour me, I will honour."
Nor. can it even be said of this honour, as is
true too often of the honour of men, that it
brings no advantage ; this is never the case
with the honour which cometh from God.
None can be conscious of this, without an im
mediate advantage ; without such an internal
satisfaction as words cannot express. None
can resemble their heavenly Father in extend
ing his mercy even to the evil and unjust,
without experiencing even at that time some
degree of His happiness and goodness whom
he imitates. No human creature can have so
8 SERMON I.
little of the law of kindness written in his
heart, as not to feel it burn within him
while he is saving a soul from death. A fore
taste this of that more ample reward which
shall hereafter enlarge his heart, wlien he,
with those whom he hath been a means of
saving, shall together enter into the joy of
their Lord. We need not dispute whether St.
James touches upon that reward, in those re
markable words, " Brethren, if any of you do
err from the truth, and one convert him, let
him know that he which converteth a sinner
from the error of his way shall save a soul
from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins."
Now supposing those be only the sins of the
persons restored to virtue and happiness, and
not the infirmities of the guide who restored
him, yet how will every good man rejoice in
the joy of the Penitent ! and how eminent
a share must he possess who was the in
strument of his salvation ! who has occa
sioned that joy in heaven which is more
over one sinner that repenteth, than over
ninety and nine just persons that need no re
pentance ;v to whom under God it is owing that
6
I 1
SERMON I. 9
all his sins which he hath committed are not
once mentioned unto him, that the hand
writing against him is blotted out, and his
name written in the book of life. Neither need
we inquire what foundation there is for this
opinion of the ancients, that the same reward
awaits those who give witness to the truth
by dying for it themselves, or saving a soul
from death : for whether the reward of a
martyr or of a winner of souls be one or not,
sure we are that either is eminently glorious
above that of common Christians. Neither the
word of God nor his attributes suffer us to
doubt that different men will have different re
wards in heaven ; that as one star differeth
from another star in glory, so will it be in the
resurrection of the dead. Every man shall re
ceive his own reward according to his own
labour ; and some of the highest of these re
wards are promised to the converters of sin
ners. All who are admitted into the presence
of God will be glorious, but these shall ex
ceed in glory : they that are wise shall shine
as the brightness of the firmament, and they
10 SERMON I.
that turn many to righteousness as the stars for
ever and ever.
Such is the wisdom of him that winneth
souls ; such is the end which he proposes : —the
means which lead to the end, I come now,
under my Second head, to consider.
The first of these is, the regulating the under
standing of him whom he endeavours to reclaim ;
the removing those confused apprehensions of
things, those false judgments and ill-grounded
conclusions which he has long been planting in
himself, and which, perhaps, have been striking
root for many years. Whether the first seeds of
these were early sown by education, or after
wards by ill advice or example ; whether they
relate to faith or practice in general, or to any
particular branch of either ; whether they are
errors of a whole sect of men, or peculiar to
the person infected, they are carefully to be
extirpated, and no root of bitterness be left.
In particular there is an absolute necessity
of removing the confused notion which most
vicious men entertain of piety. They apprehend
religion "as a terrible spectre looking down
SERMON I. 11
from heaven only to enslave the earth, stand
ing over them with so horrible an aspect as
damps the vigour of all who behold her :" and
such a monster as this they cannot but regard
as the bane of happiness, the destroyer of de
light, and the imposer of numerous burdens
too heavy to be borne; whence they naturally
infer, that to cast off her yoke is the surest
mark of a good understanding, and that the
first rule of prudence is, " Be not wise over
much ;" he who is so, they are persuaded, de
stroys himself, and cannot be over-wise.
To induce one who thus reasons to be wise
unto salvation, he must have his mind enlight-.
ened, and his judgment informed. That this
absurd notion of true religion may be removed,
he must be led to examine the truth, that he
may perceive the monster of his imagination
was a false image, and had neither the real
shape or native loveliness of genuine piety ;
that he may be taught to know that righteous
ness hath looked down from heaven, in order
that mercy may flourish upon earth, that men
may have a light to guide them to her, whose
12 SERMON I.
ways are ways of pleasantness, and all whose
paths are peace.
He is to be convinced that religion forbids no
pleasure butwhatwould deprivehim of agreater,
nor requires any pain to be embraced, unless
in order to obtain more than equal pleasure.
The plain consequence of which, he may readily
observe, is, that a good understanding have all
they that do thereafter ; and that there is the
very same danger of being righteous over-much,
provided a man knows what righteousness is,
as of having over-much ease and safety in this
life, or over-much happiness in the other.
But the convincing a vicious man of these
truths is only one step towards his conversion,
and often no step at all, since every conviction
is not a lasting one. No, a man who has long
been wedded to a mistake, if he be at last
convinced, will soon unconvince himself, if he
wishes it, if his xvill opposes the truth, which
has only fixed itself in his understanding, not
in his heart.
Old prejudices, though not soon dismissed,
are easily received again ; and the new opinions
SERMON I. 13
which seemed so firmly implanted in their
place, are by an obstinate mind quickly re
established. Therefore to confirm those who
are brought to the knowledge of the truth is
as necessary as to convince them ; and when
this is done, when due care has been used to
strengthen his understanding after enlightening
it, then is the time to employ the other great
means of winning souls, namely, to regulate
his affections. Indeed without this the other
is of little effect. He that would enlighten the
head must cleanse the heart, otherwise the
disorder of the will again disorders the intellect,
and perverseness of affection will cause an equal
perverseness of judgment ; for whatever incli
nation is contrary to reason is destructive of it,
and whoever makes the world his god, the God
of this world will blind his eyes.
This then is the most important work of all,
namely, the "laying the axe to the root of the
tree ;" the prevailing on a man to pray for the
grace of God to enable him to purify his heart
till it be holy and undefiled ; to resolve upon
sacrificing all his darling lusts which will not
submit to the law of God ; to stifle every inch
u SERMON I.
nation which is contrary to the spirit of holi
ness, which would rather prevent his entering
upon, or retard his progress in, the race set be
fore him ; to lay aside pride, malice, envy, re
venge, covetousness, intemperance, in short
every passion, every habit, which would keep
him a stranger to the covenant of promise, an
alien from the commonwealth of Israel, with
out hope, and without God in the world.
When he has determined to renounce these
inclinations which are evil in themselves, the
next point is to bring him to a resolution of
transferring those which are not so to new
objects, of setting those affections on things
above, and not on things of the earth, on things
that were designed to be the delight, and en
gage the desires, of rational creatures, and are
accordingly adequate to their capacities, which
no perishable objects are ; to a resolution of
seeking his happiness, not in things that are
seen, but in things that are not seen : not like
the half Christian (to speak in the words of an
excellent man) to " use God, and enjoy the
world," but as one who knows his privilege
better, " who uses the world, but enjoys God."
SERMON I. 15
After inspiring a sinner with this generous
resolution, one step more is to be taken, and
that is to fix him in it, to guard him from a
relapse, lest his last state should be worse than
the first ; in spite of the arts which his old
enemies will soon use to draw him from his
steadfastness, to hold up his goings in the way
that his footsteps slip not ; to watch over his
soul till he has fully proved the whole armour
of God, that he may be able to wrestle with
principalities and powers, with the rulers of
the darkness of this world, to quench every
fiery dart of the wicked, and, having done all,
to stand.
He who hath thus enlightened the under
standing, and regulated the will of a sinner, he
hath eminently advanced the glory of his divine
master, he hath rescued a fellow-being from
destruction, and for such a one there is pre
pared, " an exceeding weight of glory," " eter
nal in the heavens ;" for he that " winneth souls
is" truly ^ec wise."
But is not this a higher degree of wisdom
than any one born of a woman hath yet
attained ? This is the inference that a man
4
i
16 SERMON I.
of reflection would naturally draw from what
has been said of it. Who is sufficient for these
things ? who is equal to so vast an undertak
ing ? We have heard indeed that it is easy for
a designing man to lead others whither he
pleases if his object be to lead them into evil, to
bring them into just what opinions he chooses,
and set their affections by his own. But he
who has seen how slowly a confused appre
hension is cleared, or a prejudiced judgment
rectified, and how unwillingly men admit a
truth which they have long despised, even as
it were a sword piercing through their hearts
to rend asunder a darling error ; he who has
observed that a wicked man is almost as easily
induced to cut off a right hand, or pluck out a
right eye, as to set his affections on things
above, and mortify his beloved lusts ; in a
word, he who knows that the persuading an
ungodly man to be happy is the persuading
him out of his fancy, judgment, and incli
nation, all which must take an entirely con
trary bias, must undergo such a change as is
from death to life ; he knows that the winning
a soul is a work of no common, no human
SERMON I. 17
agency ; and that, after every help of nature and
of art, after the closest observation both upon
men and things, and even the longest expe
rience, " with man this is impossible, but
with God all things are possible !" This is our
anchor ; this bids us go on and prosper ; this
commands us not to doubt, but when we have
ourselves fled to the Rock ofAges, and the Holy
Spirit of God hath given us grace unto salva
tion, then he will entrust others to our care.
What though we can do nothing of ourselves,
'* we can do all things through Christ which
strengtheneth us! What though we are not able
to turn away the least in our enemy's army,
He who is with us has counsel and strength for
the war, and his power is sufficient for us !
Never will that power forsake the duly prepared
and commissioned labourers in his harvest, but
as their day so shall their strength be ; they
shall reap if they faint not.
I would not here be understood to exclude
all but those from having any share in this
glorious work ; no ! God forbid ! How shall I
curse whom God hath not cursed by denying
them the blessing of joining with us in convert-
c
18 SERMON I.
ing some from the error of their ways. Far be
it from us, the ministers of mercy, to be guilty
of such arrogant cruelty as to condemn all who
have not a part in our ministry as reprobate
from God and from the benefits of it ; which
we must do if we forbid this work of God, so
far as he hath given us ability; since our Lord
himself declares, " He that gathereth not with
me scattereth : he that gathers not, as he is
able, subjects to my kingdom, scattereth them
away from it ;" he that is not, according to his
power, an agent for God, is a factor for the devil!
Several acts of our blessed offices indeed
there are which may not be performed unless
by commissioned officers ; but here a general
commission is given to all the servants of
Christ to tread in his steps, to do what in them
lies in their several stations to save the souls
for which Christ died. We are, it is true, am
bassadors of Christ, and as such, are entrusted
with many powers, which those who are not
his appointed ministers, are not entrusted
with : but what scripture denies any man the
power of beseeching others for Christ's sake
to be reconciled to God ? God forbid that
SERMON I. 19
we should thus outrage the feelings of our
fellow Christians, that we should thus magnify
our office, by speaking as from God what God
hath not spoken, as to exclude any who go not
beyond their measure, from the wisdom of
winning souls.
Indeed, if Solomon had only said, " the
priest who winneth souls is wise," they would
have had some colour for saying to all who are
not invested with the sacerdotal office, " Ye
have neither part nor lot in this wisdom ; even
with such sacrifices God is not pleased when
they are offered by unhallowed hands ;" but
Solomon's words are universal, " He that win
neth souls is wise."
And who is he that is wiser and inspired
with abetter judgment; let him stand forth
and make the restriction.
But is this a time for making restrictions?
for binding the hands of our fellow labourers ?
when the avowed opponents and blasphemers
of our holy religion, are so zealously endea
vouring to destroy souls ; when those who have
made themselves shipwreck of the faith, so
c 2
20 SERMON I.
earnestly labour to plunge others in the same
gulf; when even among ourselves have men
arisen speaking perverse things; and, not content
themselves to deny the Lord who bought them,
seek to draw others into the same condemna
tion ; is this a time for turning back any sol
dier of Christ who offers to set himself in array
against the destroyer ? Is there not a cause that
we should cry aloud, " Who is on our side,
who ? " who will rise up with us against the
enemy, who will stand with us in the gap
against these wolves, that no longer put on
sheep's clothing, but wander about in their
own shapes, seeking whom they may devour?
The emissaries of Satan labour one and all :
shall any of the servants of God stand idle?
Every one of those is zealous to destroy : shall
not every one of these be zealous to save ? Yea,
in this let the heathen teach the Christian ; let
us do something from the least to the greatest ;
In these times surely we ought to suffer even
the little children to fight for Christ, and for
bid them not, lest it be said of us, with more
justice than it has been, " Ye take too much
SERMON I. 21
upon you, ye sons of Levi." Let us cut off this
occasion of reproach from them that seek occa
sion, nor let it always be true, that " the
children of this world are in their generation
wiser than the children of light ! "
3S
SERMON II.
He jhall give his angels charge over thee,
to keep thee in all thy ways.
Psalm xci. 11.
One would think it scarcely possible that a
man, even through the wantonness of wealth,
power, or glory, should forget the very condi
tion of his nature—that we are weak, helpless,
miserable creatures, totally unequal to those
many and great dangers that continually sur
round us, and threaten not only our souls (for
these, men seem little to regard) with indelible
guilt, but our darling bodies too with a total
dissolution. The meanest object of our scorn,
a beast, an insect, nay even things that have no
life, are sufficient either to take away ours, or
render it a curse rather than a blessing. Pangs
yet sharper than these can inflict, we may
often feel from the perverse injustice or malice
of our brethren ; encouraged therein by these
SERMON II. 23
wicked spirits, our fiercest enemies, who daily-
range in quest of prey, and when they are not
permitted to effect it themselves, rejoice in see
ing us devour one another.
"But where then," will the infidel say, "is the
boasted goodness of the Creator, if he delivers
over his impotent helpless creatures to their
numerous, powerful, and cruel enemies ?" God
forbid that he should deliver us to them ! It is
true that, to humble our natural pride and
self-sufficiency, he suffers them to surround us
on every side : it is also true " that we are
unable of ourselves to help ourselves," yet hath
he not given us over "a prey unto their teeth;"
on the contrary, he hath established a law, and
ordained it shall never be broken, that, unless
by our own positive voluntary act, they shall
have no advantage over us ; for all who do not
wilfully, obstinately, refuse to accept it, he hath
appointed an inviolable refuge, beautifully de
scribed at large in that psalm, a portion of
which you have heard repeated, " They may
dwell in the secret place of the Most High ;
they may abide under the shadow of the Al
mighty." That while the afflictions which befall
24 SERMON II.
the rest of mankind increase ever more and
more, while a thousand fall into various troubles
at their side, and " ten thousand at their right
hand," yet no evil shall approach them, unless
for good, " no plague come nigh their dwelling."
We cannot doubt, if we consider what peculiar
care ourheavenlyFather hath taken for their pro
tection, that " He hath given his angels charge
over them, to keep them in all their ways."
A stronger proof of the truth of this general
proposition we cannot have, than the authority
of Him who proposes it : a clearer view of the
sense of it we may obtain by making a parti
cular inquiry,
First, when the angels of God attend their
charge; at what seasons they are peculiarly
employed in keeping good men in their ways ?
Secondly, how they attend upon it ; what
methods they take (as we may naturally sup
pose) thus to keep them ?
Thirdly, why this charge is assigned them ;
for what reasons we may presume that the
omnipotent and omnipresent God does not
exert his own immediate power, but employs
these his servants to do his pleasure?
SERMON II. 25
To these inquiries, that they may not ap
pear matter of mere speculation, an inference
or two naturally resulting from them may not
unfitly be subjoined.
First, as to the seasons or times when the
holy angels attend this their charge : —Of this
we may in general be assured, that they
are always ready to assist us when we need
their assistance ; always present when their
presence may be of benefit ; in every cir
cumstance of life wherein is danger of any
sort, or would be if they were absent. The
commission which they bear plainly extends
thus far. They are to keep us in all our ways,
and we know when those ministering spirits
are employed here by God—his will is done
on earth, as it is in heaven.
In particular, when our bodies are in dan
ger of pain or sickness, or our souls with vio
lent passion or sin, then are they especially
watchful over us, to ward off the approaching
evil ; and those no doubt approach often when
we are sensible of no impending evil, which
is frequently nearest when we apprehend it
farthest off. Destruction does not always waste
4
SERMON II.
at noon-day, more often it walks in darkness ;
and our being delivered from it then is wholly
attributable to their timely interposition, though
neither the attack nor the repulse falls under
the notice of our imperfect senses. Other
seasons there are at which we are sensible of
our danger, but not of the means of our escape ;
which we suppose to be either the natural effect
of material causes, or what we call chance,
or the effect of our own strength and wisdom.
But were we left alone, left to these or to our
selves, we should soon find how little resist
ance we could make against the enemies that
daily besiege us, without those on our side
who are more skilful to save than these to
destroy. And unquestionably they would save
us whenever assaulted by any evil, whether
visible or invisible, but that this exceeds the
commission which they have received from
their Heavenly Father and ours. This He did
not appoint, could not permit, as his wisdom
knows it would not benefit but injure us. He
knows of what infinite service afflictions are to
creatures in our station, and therefore, that to
be delivered from them all while on earth
8
SERMON H. 27
would be the greatest evil that could befall
us. Such an undistinguishing tenderness to
the body would be an irreparable injury to
the soul : if the one were continually com
forted here, both might hereafter he tor
mented. Neither would it be kindness thus
to exempt us from spiritual, any more than
from temporal danger—to deliver the soul
from all temptation, any more than the body
from all pain. Were the angels of God en
joined to do this, as we should be without
trial so should we be without choice, and we
are commanded " to choose whom we will
serve."—" Behold I have set before thee life
and death, therefore choose life." Had we
been without the power of choice, we must
have been content with some lower happiness
than that we now may hope to be partakers of,
and which is the natural necessary result of
virtue—of obedience to the divine law, which
divine grace will enable every soul to keep who
sincerely implores this aid. But although for
these reasons (and who knows how many
others the divine wisdom may have in view ?)
the blessed angels may not always prevent sin
'28 SERMON II.
or affliction from assaulting the soul or body,
yet when either approach, they may prevent
us from being totally overcome ; they may pre
serve us from sinking under temporal mis
fortunes, from being enslaved by spiritual ad
versaries : they may likewise recover us out of
that trouble which they might not hinder us
from falling into, nay, and often assist us to
rise by our fall ; by having been defeated to
obtain a nobler conquest. In what manner it
is that the angels of God do this, by what par
ticular methods they may be supposed to keep
us, I proceed under my second head to inquire.
Little of certainty, you are sensible, can
be expected on a subject of this nature,
unless where there is the express warrant of
His revelation, who made all things, and
therefore knows them all. Revelation ex
pressly assures us, that these his servants excel
in strength ; which we also may infer from the
works ascribed to them, in many places of
Holy Writ. That one of them shut the lion's
mouth, which would otherwise have devoured
Daniel : that at the word of another, the chains
fell off St. Peter's hands, and the prison gates
SERMON II, 29
unfolded, seems an inconsiderable exertion of
that strength, when we are informed what is in
another place related of the tasks assigned
them by their Sovereign Lord ; " I saw," saith
St. John, " four angels standing on the four
corners of the earth, holding the four winds of
the earth, that they should not blow." Of four
others who seem to have been of that num
ber which probably lost much of their
strength with their purity, the same Apostle
records that they were loosed from their bonds
in the river Euphrates, u to slay the third part
of men." What then cannot these effect,
whose strength is still entire when they are
permitted to exert it; especially since, se
condly, they excel equally in wisdom, as we
have the highest reason to believe. They, like
man, were undoubtedly created upright, though
with superior powers, as they are beings of a
superior order; but they fell not like him, and
have therefore retained them unimpaired, at
least, ever since the world began, if not many
ages before : but we may be assured they
neither would nor could retain them without
continually improving them. At what degree.
30 SERMON II.
then, of knowledge and wisdom may we not
suppose they are now arrived ? If a creature
of so confined, so depraved an understanding
as man, can improve it so much in threescore
years, what bounds can imagination place to
the understanding of an angel, which, with
so vast a grasp, and so just and unbiassed an
apprehension, hath been travelling onward
towards perfection for probably many thousands
of ages ? especially considering whose face
they continually behold, even His of whose
understanding there is no number ; and that to
imitate him, as far as the noblest creature can,
is their vocation, and pleasure, and glory !
By these perfections, strength, and wisdom,
they are well able to preserve us either from
the approach (if that be more profitable for us)
or in the attack of any evil. By their wisdom
they discern whatever either obstructs or pro
motes our real advantage; by their strength
they effectually repel the one and secure a free
course to the other : by the first, they choose
means conducive to these ends ; by the second,
they put them in execution. One particular
method of preserving good men, which we
SERMON II. 31
may reasonably suppose these wise beings
sometimes choose, and by their strength put in
execution, is the altering some material cause
that would have a pernicious effect ; the puri
fying (for instance) tainted air, which would
otherwise produce a contagious distemper.
And this they may easily do, either by in
creasing the current of it, so as naturally to
cleanse its putridity ; or, by mixing with it some
other substance, so to correct its hurtful quali
ties, and render it salubrious to human bodies.
Another method they may be supposed to
adopt when their commission is not so general;
when they are authorized to preserve some few
persons from a common calamity. It then is
probable that they do not alter the cause, but
the subject on which it is to work ; that they
do not lessen the strength of the one, but in
crease that of the other. Thus too, where
they are not allowed to prevent, they may re
move, pain or sickness; thus the angel restored
Daniel in a moment when neither strength or
breath remained in him.
By thes<; means, by changing either our
bodies or the material causes that use to affect
Z1 SERMON H.
them, they may easily defend us from all bo
dily evils, so far as is expedient for us. A
third method they maybe conceived to employ
to defend us from spiritual dangers, by apply
ing themselves immediately to the soul to raise
or allay our passions ; and indeed this province
seems more natural to them than either of the
former. How a spiritual being can act upon
matter seems more unaccountable than how it
can act on spirit: that one immaterial being
by touching another, should increase or lessen
its motion, that an angel should retard or
quicken the channel wherein the passions of
angelic substance flow, no more excites our
astonishment than that one piece of matter
should have the same effect on its kindred
substance ; or that a flood-gate or other mate
rial instrument should affect the course of a
river : rather, considering how contagious the
nature of the passions is, the wonder is on the
other side ; not how they can avoid to affect him
at all, but how they can avoid affecting them
more ; how they can continue so near us, who
are so subject to catch them, without spreading
the flames which burn in themselves.
SERMON IJ. 33
And a plain instance of their power to allay
human passions is afforded us in the case of
Daniel, when he beheld that gloriously terrible
minister, whose " face was as the appearance of
lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, his
arms and feet like polished brass, and his voice
as the voice of a multitude," (x. 6;) when
the tears and sorrows of the Prophet were
turned so strong upon him, that he was in a
deep sleep, void of sense and motion. Yet
this fear, these turbulent passions, the angel
allayed in a moment ; when they were hurrying
on with the utmost impetuosity, he checked
them in their course; so that immediately
after we find Daniel desiring the continuance
of that converse which before he was utterly
unable to sustain.
The same effect was doubtless wrought on all
those to whom these superior beings, on their first
appearance, used this salutation, " Fear not"—-
which would have been a mere insult and
cruel mockery upon human weakness, had they
not with that advice given the power to fol
low it. ,. . ,,. .
Nearly allied to this method of influencing
D
34 &RRi<rtr ni
the1 passions ' is the kst I1 intend tb'meiitib'n,
by which the angels (it is prtfbable) preserve
good meii; especially iii' or from stiirltual'dahi
gers. And this is by applying tHeinselVe's, tb
tHeir reasbri, by instilling good1 thoughts« ihfe
their hearts'; either' siteh as' ate1 go6d iri tHeir
bwri' na^ure^—;as tend1 to' GuV improvement iri
Virtue ; or such as arb C6ntraryi to the' sitg-
gdstibris of flesh1' and' bl6bdy by -tftiicbV w«i, are
tdrripted' tb' vice. It is' ri'bt unlikely tftitt; we' arb
indebted1 to them, ntit brity for* rnbst of trrose
inflections' which sudderiiy dart irittf bur minds
we know not how, having rib con'riekiori: wrfti
iky thing that went b'eibre therri'; but for
many of thb's'e also which seem errfirely our
bwn, arid naturally consequent frouir the pre
ceding.
It were easy l!o demonstrate that to some
6f thes'e herids aill those actions' are recfuerbfe
which we cdri cbriceiv'e buf guardian ang'efe t6
pbrforrii iri execution of this' theff charge.
But we come 4b our third Mquiry, whit* was,
why this' charge was assigned therri ; fbr what
reasons we may suppose He who is omr/ip're*
s&fti arid brrihlpdterit dbes hbt use his bwu
SERMQN , II. 3$
immediate power, but of these his, seryants.to
execute his pleasure. " F^
I am not ignorant that this is usually thought
a knowledge too wonderful for us—that man can
not attain a view of these ways of God, these hid
den treasures of his providence. It cannot, how
ever, be unlawful to extend. our searches far as
our limited faculties will permit, provided we ap-'
proach with due reverence and humility, and
offer nothing contrary to the analogy of our
faith.
Consistently with these, we may presume
that, one reason wherefore our gracious Cre
ator assigns this charge to his holy angels
is, because they delight in it ; because they
have additional happiness therein, besides
what results from being employed in the ser
vice of God ;- seeing the more benevolent any
being is, the more pleasure he enjoys in doing
good. And that these are benevolent in the
highest degree we cannot but infer, by their
holding the highest rank among creatures, in
asmuch as God always favours and honours
them most who are most like him ; for God is
love, and to conduct others in the paths of hap
D 2
S<5 SERMON II.
piness must be particularly pleasing in his sight,
and enhance their own happiness.
Nor is it a barren useless pleasure which
these sons of God reap from their attendance
on the children of men, but joined with im
provement : in doing good to us, they accumu
late good to themselves also ; and this perhaps
is a second reason why the most High hath
allotted this province to them, that by exer
cising the goodness they already possess they
continually acquire more, and swiftly too.
Even we, fettered as we are in this tabernacle
of earth, and weighed down by original cor
ruption—even we can perceive that the more
acts of any virtue we perform, the stronger
habit we slowly acquire : much more swiftly,
then, must exercise improve those blessed
spirits who have neither of these our impedi
ments: much more sensibly, by the acts
of benevolence which they perform, must
they advance in this godlike virtue.
And thirdly, as by this exercise of it they
are more benevolent and happy, so thereby
they treasure up to themselves an augmenting
fund of future happiness. The greater good
SERMON II. 37
will they bear to men, the greater must be
their joy when these men, in the fulness of
time, are received into the glory appointed for
them ; the more exquisitely will they sympa
thize with them when all their sorrows are
done away, when the days of sickness and
pain and sin are passed for ever, and swallowed
up in blissful immortality, and they are ad
mitted with these glorious spirits to drink those
rivers of pleasure which flow from the presence
of God for evermore !
In those days we shall evidently perceive a
fourth reason why these ministering spirits are
now so constantly sent forth to guard those
who are heirs of salvation ; namely, that when
entered into their inheritance they might
be gratefully sensible of their benefits ; that
when they experience the inestimable value of
them, this gratitude might ripen into love ;
that this love might be a means of increasing
their happiness by seeing those whom they
loved, and seeing them so happy, and by re
flecting that themselves, unworthy as they
were, while in these earthly tabernacles of clay,
had in some degree contributed to its augmen
tation.
38 SiEllMON H.
From that little we have been able to con-
' jecture respecting this one dispensation of Pro
vidence—as the time when, 1'the mariner how,
and the redsons why, the blessed angels have
charge to keep good men—may we not natu
rally infer that we should adore his wisdom
and goodness, who hath instituted the services
of men and angels in so wonderful an order !
How great is that goodness which hath not
left without defence ' his weak arid helpless
creatures! How great is that wisdom which
'hath so 'well proportioned the powers of our
defenders to their office ! ' How infinitely great
are these divine ' attributes which have made
' man serviceable to them, and that such im
potent, iriiserable creatures should be the
means of conveying a benefit to beings only
riot almighty.
Hence we may, secondly, infer the weakness
of that objection which men ' who pretended to
believe a God have often made against his
Prc-viderice—that it is beneath the Supreme
Being, the Mighty Creator, to concern him-
: 1 self in our little concerns. "Now supposing
'this (though it be palpably absurd to believe
it of Him who is omnipresent as well as omni
potent), how^ypipld it proye Ithat ( chance go-
yef;ijifjd the ;world ? (since .there is .a particular
order of beings (which the Scriptures attest
.Jhere j is), tlto ., attend . upon this very thing ;
(Vvho^re ready op ^all occasion^ to assist such
jas,(^£gd aftd ,will .accept of . their assistance,
^gd^byj;tjhe .pQwersfw.herewith he hath endued
tbs^jf(are^u^cje^th/^ble (were that the will
Jof(.t^ieii;J^eavenly faster) ,to preserve both the
;.ijatur/d and mpral, world in order,- without the
Jnterppflijipn. of his .mighty .power.
-> We! H^nce, in the$iird place, to cpn-
. jd.em.n thefp^ly and grxpr of those who intrude
. .into the Christian church their own doctrines and
..(coninj^ndine^ts ,pf men—naipely, ,the worship
ping of.ajjgels,; the paying to the creature the
, , jnc,9njnjunicable honour of the Creatpr. "Let no
^.njvan, beguile us of pur(reward " in this " shew of
wisdom in will worship .and humility." (Co-
.Joflsjans, ii. 23.) .They ke(ep us in. all our ways it
.is t^ue, butwe.Ifnpw whp^as given them this
, .gracious,jch.arge. The Lord pur God is but one
tJferdftyifcth^^^ffltytyth^dp his pleasure;
;JWd if ^eir^ping thisj if their obeying his ordier
we*e a.auflicient reason for u?tp worship them,
40 SERMON II.
the sun, the moon, fire and hail, storms and
tempest, which alike fulfil his word, alike may
claim our adoration.
It is God himself, as we may fourthly col
lect from what has been said, to whom our
prayers and praises are due, to whom we ought
to return our sincerest acknowledgments, whom
we should implore with the deepest humility,
that we may reap the fruits of his wisdom and
goodness, from the constant ministry of his
servants. To Him our petitions should be ad
dressed, according to the wise direction our
church has given us, " that as His holy angels
do him service in heaven, so they may suc
cour and defend us upon earth;" that their
general commission to inspect human affairs
may affect us in particular, and secure to us
such a degree of present ease as best accords
with bur future happiness.
Happy is the man even now, as he can be
upon earth, who is in such a case! who en
joys such a protection ! happy in having the
greatest possible security that he never shall
be unhappy—unprotected —unblessed! that
even the greatest temporal evil cannot befall
SERMON II. 41
him but to procure a greater good, and that no
evil shall befall him that does not work out a far
more and exceeding reward ; that though he
wrestles not only against inanimate foes, but
against flesh and blood, the depravity of his
own nature, with the perverseness, malice, and
injustice of other men ; nay, and not only
against all these combined, but against prin
cipalities, the rulers of this world, the wicked
spirits in high places ; they that are for him
are not only more, but stronger than those who
are against him. And are not these at least as
watchful to do us good, as those are to do us
evil ? —so watchful, that let him be but faith
ful, let him but fix his love on their common
Creator, and nothing in the creation, animate
or inanimate, by design or by chance, shall
have power to hurt him. In famine they shall
preserve the good man from death ; in war,
/from the power of the sword : —They shall hide
thee from the scourge of the tongue. Thou
shalt laugh at destruction when it cometh.
The very beasts of the earth shall they make
to be at peace with thee, and thou shalt be at
league with the stones of the field. (Job v. 22.)
.SERMON II.
Wherefore do Him that hath thus loved us,
and formed and .redeemed us, and given us this
good consolation; among the;;nttrobeii;less. ewls
-■with . which uwe ; are. attrrounded—to Gdd the
t Father, i God the 'Son, ,andi Gdd ;|the I;Holy
JGhosWQne .God—let ^us .yield ,ajl ; .praise,
majesty, and dominion, now and for, e^fpf '
Amen. > Vt.. .
. i i 'in:."
43
SERMON HI.
He that is faithful in that which is least is
faithful alfo in much : and he that is unjust
in the least is unjust alfo in much.
Luke xvi. 10.
• Christianity, from its first establishment in
the world, has met with strong opposition
from two different sorts of people—the perse
cutor and the scorner. The one has essayed by
force of arms and violence to drive it out of
the world; the other, by scoffs and insults to
* render it contemptible in it. By the mercy of
God and the constancy of Christians, the
former have been disappointed of their purpose,
and their cruel intentions have been entirely de
feated ; but the latter too often have succeeded,
and by their taunts and jeers, their insults
and reproaches, have done more injury to
Christianity, than bonds and imprisonments,
44 SERMON III.
racks and tortures, ever could effect. They
have made people ashamed of their profession,
brought religion into disrepute, and prevailed
upon many of its followers to sacrifice their
piety to preserve their reputation. One of the
arts by which these scorners have been able
most effectually to serve their master, the devil,
has been to represent the several duties of the
gospel as too mean for the Most High God to
impose, or for man (his most excellent work)
to be solicitous about.
For instance, profane jesting and loose con
versation are expressly forbidden by God him
self ; but these enemies of righteousness will
boldly venture to deny their obligation to obe
dience in such immaterial matters ; that, pro
vided a man is honest and performs his duty
in the main, he need not extend his care to a
jest or a word ; for that the Almighty is too
great and too good to take cognizance of such
things, or expect that man himself should do so.
Another (if he finds you reluctant to spend
your time and money in idle diversions and
recreations) will ridicule your scrupulosity, and
ask you if you suppose that God can deign to
sermon nr. 45
concern himself respecting these trifles, or has
given any precept on such unimportant sub
jects f In short, they have so far carried their
cause, that religion is almost wholly excluded
from common life, and confined to solemn times
and places, to forms and modes of worship.
The practice of Christianity is restricted within
the bounds of the church ; and he that would
regulate all his behaviour and conversation by
the rules of the gospel will be inevitably
branded with the names of superstitious, scru
pulous, and pharisaical. .
It is this error which I design to combat in
my present discourse, and show,
First, that no action is too trifling and insig
nificant to be made a part of our religion, or
regulated by the rule of the gospel :
Secondly, that by neglecting to take care of
what we call our little actions, we are led into
great transgressions :
Thirdly, that the advantage of thus regulat
ing the little common actions of our lives by
the rule of the Divine command will be greater
than Christians at first may imagine.
We know there is but one rule for the Chris
tian's behaviour in the world ; and that is, that
46 SERMON III.
be should have a constant view to the, great,
end of his creation in every action of his life.
Now the end for which man was created and
sent forth to be an inhabitant of this lower
world was the glory of God and the salvation
of his own soul. Accordingly we find St. Paul
exhorting his Corinthians to look constantly,
with a simple heart and single eye, to this
great end of their being ; and " whether they
eat or drink, or whatever they do, to do all to
the glory of God."
Now I would ask whether the doctrines of
my text do not evidently and clearly prove the
point we are discussing ? Eating and drinking,
those common necessary actions of life, are
commanded to be done in such a manner as
that the glory of God may be promoted. Now
it is certain we should never be required to
refer these actions to God, unless they were in
some measure capable of advancing and pro
moting his glory : and surely no work can be
termed trifling and insignificant, whereby so
noble an end is attained ; no action be deemed
indifferent, which tends to promote 'the one
design of our creation. Eating and drinking,
therefore, those essential means of supporting
SERMON III; 47
and preserving oiin lives, arc in this text posi
tively declared to be subservient to the glory
of God, and, as suchj are expressly referred to
llim'. And if this principle respecting these ne
cessary actions must actuate usj it applies to
every thing we do ; the consequence of which
is,' that no action is too mean or trifling, to be
incorporated' into our religion, or to be regu
lated- by the strictest rules of the gospel.
Secondly, we find in effect that the Almighty
hath most rigidly extended the rule of his
Commandments to all our actions, and that
there is not any thing we can either do, or
speak, or! think, wherein some of his precepts
are not im mediately concerned. Now, since
oui> Creator has seen good to lay down regula
tions for every instance of our behaviour, are
we not indispensably required to conform our
selves to his rules ? Will any man doubt whe
ther he be obliged to demean himself in a
manner strictly consonant to a Divine com
mand ? That be far from us to question so
plain a principle as whether a creature is bound
to obey his Creator ! All those commandments
which enjoin us to love the Lord our God with
all our heart, with all our mind, and with all
48 SERMON III.
our strength, and to serve him faithfully with
all our soul^ do evidently extend their sense so
far as to include every thought, word, and
action ; for what action can be lawful which
cannot be referred to him, directly or indi
rectly ? what are we at liberty to do without
having a view to his service ? When the Son
of God in his holy gospel has particularised
those several duties comprised in this saying,
to obviate all objections, and silence all cavils
that might have been made against his precepts
as trifling and unimportant, he strengthens it
with this solemn sanction, " He that keepeth
the least of these commandments, and teacheth
men so to do, shall be called great in the
kingdom of heaven ; but he that breaketh the
least of these sayings shall be esteemed least
in the kingdom of heaven."
Now the sense of this passage is plainly
this—that nothing is too insignificant to be
made an instance of his laws, nor any action
so inconsiderable as not to be in some measure
a means of increasing our great and glorious
reward in his heavenly kingdom ; which sug
gests a third argument, namely, that
No action is to be considered unimportant,
SERMON III. 4Q
which will be followed by such an inconceiv
ably great reward. The text proves evidently
that the eternal God has respect to the little
actions of' our lives ; and if they be conform
able to his holy commandments, he wil? not
fail to fulfil his gracious promise, and greatly
to reward them in the next life.
" Had the prophet bid thee do some great
thing, wouldst thou not have done it? and
how much more when he saith, wash and be
clean," was the reproof that Naaman's servant
gave him when he rejected Elisha's advice, and
refused to make use of the means he had pre
scribed for the recovery of his leprosy. And
may not the Almighty make the application
to those servants whom he hath ordered to be
faithful in that which is least, and for encou
ragement hath promised to make great in the
kingdom of heaven ? Heavy, without doubt,
will be the condemnation of those who neglect
to secure the mighty recompense of Heaven,
from not observing to fulfil the jots and tittles
of the law. He cannot have a due sense of the
value of those good things which God hath
preparedfor all xvho love himy who refuses any
E
50 SERMON III.
labour, or starts at any difficulty, which lies iu
the way of attaining them ; much less who re
fuses to comply with easy bonds, and so light
a yoke ; to submit to little grievances and self-
denials, which are privileges to a devout Chris
tian. Surely, if heaven be worth all our care
and pains, we cannot think ourselves blameless
if we do not labour in every action of our life
to secure it ; and if the kingdom of God is so
invaluable, so beyond all that we can hope or
conceive, as to deserve the struggle of " taking
it by force," how can we be justified for not
entering in, when encouraged by this divine
promise ; " He that keepeth the least of these
commandments shall be called great in the
kingdom of heaven."
To evince this important truth beyond all
possibility of contradiction, and to remove
every doubt, whether we are obliged to refer
all our actions to the glory of God, and conse
quently that none of them are too mean to be
made a part of our religion, or to be regulated
by the strict rules of the gospel, the blessed
Jesus expressly assures us that, at the day of
judgment, every individual action of our lives
r
SERMON III. 51
will be scanned and strictly examined. Now,
if not one be too insignificant to deserve the
censure and cognizance of the Almighty, not
one is tob mean to be referred to his service.
If we are to give an account for each, cer
tain it is, that each should be done as to the
Lord.
Persuaded I am that no action can stand the
test of this strict and solemn scrutiny, which is
not begun, continued, and ended in his ser
vice ; and therefore the proof of this article of
our faith ought to convince us of the import
ance, as well as the truth, of the doctrine now
under consideration, and effectually prevail
upon us to do every thing we do as in the
presence of our God, in the sight of our judge,
who hath required it of us that Himself should
be the ultimate end of all our actions.
That we may not think that we shall escape
unpunished in the great and terrible day of the
Lord, merely for the innocence, or rather the
insignificance of our actions, our blessed Savi
our has told us, that we shall give an account
at the day of judgment even for every idle
word. Now, if our idle words will not escape
E 1
52 SERMON III.
censure, where shall he appear who has a whole
train of idle actions ? .
Now every word and action is idle which is
not done with a view proposed by our Creator
in our very existence here. This interpretation
is corroborated by St. Paul's well known pas-
sage in his epistle to the Ephesians, iv. 2Q, 30 :
" Let no corrupt communication proceed out
of your mouth, but such as is good to the use
of edifying, that it may minister grace to the
hearers :" and " Grieve not the holy Spirit,
whereby ye are sealed unto the day of re
demption."
If any ask what we mean by idle words,
my answer is, the same that the apostle means
by "corrupt communication ;" words that are
not edifying or beneficial, such as minister no
grace to the hearers. In this manner, then, we
must not converse or speak, but preserve an
invariable view to the great end of our being,
the glory of God, and the good of others.
Now if no conversation can be vindicated,
which is not sanctified, consecrated, if I may
so say ; if no subject, however light, be ex
empted from some moral tendency ; I ask
SERMON III. 53
whether it doth not hold equally true, that no
action or business we can undertake is too de
spicable to have a reference to religion, or
to be made an offering holy and acceptable
to the Most High r
Indeed, if we consider human actions simply
in themselves, they are all infinitely too mean for
the great Majesty of Heaven to regard. What
are our best services to the Almighty God ?
Is he honoured by the bowing of our knee, or
lifting up of our hands ? Oh no ! the High and
Lofty One who inhabiteth eternity need not be
worshipped with man's worship, the worm of
yesterday ! Neither hath he respect to the out
ward actions of his creature, but to the temper
and spirit with which they are performed. He,
therefore, who is faithful in that which is least,
is esteemed, in his sight, as faithful in much ;
and he that is conscientious, and fearful of
doing a little thing which may offend God,
will be blessed with a reward exceeding all
comprehension of mortals.
We know that the two mites of the widow .
were accepted before the abundance which the
rich cast into the treasury, because of that sim.
54 SERMON lit.
plicity of heart, and fervent piety, wherewith
the offering was made. And is not the same
spirit capable of sanctifying the meanest actions
of our lives, that is, the desire to please God,
and rendering every thing acceptable in his
sight ?
Yes ; God is a spirit, and seeketh such to
worship him as worship him in spirit and in
truth. He that hath promised that even a
cup of cold water given to a disciple in the
name of God shall in no wise lose its reward,
will doubtless have a great respect to, and will
mightily bless and prosper, him who in his
least action has reference to the advancement
of his glory. He, therefore, who refuses to in
dulge himself in pleasure, who lays various
restraints upon his behaviour and conversation,
who is fearful of doing many things which the
generality of people freely allow themselves in,
if he has made God the foundation of his scru
pulosity, and a desire of his glory the ground
and reason of his singularity—he shall be re
ceived as great in the kingdom of heaven.
Thus have I endeavoured to prove my first
position ; and, I trust, have incontrovertibly
SERMON III, 55
proved that there is no act of our lives too mean
to be made a part of our devotion, consequently,
to be laid under the strictest rules of his holy
gospel.
Secondly, I have now to show the danger
of not being faithful in that which is least, and
to evince that, by neglecting what we call our
little actions, we are often led into great and
heinous transgressions.
It is the observation of the wise son of
Sirach, that he who despiseth little things,
shall fall by little and little ; and experience
will attest this truth, and prove it to every
attentive Christian. See we not that vice, as
well as virtue, is of a progressive nature, and
by degrees encroaches on the hearts of its vo
taries ? The evil spirit is too subtle a tempter
to show the heinousness of sin at the first
glance, and therefore adapts his temptations to
the conscience and disposition : and, knowing
that mankind (until they become thoroughly
reprobate) are averse from monstrous crimes, he
ensnares them into little transgressions ; aware
that he who is once habituated to small offences
will soon lose his horror at sin, shake off his
SERMON III.
tenderness of conscience, and by degrees grow
hardened in vice and impiety. Therefore this
enemy of our souls, when he would seduce any
of the servants of God from the path of right
eousness, would make the first declension from
that path as small as possible, that he might
ensnare them in his nets, without their even
perceiving the danger, and bring them unawares
from the road to heaven to the gate of destruc
tion. For instance, is drunkenness the sin to
- which he tempts ? —his method is to conceal this
frightful vice, and its dreadful consequences,
under the veil of innocent mirth and social
pleasure, so that his victim is beguiled, by a
desire of being easy and agreeable to his com
panions, to weaken his understanding, till he
becomes a beast, and makes shipwreck of his
reason as well as conscience. Now had this
man been so upon his guard as never to exceed
the bounds of Christian temperance and so
briety, had he been scrupulously exact in ob
serving the rule of the apostle, of eating and
drinking" only to the glory of God, he would
have preserved the intellects which the Al
mighty bestowed upon him* avoided the stum-
3
SERMON III. 57
bling block which the evil one cast in his way,
and escaped the guilt, the misery, and the
punishment, which those incur who are over
charged " with surfeiting and drunkenness."
Again:—a virtuous youth who would tremhle
at the sin of fornication, will be tempted to
loose conversation, and "jestings which are
not convenient ;" he will hear them amongst
his irreligious companions, till he joins in them,
and easily be persuaded there is no great evil
in such little things, till by little and little he
flings off all restraint, falls into the commission
of vices which he once regarded with indig
nation and horror, and at last is ensnared by
the strange woman whose " house is the gate
of death, and her chambers the path-way to
hell." Now had this man been so obedient to
his Maker, and faithful to himself, as to have
" set a watch to his words, and kept the door
of his lips," he had avoided this most danger
ous of sins, and been preserved from the ini
quity which will now in all probability bring
him to destruction.
Farther : the generality of mankind, in
theory, abhor gambling ; though most of them
58 SERMON III.
allow themselves in games, and recreation is
made a pretence for extravagances, and diver
sion becomes an inlet to profuseness and prodi
gality. A trifling wager may be risked and lost
without injury, and a small part of our income
appropriated to pleasure and chance ; but alas !
insignificant as these beginnings appear, they
are likely to end in serious evil. The gentle
man too often degenerates into the gambler ;
and by degrees it comes to pass that many
wager away their estates, and cast the fatal die
which reduces themselves and their families to
beggary and want.
Now all these may serve as examples to de
monstrate the direful tendency of being negli
gent of our little actions, and the important
truth of my text, " that he that is unjust in the
least is unjust also in much :" that he who
places not his common ordinary actions under
the restraints of religion is bringing himself
under snares and temptations, blindly enters
into the confines of vice, and throws himself
by steps and degrees under the full power and
dominion of the adversary.
And indeed a little spark will quickly kindle
SERMON III. 59
to a flame ; a small breach in the river's bank
will soon cause an inundation. He that will
venture to go ever so little out of the right
way ought seriously to weigh with himself
where may be the end. Every step out of the
path of life is a step leading to death. We have
the testimony of the Holy Scriptures that the
way to heaven is narrow, and beset with traps
and pitfalls ; and, if we deviate from it, no
wonder if we are entangled or dragged down
to ruin and destruction. To be secure, we
must go on in holiness ; and to be free from
danger of evil, we must constantly practise all
that is good. He that can trifle himself into
a spirit of carelessness and want of thought,
deceives his own heart if he fancies he is safe ;
and the man who suffers himself at any time,
or in any degree, to relax in circumspection,
exposes himself at that time, and in that de
gree, to all the assaults of a vigilant and subtle
adversary, who seeks to destroy his immortal
soul.
But it will be said, is the Christian then
secluded from mirth and diversion, pleasures
and entertainments ? Yes ; as far as they are
SERMOK III.
inconsistent with piety and innocence, with
temperance and safety. Whatever pleasure
may be enjoyed consistent with these, and is
entered upon with either a mediate or imme
diate reference to the glory of his Creator, a
Christian may delight himself in. But what
ever is incompatible with these principles,
whatever diversion is unlawful, either in itself
or in its necessary consequences, which tends
to evil, or exposes men to be an easier prey to
temptation, I scruple not to say, cannot be a
pleasure designed for Christians ; so manifestly
the reverse, that God, who seeth the evil as well
as the danger, has solemnly forbidden such
diversions in his holy word, by commanding us
to abstain from all appearance of evil, and
strictly enjoining us to do nothing which may
not be done as unto the Lord, and be some
way subservient to his honour and glory.
So much I have deemed proper to remark
on the danger of not being faithful in that
which is least, and established the truth I un-.
dertook to discuss ; namely, that by neglecting
to take care of our miscalled little actions, we
are often led into great and heinous transgres
SERMON III. 61
sions. I therefore proceed to my third head
of discourse, wherein I promised to show,
Thirdly, the incalculable advantages which
will arise from regulation of the little common
actions of our lives by the strict rules of God's
commandments.
He that would be secure must not approach
the precipice of evil. The danger has been
demonstrated, and the only means of avoiding
it is to keep at a distance from the very ap
pearance. He that maketh every action a point
of duty will not easily be ensnared into a fla
grant breach of it, and he that is circumspect
in little will scarcely ever fall into great trans
gressions. . . ,
Tenderness of conscience is the noblest pre
servative from sin, and a scrupulous fear of
offending the best safeguard against it. The
fortress of virtue is most effectually secured,
when the inlets to vice are most sedulously
guarded. Constant recollection impedes attack;
and he who never exposes himself to the least
shadow of temptation will never be in danger
of being overcome by the greatest. Were the
good man of the house always on the watch,
Ql SERMON III.
the thief could never break in and spoil his
goods ; and if the Christian would not indulge
himself in the full enjoyment of that liberty
which he thinks allowed, but conscientiously
abstain from some of those wordly good things,
which he sees his brethren use intemperately,
it would be as probable a means to preserve
him from falling as can be conceived. Who
is so likely to persevere as such a faithful ser
vant, to whose mind the injunction of his
Lord (to all Christians, as well as to his dis
ciples) is ever present, " What I say unto you,
I say unto all, watch!" Is it not one of the
most awful punishments that attend the wicked,
to be given over to a reprobate mind ; to have
their hearts hardened and their consciences
seared. Now such as is the curse of a callous
heart, so great is the blessing of a tender con
science ; and as on one hand an obdurate reso
lution is a certain forerunner of eternal destruc
tion, so on the other, a sedulous adherence to
virtue, and a nice sense of every little breach
of duty, is of all others the most powerful pre
servative from the guilt, as well as the punish
ment, of sin j and universal conscientiousness
8
SERMON HI. 63
is an invulnerable shield against the force of
temptation.
Hazael, king of Syria, was offended highly
at the prophet,- for predicting the evils which
he should bring upon the Israelites. " Is thy
servant a dog that he should do this great
thing ? " was the rebuke he gave the man of
God ; but when he had contemplated the splen
dour of a crown, and permitted his thoughts
to dwell on the pleasures of high station, his
heart swelled with pride and ambition, and
he soon fulfilled the awful prognostication, slew
his master, ascended his throne, and exercised
his ill-gotten power with so much tyrannic
cruelty, as served to accomplish the designs of
Providence, who appointed him a scourge to the
rebellious nation, which had become traitors
to their God ; and has given in this narration,
to all ages, a striking instance of the deceitful-
ness of the human heart, and the danger of not
checking evil thoughts before they proceed to
actions.
The case is plain ; if we would be holy, we
must use the means. The lesson of Christian
perfection is not to be learned at once ; we
SERMON III.
must be well exercised in rudiments and first
principles, if we ever hope to make a progress
in the school of Christ. By habituating our
selves to little restraints in the first instance,
by voluntarily imposing on ourselves small
crosses, we shall in time become conformed to
His death, who deemed no sacrifice too great
to purchase our salvation. By abstaining from
taking the utmost liberty we lawfully may,
we shall be effectually secured from even the
desire of criminal gratifications, and escape the
dreadful guilt of heinous and presumptuous
tins.
The children of this world (who in their ge
neration are wiser than the children of light)
will eminently prove the advantages resulting
from strict exactness, and punctual regularity,
in the most trifling things; they will tell'us of
the benefits resulting from doing every thing
by rule and order, neglecting no means of gain,
and ever adding to their accumulations ; and
why the same attention is not required in a
Christian, which experience teaches us is so
useful in a tradesman's concerns, it will be
difficult to show. Christianity is an employ
S£RMON III. 65
ment no less extensive than important; its in
fluence may reach, if we please, to every action,
and render the most insignificant of them
holy and acceptable to God. Why then should
not every thing we think, and say, and do, be
undertaken with this view, and wholly referred
to his most sacred and adorable name ?
I have shown in the first part of this dis
course that all our actions are capable of being
thus piously and advantageously improved ;
that none are too mean to be dedicated to the
service of God, or instrumental in promoting
his glory. Away then with this objection of
their being unworthy of the Most High, and
not fit to be made instances of our obedience to
him, or to be regulated by the strict rules of the
gospel ; away with all jeering scoffs against this
religious scrupulosity which I have been incul
cating : and if any men there be that still con
tinue to laugh at any such little singularities of
the true disciples of Christ, let them remember
it is written, " Woe unto you that laugh now,
for ye shall mourn and weep." No doubt can
possibly be made, that every action of our lives
may be referred to God, and there is demon-
F
(56 SERMON III.
stration to prove that we are thus to refer every
action : for if we consider, on the one hand,
the great danger which those incur who are
negligent of their little actions, to what mani
fold and great temptations they are exposed,
even to commit heinous sins ; and on the other,
those mighty benefits which accrue from bring
ing our indifferent actions to the standard and
test of God's holy will and commandment—I
say, whoever weighs these great truths as he
ought will find the indispensable necessity of
no longer living to himself, but unto God ; and
of doing the most insignificant action of his
life with such a spirit and temper, as that it
might be done unto the Lord and not to man.
This is the method to escape the punish
ment due to those who live for themselves, and
not to God : hereby we shall assure our hearts
before him, when he is constantly in our
thoughts, and is set always before us. How
eminent a share of glory shall they receive,
who are thus perpetually concerned in promot
ing the glory of God ? How abundantly shall
they be recompensed for those pleasures from
which they have voluntarily abstained for
SERMON III.
Christ's sake ! Much doubtless shall be given,
as well as forgiven, to those who have loved
so much as to make the great object of their
love the end of every thing they do. We
have our blessed Saviour's promise that, in
consequence of their being faithful in that
which is least, they shall be esteemed faithful
in much, and for their tender fear of trans
gressing their Divine master's little commands,
they shall be pronounced great in the kingdom
of heaven.
Blessed therefore are all they who hear
these sayings and keep them ! They shall
escape the guilt and punishment of heinous
transgressions, and receive a glorious recom-
pence for their labour, an incalculable reward for
their care and industry ; such a recompence as
fadeth not away, eternal in the heavens ; such
a reward—great as their Master's love, and ex
tensive as the grace which enabled them to do
Him " true and laudable service ! "
f2
68
SERMON IV.
/ say unto you, that except your righteousness
shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes
and pharisees, ye shall in no case enter the
. kingdom of heaven. Matthew, v. 20.
These words are a part of the divine ser
mon which our blessed Lord delivered from
the mount to the people, who, having seen the
mighty and wonderful works he had done in
the towns where he had preached, followed
him in multitudes, and pressed upon him to
see the signs he had wrought, and to hear the
doctrines he promulgated. These, therefore,
he instructs in the perfection of that religion
which he came into the world to establish, and
shows how infinitely it exceeded all other re
ligious dispensations wherewith mankind till
then had been blessed. And as the people
to whom he spoke were all of them Jews,
SERMON IV. 69
and had a high veneration for the religion of
their fathers, he chiefly compares his com
mands with those of Moses, to convince them
how far even the law and the prophets fell
short of that which the Son of God himself
descended to make known on earth ; and as
all the people of Israel were prepossessed with
high notions of the scribes and pharisees,
whom they supposed to be exalted patterns of
sanctity, he informs them that, holy and emi
nent as they thought these men to be, yet the
lowest servant of Christ must infinitely surpass
them in righteousness and true holiness, or he
could never hope to be made partaker of the,
kingdom of heaven.
In discoursing on these words, I shall,
First, show wherein consisted the righteous
ness of the scribes and pharisees.
Secondly, consider in what instances all
Christians are obliged to exceed them.
Thirdly, conclude with some practical in
ferences from the whole.
The scribes, as we learn from several pas
sages of Holy Scripture, were for the most part
learned doctors and teachers of the law, who
70 SERMON IV.
sat in Moses' seat, and explained those por
tions of it which, through their blindness
and weakness of understanding, they would
otherwise have remained ignorant concerning.
They are sometimes called by the name of
Rabbi, which signifies master—one that had
been brought up in the schools of the prophets,
and was licensed to teach a set of disciples or
followers the weighty matters of the law.
The pharisees were the most rigid sect of the
Jews, men who obliged themselves to the
strictest observance of the things required by
the law ; and were distinguished by placing
.their conduct under some restraints which were
not obligatory, and denying themselves such
liberties as were by the law allowed to the
people; and hence they derive their name from
a word which signifies to distinguish or separate.
Now both these sets of men, we may imagine,
pretended to extraordinary degrees of piety.
The very title of pharisee implies a recluse per
son, or one who separated himself from his
brethren by the remarkable rigour of his life
and conversation ; and one scarcely can sup
pose that those scribes who were entrusted
SERMON IV.
with the education of young people could be
other than sober and moral, as well as grave
and learned persons ; and indeed we find their
characters to have been such. They were dis
tinguished by leading austere lives, and pro
fessing strict doctrines. They observed great
sanctity and severity of behaviour, were regu
lar in their public offices of devotion, fasted
and prayed often, and gave much alms. They
were zealous for the law to excess, and reve
renced the institutions thereof as divine ap
pointments deserve to be reverenced. In short,
there was nothing in their exterior behaviour
but what was becoming in teachers of religion,
edifying and exemplary. They manifested the
highest regard to God, the greatest veneration
to things and persons appropriated to his ser
vice, and the severest resentment of any pro
fanation of them.
Such was the righteousness of the scribes
and pharisees of old, which our blessed Saviour
declares not to be sufficient to bring any one
to the possession of his kingdom ; which leads
me to my second general head, wherein I am
7$ SERMON IV.
to point out iii what instances all Christians
are to exceed them.
We see that their external regularity, their
zeal, their exact manners, and decent deport
ment, are such as might be well proposed to a
Christian ; but they are patterns which we
must not be content to equal, but infinitely
surpass, or our righteousness will avail nothing
in the great day of accounts. The Christian
religion requires indeed an exemplary beha
viour, an external reverence to God and holy
things, and all demonstrative of our piety and
virtue : but it endeth not here ; it's chief resi
dence is in the heart, and there it is designed
to effect the greatest change. Its principal de
sign is to convert the sinner, to rectify his
mind, and alter the most prevailing evil temper
of his soul. And herein consists the grand dif
ference between the righteousness required of
the Christian, and that which was practised by
the scribes and pharisees. Theirs was an out
side holiness; ours is commanded to be the
holiness of the heart. Their virtue consisted
in their sanctified actions ; ours in upright in
SERMON IV. 73
tentions. Their works of piety and charity
were performed to be seen of men ; ours must
be performed to please our Father which is in
heaven. In short, the scribes and pharisees
considered external sanctity all that was re
quired of them ; whereas the Christian is
taught principally to regard the state and dis
position of his heart, and to regard his outward
behaviour only as a testimony and proof of his
internal spirit and temper. For instance, the
learned scribe and proud pharisee would think
he had sufficiently done his duty to God, by
having been present at his public worship ; but
the humble pious Christian knows that God
will not accept a religion only confined to time
and place, or has any respect to such holiness
as is bounded by the walls of the church. No ;
his conscience tells him that pious ceremonies,
without a corresponding purity of mind, are
so far from being acceptable to God that they
are abomination in his sight.
Indeed devotion, if it consists in no more
than bodily worship and the prayers and
thanksgivings of our lips, is a solemn mockery
74 SERMON IV.
father than an humble adoration of the Most
High, and must be expected to draw down his
heaviest vengeance rather than his gracious
blessing upon us.
In fine, any instances of piety whose best
merit consists in decency of performance may
be the piety of scribes and pharisees, but not
of Christians.
Another instance wherein the righteousness
of Christians is to exceed that of the scribes
and pharisees is in the extensiveness of it.
Any Christian who is pious upon principle,
and whose virtue proceeds from purity of in
tention, will immediately perceive the neces
sity of a uniform conduct, and how incum
bent it is for a Christian not to act inconsist
ently, so that one part of his life may not
contradict the other. The scribes and phari
sees made long prayers, but at the same time
they devoured widows' houses. They paid
tithe of mint, anise, and cummin, and in this
they did well ; but then they neglected the
weightier matters of the law—-judgment,
justice, and truth. In short, they were reli
SERMON IV. 75
gious as far as ceremonies and modes of wor
ship were concerned, but neither pious nor
honest in their common life.
And here it is that the Christian is required
to exceed them. He is commanded to perform
every action with the same spirit as he performs
his devotions ; the glory of God is the end that
he proposes in his prayers, and the same sacred
purpose is to be the rule of every part of his
life. We have an apostolical precept to regu
late the most ordinary as well as necessary
actions, " Whether ye eat or drink, or what
ever ye do, do all to the glory of God ;" and
he must be a very loose casuist who can find
an exception to this heavenly rule, or point
out any actions of a Christian which are not
to be tried by it: and whoever thinks that he
need only have a view to this sublime end
while he is in the immediate act of worshipping,
may perhaps lay claim to the righteousness
(as they do to the purity) of the scribes and
pharisees, but not to that of the disciples of
Christ.
The religion which the blessed Jesus insti
tuted was designed to shine forth in the lives
76 SEKMON IV.
as well as the public worship of professors ;
and therefore every one who prays to God
with devotion and solemnity at church, and at
the same time lives without God every where
else, may satisfy himself with the name of
Christian, but be assured he has nothing else
to boast. He neither feels the power of Christ
in his soul, nor has any lot or portion in that
glorious inheritance which is prepared for those
who love and fear him.
A third instance wherein our righteousness
is to exceed that of the scribes and pharisees
is, the motive from whence it proceeds. They
fasted, they prayed, and gave alms, to be seen
of men ; and were pious for the sake of that
reputation which they gained among their
brethren for being so. They made use of
their religion to be a cloak to their iniquities :
the end of it extended no further than this
world, their honour and their interest being
the only views they proposed by it ; and there
fore of them doth our Saviour justly say,
" Verily, they have their reward."
But the piety of Christians is founded on a
nobler principle, and proceedeth not from a
8
SERMON IV. 77
view of human interest, but from the pure love
of God.
This must be the foundation of every holy
action and design, if ever we hope to be
accepted by God. This love must be the rea
son of our desire to please him, or that desire
can never be fulfilled.
For any exercises of devotion which are
performed with another view lose all their
excellence : for instance, should we comply
with the worship of God because it has the
custom and practice of the world to recom
mend it; should we regulate our actions by
the rules of God's holy commandments, lest
■we should appear scandalous in the eyes of
our neighbours ; comply with the established
modes of worship, and submit to the use of
the stated service' of God, for honour or profit.
Can we lay our hands upon our hearts, and
call this religion ? Will it be accepted by
Him who searcheth the heart, and requires it ?
It remains to draw a practical inference
from what has been said.
First, we have seen the great exactness and
rigour wherewith the scribes and pharisees ad
7S SERMON IV.
hered to all the outward ordinances of the
law ; and hence may Christians learn the great
veneration and esteem which are due to the
institutions of the New Testament. The
ordinances of the Jewish church were but
types and figures of those of the Christian ;
and therefore are we more immediately con
cerned not to be exceeded by the Jews in the
reverence they paid to sacred things.
The scribes and pharisees may in this re«
spect be admitted as examples to us, for they
were scrupulous in adhering to every the least
jot or ceremony of the law ; and so far their
zeal is laudable and recommended to us by our
blessed Lord himself, who, speaking of their
tithing mint, anise, and cummin, is pleased
to say that these things ought to be done, but
at the same time the other weightier matters
were not to be left undone.
True it is that the inward spirit of Chris
tianity is principally to be regarded, and the
greatest danger is that men will trust too
much to external duties, even so far as to
neglect the religion of the heart, as if we
could deceive that Omnipotent Being who dis
3
SERMON IV. ffr
cerneth all the secret springs and motives, the
subterfuges and foldings, the thoughts and in
tentions, of every child of man ! We have seen
that, strict as the lives and conversation of the
scribes and pharisees appeared, they were not
accepted for want of sincerity ; from which
we may learn the great value of uprightness,
and should incessantly implore the Almighty
God to bestow this grace upon us. The
strictest ritual obedience becomes of no effect
without it ; nay, it is said to be abomination ia
the sight of God.
Hypocrisy is of all others the most odious
sin ; its baleful influence extends the farthest,
and its poison is noxious enough to blast our
best performances. The scribes and pharisees
were careful and vigilant in their duty; they
forced themselves through the labour and dif
ficulties of heartless religion, and endured the
toil and danger of servants—yet were rejected
by their Lord and Master, because their ser
vices were all performed and undertaken for
sinister views. And let it instruct us carefully
to try our ways, and accurately examine the
recesses of our own hearts, that we may not
80 SERMON IV.
fancy ourselves religious, because we are regu
lar in our deportment, and exact in external
worship ; but sedulously labour to be approved
in His sight who judgeth motives, not only
that we may escape the tremendous judgments
which are pronounced to the scribes and pha*
risees, hypocrites, and to all who hold the
truth in unrighteousness, but be rewarded
openly in that great day by our Father who
seeth in secret.
81
SERMON V.
One thing is needful. Luke, x. 42.
Could we imagine an intelligent being,
entirely a stranger to the state of this world
and its inhabitants, to take a view of their va
rious enterprises and employments, and thence
conjecture the end of their existence, he surely
would conclude that these creatures were de
signed to be occupied with many things : while
he observed not only the difference of the ends
which different men were pursuing, but how
vast a multitude of objects were successively
pursued by almost every person, he fairly
might infer that the sons of men were placed
upon the earth to gratify their several inclina
tions either with pleasure, riches, honour, or
power.
How astonished would he be to hear their
6
82 SERMON V.
Creator declare to all without distinction—
" One thing is needful ! " but how much more
astonished when he knew that this one thing
needful for men, their one business, the one
end of their existence, was none of all those
things which occupied mankind, none of all
those ends they were pursuing, none of all
those engagements wherein they were so
deeply absorbed, which filled their hearts and
employed their hands—nay, that it was an end
not only distinct from, but contrary to them
all; as contrary as light and darkness, heaven
and hell, the kingdom of God and that of Satan !
The only thought he could form in their
favour must be, that they had a surplusage of
time at their command, and therefore trifled
a few hours because they were assured of
thousands of years wherein to work. But
how beyond measure would he be amazed
when informed that these were creatures
of a day; that as they yesterday arose out
of the dust, so to-morrow they would return
to it; that the time allotted for their great
work was but a span long, a little speck, a
moment, and yet that they had no manner of
SERMON V, 8S
assurance of not being snatched away in the
midst of this moment, or indeed at the very
commencement of it—when he saw that all
men were placed on a narrow, weak, tottering
bridge, either end of which was swallowed up
in eternity ! that the waves and storms that
passed over it were continually bearing away
one after another in an hour when they ex
pected it not ; and that those who yet stood
knew not but they should plunge into the great
gulf the very next instant, but well knew
that if they fell before they had finished the
end of their existence they were lost, destroyed,
undone—for ever !
How would all utterance, nay, all idea be
lost ! how would he express, how would he
conceive the senselessness, the madness, of
those creatures who, being in such a situation,
could think of any thing, could speak of any
thing else, could do any thing else besides,
could find time for any other design or care,
but of ensuring—the one thing needful !
It cannot, therefore, be an improper em
ployment,
First, to observe what this one thing is; and,
« 2
SERMON V.
Secondly, to consider a few of the numerous
reasons that prove this to be the one thing
needful.
We may first observe what this one thing is,
in which many things are comprised ; as are
all the works of our callings, all that properly
belong to our several stations in this world ;
insomuch that whoever neglects any of these
so far neglects the one thing needful : and this
indeed can no otherwise be pursued than by
performing them in such a manner as in and
by every one to advance our great work.
Now this great work, this one thing needful,
is the renewal of our fallen nature. In the
image of God was man created, but a little
lower than the angels : his nature was perfect,
angelical, divine ; he was a dignified image of
the God of glory ; he bore his stamp on every
part of his soul ; the brightness of his Creator
shone mightily upon him. But sin has now
effaced the image of God ! He is no longer
nearly allied to angels ; alas ! he is sunk lower
than the very beasts of the field ! His soul is
not only earthly, addicted to covetousness and
idolatry—sensual, a lover of pleasure more-
SERMON V. 85
than of God ; but devilish, inclined to hatred,
malice, and revenge ! Thus is the mighty-
fallen ! the glory is departed from him ; his
Justre is swallowed up in utter darkness!
From the glorious liberty in which he was
created, he is fallen into the basest bondage.
That evil spirit, whose slave he is now become,
holds him so fast in prison that he cannot ex
tricate himself. He hath bound him with a
thousand chains, even the heavy chains of his
own vile affections ; for every inordinate appe
tite, every unholy passion, as it is the express
image of the god of this world, so it is the
most galling yoke, the most grievous chain,
that can bind a freei-born spirit; and with these
is every child of Adam, every one that is bora
into this world, so loaded, that he cannot lift
up an eye, or raise a thought, to heaven ; nay,
his whole soul cleaveth to the dust ! These
chains of darkness under which we groan do
not only hold us in on every side, but they are
within us also ; they enter into the inmost re
cesses of our soul, they pierce its very sub
stance. Vile affections are not only so many
chains, but likewise so many diseases. Our
86 SERMON V.
nature is distempered as well as enslaved ;
** the whole head is sick, and the whole heart
faint." Our body, soul, and spirit, are infected,
overspread, consumed with the most fatal moral
leprosy ; every one of our brutal passions and
diabolical tempers, every kind of pride, sen
suality, and selfishness, is one of those deadly
wounds full of corruption.
To recover our first estate from which we
are fallen is the one thing needful : to re-
exchange the image of Satan for the image of
God, bondage for freedom, sickness for health !
Our one great business is to erase out of our
souls the likeness of our destroyer, and to be
born again, to be formed anew after the like
ness of our Creator. This is our one concern,
to shake off this servile yoke, and regain our
native liberty ; to cast away every chain, every
passion, that does not accord with an angelical
nature. The one work we have to do is to re
turn from the gates of death, to have our dis
eases cured, our wounds healed, and ourselves
restored to perfect soundness.
Let us in the second place consider a few of
the numberless reasons which prove that this
SERMON V. 87
is the one thing needful, that this alone is to
he kept in view, and pursued at all times and
in all places ; not indeed by neglecting our
temporal affairs, but by making them all mi
nister unto it : by so conducting them all, that
every step therein may be a step to this higher
end. Now that the recovery of the image of
God, of this glorious liberty, this perfect re
storation, is the one thing needful upon earth,
appears first from hence, that the enjoyment of
them was the end of our creation ; for man was
created to love God, and to this end alone,
even to love the Lord his God with all his
heart, and soul, and mind, and strength. Love
is the very image of God, it is the brightness of
his glory. By love, man is not only rendered
like him, but in some sense one with him.
If any man love God, God loveth him, and
maketh his abode with him ; he dwelleth in
God, and God in him ; and he that is thus
joined to the Lord is one spirit.
Love is perfect freedom. As there is no fear
or pain, so there is no constraint in love.
Whoever acts from this principle alone,he doeth
whatsoever he will; all his thoughts move spon
86 SERMON V.
taneously, they follow the bent of his mind,
and dwell On the beloved object ; all his words
are dictated by his heart, for out of the abun
dance of the heart the mouth speaketh ; all his
actions are the result of pure choice. Love is
the breath of his soul, the full exertion of all
his powers, the perfection of all its faculties ;
therefore since the enjoyment of these was the
one end of our creation, the recovering of them
is " the one thing needful."
The same truth appears, secondly, from its
being the end of our redemption by Jesus
Christ ; of all that our blessed Lord did and
suffered for us ; of his incarnation, his life, his
death, his resurrection, his ascension into hea
ven, and the descent of the Holy Spirit. All
these miracles of love were wrought with no
other view than to restore us to health and
freedom, to happiness and immortality. Thus
he himself testifies of the end of his coming
into this world : " The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me—he hath sent me to heal the broken
hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives;"
or, as the prophet expresses it, " to preach good
tidings to the meek, to bind up the broken-
SERMON V. 89
hearted, to prpclaim liberty to the captives,
and the opening of the prison to them that are
bound." ;
For this alone the blessed Saviour lived, that
he might remove every spiritual disease from
our nature ; for this only he died, that he
might deliver those who were all their life-time
subject to bondage : and it was in pursuance
of the very same design that he gave us his
merciful law. The end of his command was
only our health, liberty, and perfection, or in
one comprehensive word, Charity; and the
branches of it centre in this one point, our
renewal in the love of God ; either enjoining
what is necessary for our recovery, or forbid
ding what is obstructive of it ; therefore this
being the one end of our redemption, as well
as our creation, is the one thing needful for
us upon earth.
Thirdly, it is the one end of all the dispen
sations of Providence. Pleasure and pain, health
and sickness, riches and poverty, honour and
dishonour, friends and enemies, are all be
stowed by his unerring wisdom and goodness
with a view to this one thing. The will of
90 SERMON V.
God, in allotting us our several portions of all
these, is solely for our sa notification ; our re
covery from the vile bondage, the love of his
creatures, to the free love of our Creator. All
his providences, be they mild or severe, point
at no other object than this ; they are all de
signed either to wean us from what is not, or
to unite us to what is, worthy our affection.
Are they pleasing ? then they are intended to
lift our hearts to the Parent of all good. Are
they painful ? then they are means of eradicat
ing those passions that forcibly withhold us
from him : so that all lead the same way, either
directly or indirectly, either by gratitude, or
disappointment ; for to those who have ears to
hear, every loss, especially of what was nearest
and dearest to us, speaks as clearly as if it were
an articulate voice from heaven, " Little chil
dren, keep yourselves from idols "—every sor
row, every pain, every mortification, " Love
not the world, neither the things of the world "
—and every pleasure, with a small still voice,
** Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart."
To the same end are all the internal dis«
SERMON V. 91
pensations of God, all the influences of his
Holy Spirit, whether he gives us joy or sorrow
of heart, whether he inspires us with vigour
and cheerfulness, or permits us to sink into
deadness of soul, into dejection and heaviness,
it is with the same view ; namely, to restore
us to health, to liberty, to holiness : these are
all designed to heal those inbred diseases of
our nature, self-love and the love of the world.
They are all given, together with the exter
nal dispensation of our daily bread, to enable
us to convert them into spiritual nourishment,
and to recover his love, which is health to our
souls. Therefore the renewal of our natures in
this love being not only the one end of our
creation and redemption, but likewise of all
the providences of God over us, and all the
operations of his Spirit in us, it must be, as the
eternal wisdom of God hath declared it, <c the
one thing needful."
How great reason, even in the Christian
world, there is to resume the apostle's exhort
ation, " Awake thou that sleepest, and arise
from the dead ?" Hath not Christ given thee
light ? why then sittest thou in the shadow of
§2 .SERMON V.
death ? What slumber is this which oppresses
thee ? knowest thou not that one thing is
needful ? What then are these many things
with which thou art encumbered ? Why hath
any but this great concern the least place in
thy thoughts ? Is the entertainment of the
senses the one thing needful ? or the gratifying
the imagination with uncommon, or great, or
beautiful objects ? Our blessed Lord speaketh
not thus : he saith not that the one thing is
to acquire wealth, or increase what thou hast
already ; nor to obtain honour, power, rank, or
preferment ; nor yet to possess a large share of
that fairest earthly fruit, learning. No ; though
any of these may sometimes be conducive to,
not one of them is the one thing needful,
which simply is to regain an angelical nature ;
to recover the image wherein we were formed,
to be like the Most High ! This alone is the
one end of our abode on earth ; for this alone
did the Son of God pour forth his precious
blood, that he might form a people to himself,
" zealous of good works ;" for this alone does
his Holy Spirit watch over us, that we, who
without this divine influence are not able to
SBRMON V. 9$
please him, may be unerringly directed to walk
in his ways.
One thing we have to do, to press forward
to this mark of the prize of the high calling ;
to emerge out of chains, diseases, death, into
liberty, health, and life immortal ! Let us well
observe that our Lord doth not call this our
chief, but the one thing, all others being con
nected with, or quite foreign to the end of life :
on this let us fix our single view, our pure un
mixed intention, regarding nothing, small or
great, but as it has reference to this. We must
use many means, but ever let us remember we
have but one end ; for as while our eye is
single our whole body will be full of light, so,
should it ever cease to be single, in that mo
ment our whole body would be full of darkness.
Be we then continually watchful over our
souls, that there be no duplicity in our inten
tion ; be it our one view in all our thoughts
and words, and actions, to be partakers of the,
divine nature, to regain the highest measure
possible of faith which works by love, that
faith which unites us to God ! I say, to regain
the highest measure possible for us : for who-
8
/
04 SERMON V.
ever will plead for any abatement of health,
life, and glory ? Let us then labour to be per
fectly whole, to burst asunder every chain of
sin and misery, to attain the fullest conquest
over this body of death, the most entire reno
vation of our natures ; knowing this, that when
the Son of Man shall send forth his angels to
cast the double-minded into outer darkness,
then shall the single of heart receive the one
thing they sought, even the salvation purchased
by the Redeemer, and shine forth as the sun in
the kingdom of their Father !
Now to God the Father, God the Son, and
God the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all honour
and glory, adoration and worship, both now
and for ever. Amen.
SERMON VI.
(Preached in America.)
What I do thou knowest not now, but thou
shalt know hereafter. John, xiii. 7.
One of the earliest principles in the soul of
man is a desire of knowledge. This often ac
quires considerable strength before reason has
shaken off its infant weakness. Indeed it is
this which insensibly leads us on to improve
and perfect our reason, which by the present
satisfaction it affords encourages us to seek, and
renders us capable of receiving instruction.
So long as this is restricted within proper
bounds, and directed to proper objects, there
is not in the mind of man a more delightful
or more useful inclination ; the pleasures it
yields are without number ; the field of know
96 SERMON VI.
ledge hath no end ; and in almost every part
of it springs up some plant not only gratifying
to the eye and cheering to the heart, but use
ful to the life. The desire of knowledge is a
means of attaining to the true wisdom, a
means to enlighten the conscience and enlarge
the capacity, to lead us to see the all-wise, the
all-merciful God in each even of these his
lower works.
It is true that this source of lasting pleasure
may by accident give us much pain, if our
desires fix on improper objects—on any of
those parts of knowledge which, as they were
not designed for man in this lower station,
cannot be obtained by him till his removal
into another ; or if his desire even of know
ing his Creator extend beyond the limits of
his capability. He who employs his search
even on the ways of the Almighty, and will
not be contented till he has found them out
to perfection, will not be satisfied on this side
of the grave. For what human soul, clogged
with this tabernacle of clay, can find out the
Eternal to perfection ? No, we must believe
SERMON VI. 97
what God himself affirms of his own dispen
sations, " What I do thou knowest not now,
but thou shalt know hereafter."
This declaration, though uttered by our
blessed Lord upon a particular occasion to one
of his disciples, may, if rightly understood
and duly remembered, be of great benefit to
all Christians. Should a perplexing thought
arise in any of our hearts respecting any of the
ways of God, or the reasons of them, should
our minds be troubled because unable to com
prehend them, we may immediately silence
them with the reflection—this is an unavoidable
evil ; what God doeth, ** thou knowest not
now ;" or rather it is no evil at all, for " thou
shalt know hereafter."
Man cannot understand,
First, how the infinite God operates in num
berless cases ;
Secondly, why things are done by him
which he is fully sensible are done.
After illustrating a few instances of our ig
norance, I intend, thirdly, to offer some reasons
why we may suppose this ignorance to be our
H
98 SERMON VI.
portion, and wherefore the Almighty has been
pleased to ordain that, respecting most of his
ways, we cannot know them till hereafter.
First, we cannot know how it is that the
Supreme Governor holds the world in its pre
sent state ; " how he spreadeth the north over
the empty space, and suspendeth the earth upon
nothing ;"—" how he teacheth the sun his cer
tain seasons, and maketh the moon still to know
her going down ;" how he sustaineth those
other great lights which continually float in
the firmament of heaven ; how he balanceth
them, so that no force can shake them, and
so arranges their innumerable armies that
every one keeps his appointed station, and
constantly runs the appointed race ; that though
each of them has moved so many thousands
of years, with such inconceivable swiftness,
yet each preserves its due rank and equal dis
tance from all others ; that amidst the variety
of their motions there is the utmost regularity^
no injury, no confusion, but all is order, har
mony, and peace. . t
It is certain that those who are too wise to
SERMON VI.
own they know nothing about it will affirm
that all this is done by a power unknown to
the old philosophers ; that this power connects
the universe together, and all the hosts of
heaven keep their courses because they conti
nually gravitate with such a determinate force
towards each other. How clearly do these
people explain the ways of God ! how satis
factorily do they declare the thing as it is !
We allow that all things gravitate with a force
proportioned to their quantity of matter. That
this is done we know, but we ask how' it is
done? We inquire what this gravity is?
what is this secret chain by which all parts of
the universe are so firmly and durably con
nected ? what is the universal spring to which
all earth and heaven submit ? this attraction,
this tendency in every natural body to ap
proach to every other ? We know it is the
law of nature, we discern it is the hand of
Omnipotence, and here our knowledge ends.
Secondly, not that we need ascend to
heaven or down to the deep, for instances of
the ignorance of man in the ways of God.
They are nigh thee even in thy heart, nay, in
h 1
SERMON VI.
the most inconsiderable, the most obvious
parts of thy own frame. Who knoweth how
thy soul is retained in life ( how the Most High
God encloseth spirit in matter ? how he has so
intimately united two substances of natures so
totally different? how He who established it
at first, still preserves that exact dependence of
one on the other ? Who knows how the
thought of his inmost soul immediately strikes
the outward part of this earthly body, and
how a consciousness in the mind of having
done any thing amiss instantly spreads a blush
over the cheek, and a prick of a needle on the
hand immediately occasions a painful sensation
.in the soul ? Man is a mystery to himself.
That God does work wonderfully within him
he knows, but the manner of the operation he
cannot know ; it is too wonderful for his pre
sent capacity. Whether he surveys his hand or
heart or head, he sees innumerable footsteps of
the Almighty ; but vainly does he attempt to
trace them to their spring : " clouds and dark"
ness are round about it."
As unsuccessfully may man attempt to search
out how this -infinite Being operates in the
SERMON VI. 10i
works of grace. The springs whence we de
rive spiritual life are at least as unsearchable as
those of the natural. That it is the Divine
Spirit " who worketh in us both to will and
to do of his good pleasure," experience and
reason and Scripture convince every sincere
inquirer ; but how he worketh this in us, who
shall explain ? who can point out the particular
methods of divine operation ?
This indeed we know, that when the pas.
sions are calm, and our souls are tranquil, then
chiefly the Spirit of God loves to move upon
the face of the waters ; yet are we not able to
understand how it moves. Darkness is upon
the face of the deep ; " the wind bloweth,"
as our blessed Lord has said, " where it
listeth, and thou nearest the sound thereof,
but canst not tell whence it cometh, nor
whither it goeth."
If there be any particular work of the Holy
Spirit which we can less comprehend than the
rest, it seems to be his influencing one person
in answer to the prayers of another: that he
does pour a large measure of his blessed influ
102 SERMON VI.
ence upon us at the request of those in whom
he is well pleased, he hath afforded us sufficient
ground to believe in several places of Holy
Scripture.
It was at the intercession of Moses that
the Almighty spared the Israelites when they
had made the golden calf, withheld the pesti
lence which he threatened to inflict when
they brought up an evil report of the promised
land, and restored Miriam when punished with
leprosy.
When the arm of king Jeroboam (which
was stretched out to seize ' a prophet for de
claring the judgments of God) was dried up,
it was at the prayer of the same prophet he
was healed.
When the son of the widow of Sarepta
died, Elijah cried unto the Lord, and said,
" O Lord my God, I pray thee, let this child's
soul come into him again," and the petition
was granted.
The son of the Shunamite was also restored
to \hfe at the entreaty of the prophet Elisha ;
and it was the intercession of Job which ob
SERMON VI. 103
tained pardon from God for his misjudging
friends.
The New Testament is also full of instances
of the efficacy of prayer, and we are encouraged
further by the express declaration of St. James,
P The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous
man availeth much;" but how it avails we
cannot explain. How the most wise God acts
upon us in consequence of the prayers of our
friends, the manner of his returning the inter
cession of the one into the bosom of the other,
we cannot know.
Nor yet is the manner whereby God acts
in any of these particulars more perfectly un
known to the wisest of men than are the rea
sons whereon he acts upon others.
To produce a few instances of this truth
was the second thing proposed, to mention
some things of which we cannot say why, x
though we know they are done.
And first, we cannot say why the Omni
potent God suffered evil to have a place in his
creation. Why, he who is so infinitely good
himself, who made all things " very good,"
and who rejoices in the good of all his crea
104 SERMON VI.
tures, permitted what is so entirely contrary to
his own nature, and so destructive of his own
works. Why is sin, and its attendant pain,
permitted to exist in the world i—has been-
a question ever since the world begun ; and
the world will probably end before human
understandings have answered it with any
certainty.
It has indeed been well observed, that all
evil' is either natural, moral, or penal ; that
natural evil or pain is no evil at all if it be
overbalanced with subsequent pleasure ; that
moral evil, or sin, cannot possibly befall any
one unless those who make it their choice ; and
that penal evil, or punishment, can only de
volve upon such as secure it for their portion,
by voluntarily committing sin.
This entirely removes all imputation on the
justice and goodness of God, since it never
can be proved that it is contrary to either
of these attributes to bestow upon his crea
tures the liberty of embracing either good or
evil, to place happiness or misery in their own
power, and to give them the choice of life
or death.
SERMON VI. 105
But still this does not solve the question—
why an omniscient and merciful God gave
them this choice? It is incontrovertible in
so doing he did not act contrary to any of
his divine attributes ; but can we venture to
affirm that it would have been contrary to
them to have acted otherwise ? to have prede
termined man to obedience? to have con
strained him to be happy, and given him no
choice of misery ? Perfectly consistent it was
with his goodness and justice to set life and
death before his creatures ; but would it have
been inconsistent with either to have permitted
them to know only life ? Why the supreme
Disposer of all things chose one of these me
thods rather than the other, can blind and
feeble man presume to judge ? The All Wise
could not act without infinite wisdom, however
it be hidden from finite comprehension. Man
cannot attain to such knowledge, or fathom the
councils of the Most High ; but doubtless in
another state they will be unfolded, and fully
justify the ways of God to man.
Nor can we here understand why, among
those who choose happiness, the Almighty
J 06 SERMON VI.
makes the difference which we see he does
make. Why he appointeth to one ten talents,
to another five, to another one ; and that these,
if improved, shall bring a proportioned reward.
Not that he hath 'so limited any of his ra
tional creatures, but that each may attain an
inconceivable degree of happiness ; and more
or less of it every one will attain according
to the improvement of talents entrusted to
him 5 but yet some appear chosen to such
honour (as the prophets, apostles, and mar
tyrs) as no others attain ; to such excellence,
as even the opportunity of achieving be-
longeth not.
Thirdly, why the eternal God is pleased to
bestow on these persons such a measure of
honour, happiness, and virtue, (distributing
the ten talents with the grace to improve them,)
we can no more resolve, than why he is pleased
to inflict such a measure of suffering on others:
/ in the latter case indeed we may sometimes
trace the immediate reason, and observe that
the particular affliction either is pointed at the
particular vice to which such a man naturally
inclines, or is conducive to that virtue which
6
SERMON VI. 107
he eminently needs ; but if we move one step
beyond this, we are lost again. We cannot
explain wherefore it was that such a man was
suffered to be naturally inclined to that evil or
averse to that good. Or if it should occur, as
it sometimes does, that we can assign a reason
for any notorious fault in our natural temper,
yet we only put off our ignorance one remove,
and return to our doubt.
Thus, if we perceive our nature is peculiarly
prone to some hateful sin, because there is no
other method of bringing us to humility, with
out which all our actions are displeasing to the
God who seeks the humble and contrite spirit,
yet the difficulty recurs—Why did the good
God permit me to be so prone to pride ? And
here at least we must stop ; we have only to
rest on his good pleasure, and own " that his
judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past
finding out!"
Innumerable are the other instances wherein
it is obvious that man knoweth not the ways of
God, that he never designed us to be of his
council, or privy to the secret springs of hi*
conduct ; why he gives to this man one en*
]08 SERMON VI.
dowment, to that another ; why he distributes
the several blessings, and his Holy Spirit, in
such a measure and at such a time ; why—but
it is vain to attempt to enumerate all the in
stances of this one branch of human ignorance,
unless we could declare all the depths of the
riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God.
Attempt we rather to search after that
part of his ways which is not past finding
out, and to inquire, as we proposed to do
in the third place, why this ignorance is our
portion.
And one great cause why (as we may reason
ably suppose) our Heavenly Father permits this
cloud to rest upon us, prohibits our knowledge,
and displays so small a part of his ways is,
that our profound ignorance may teach us
the most useful knowledge—humility ; —that,
conscious how little we can know of the Most
High, we may be the more intent upon
knowing ourselves ; that, from a due sense
of our utter inability to understand either the
manner or reasons of the divine operations, we
may seriously apply to what we are able to
SERMON VI. 109
understand—the manner and reasons of our
own actions. Nor is any thing more suited to
give us a just, that is, a mean opinion of our
selves, than to have so many proofs daily be
fore us of the imperfection of our noblest en
dowments ; if reason, boasted reason, be so
imperfect, what must be the meaner parts of
our frame. If thy understanding, the light
that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness ! By pride, saith the prophet, didst
thou, O Lucifer, son of the morning! fall
from heaven.
Lest his next race of creatures should also
fall from it, the Almighty God particularly
guarded them against it. He made them lower
than his angels, that, not having the same
temptation, too high an opinion of their own
perfections, they might continue capable of
that glory and honour wherewith he designed
to crown them ; that he permitted man so
strangely to debase all his powers, corrupt his
will, and obscure his understanding, that he
might withdraw pride from man.
Here then is one wise and merciful reason
for the present.blindness of our understanding.
110 SETIMON VI.
that God, by hiding himself from man, might
teach him humility, and so conduct him to his
Maker. Another cause is, to fulfil his eternal
purpose, that man, as long as he continues
upon earth, should walk by faith not by sight.
The design of our Heavenly Father was not
that we should see and know, whether we
would or not, that all his ways are wise and
good and gracious ; but that we should be
lieve this, give such an assent as he has given
us power to give or to withhold (for the power
of choice is his gift) ; and this intention of our
Creator is admirably served by the measure of
understanding which we now enjoy ; it suffices
for faith, but not for knowledge ; we can be
lieve in God—we cannot see him. ;.
Another reason why we are so little ac
quainted with his ways, why what the Omni
potent doeth, man cannot know, seems to be
alluded to in the text, " but thou shalt know
hereafter." This knowledge, therefore, is de
nied us on earth, because it is a felicity for
heaven. And what a felicity ! to have the veil
withdrawn at once, and to enjoy the full blaze
of Deity! the wisdom, the goodness, the love
SERMON VI. fit
of God ! Clearly to discern by what means
the great Author of this visible world united
all its parts together—by what chain the pillars
of the earth were upholden, and the armies
of the sky supported ! In what manner the
mysterious union between the body and the
soul was effected and maintained, that as
tonishing correspondence between spirit and
matter, of perishable dust and immortal flame I
To comprehend how the Holy Ghost, the
author of the world of grace, sustained the
soul in moral life ! How, in answer either to
our own prayers or to the prayers of others, his
blessed influence, overshadowing us out of the
darkness, storm, and confusion of our degraded
natures, educed all light, and peace, and order f
To comprehend the reasons why sin and pain
and misery were permitted to mingle with
those works which God himself had pro
nounced very good !—to perceive what unspeak
able blessings owe their being to the curse,
even the redemption of man (that greatest in
stance of the love of God) overbalancing the
evils of the fall ! —why it was just and right as
SERMON VI.
well as merciful in God to deal to every man hi*,
distinct measure of faith, " and anoint some
whom he chose before the world began, with
the oil of gladness above their fellows ;"—
wherefore he distributed to every man his
distinct measure of suffering also ; —why seme
were plucked as brands out of the flame, and
others sanctified from the womb ; —why the
several gifts of the Spirit were distributed as
they were with respect to kind, degree, time,
and persons ? What a gratification to a rea
sonable soul to have such a prospect displayed
before him ! —to have the eye of the mind
opened, strengthened, and cleared, that it may
command and enjoy it to the fullest extent !
A prospect which we could not see and live,
which, imprisoned in this habitation of clay,
we could not bear ; and which is therefore fitly
reserved for that state wherein, being clothed
with glory and immortality, we shall be like
the angels now in heaven—purified to see our
God ! Amen.
To Him who dwelleth in the light which no
5
SERMON VI.
mortal can approach, whom flesh and blood
hath not seen nor can see—to the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost—the ever-blessed Trinity-
one God—be glory and praise, might and ma
jesty, now and for ever !
I
' 1)4
i •
SERMON VII.
(Preached at Fredcrica : —at Savannah : —at Christchurch, Boston.)
He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing pre
cious seed, shall doubtless come again with
rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.
Psalm exxvi. 6.
Experience shows us that even they who
are Christians indeed, who serve God with
all their strength, may go on their way weep
ing, perhaps for many years, perhaps to the
end of this transitory life.
They are followers of him who was a man of
sorrows and acquainted with grief ; and if any
man will come after him he must deny him
self, and take up his cross ; he must suffer with
his master, more or less, being like him, to be
made perfect through sufferings. For this very
cause are these sufferings permitted, to lead
1
SERMON VII. 115
them to higher perfection ; they go on their
way weeping, that the good seed they bear
may yield them more fruit ; and that good
seed (even all those Christian virtues which are
perfected by affliction) shall in due time grow
up into a plenteous harvest of rest, and joy,
and life eternal.
The certainty of this great truth is pointed
out to us by the very manner wherein it is re
vealed. Heaven and earth may, nay must,
pass away, but not one tittle of the sacred
word of God. As sure as He exists, and is a
rewarder of all that diligently seek him, so
sure no one virtue of any disciple of Christ,
shall in any wise lose its reward. Only let
him bear forth this good seed unto the end,
and though he may now go on his way weep
ing, he shall come again with joy, and bring
his sheaves with him.
I propose briefly to explain, that every virtue
is the seed of joy eternal ; an important consi
deration, which requires your most frequent
thought and deepest attention. The time in
deed will not permit me to enumerate every
Christian virtue, but only those general graces
1 1
SERMON VII.
which we can never regard too highly, humi
lity, faith, hope, and love ; yet this is almost
the same thing, since these are the common
root of each particular virtue, none of which
has any value, nor in truth any existence, un
less it spring from them. It will therefore be
sufficient to show, in few words, that each is
the seed of joy ; that every one of these graces,
although when first sown it may be as small as
a grain of mustard seed, yet as it groweth up,
shooteth out great branches full of delight and
blessedness.
This joy, I therefore call eternal, because
the Holy Scriptures assure us that it is the
same in kind, though not in degree, with
that we shall enjoy in eternity ; for it should
be well observed, and ever remembered, that
heaven is begun upon earth ; and accordingly
our blessed Saviour often means by the king
dom of heaven that temper of mind which a
Christian now enjoys. He begins to enjoy it
when he begins to be a Christian, when Christ
begins to reign in his soul, is the object of his
love, and the principle of his actions ; and the
more absolute this principle and love are, the
SERMON VII. M7
more happiness he enjoys : for as all the poor in
spirit, all that believe in God, all that trust in
him, and love him, are blessed ; so the greater
their humility, faith, hope, and love> the greater
is their blessedness : and thus they go on from
strength to strength, they go on from one
measure of joy to another, till what was sown
on earth be removed into a better soil, and
grown up to perfection in heaven.
But before this is explained further it may
be proper to examine an objection which almost
every one is ready to make, and this is, that
by this doctrine every Christian is happy j
which is contrary to experience, there being
many good Christians who scarcely know what
joy means.
I answer, Is that mind truly in them which,
was in Christ Jesus ? Have they those tempers
which he requires ? Are they renewed in hu
mility, faith, hope, and love ? Otherwise they
are only nominal Christians, and however un
happy they are it is nothing to the present
question.
Supposing they have some degree of these
tempers, have they such a degree as they might
have ? have they as much as the first Christ
118 SERMON VII.
ians enjoyed ? so much as God would give
them too, if they would receive it ?
If not, let none wonder that a low degree of
holiness gives (if any) but a low degree of hap
piness. If they have a deep humility, a strong
faith, a lively hope, and a fervent love, at some
seasons, do they not at others so droop and
faint in their minds, as to become like common
men ; if they do, no one can expect their joy
should extend further than the cause of it :
they cannot be always happy till they are al
ways holy; and when they are always heavenly-
minded, then they shall rejoice evermore.
Yet is it most certain, as was before remark
ed, that till that happy hour when God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes, even they
who bear forth this seed of joy may go on
their way weeping. They may, nay they must,
endure affliction, for so did the Captain of their
salvation. But it is as certain that a Christian
knows how to rejoice, not only after, ' but in
tribulation : for as in the laughter of the wicked
the heart is sorrowful, so in the tears of the
righteous there is joy ; he does not wait till his
afflictions are overpast, but in every thing giveth
thanks ; though he cannot but feel when he
SERMON VII. HQ
suffers pain, yet in the midst of it he can re
joice in the Lord, and possess his soul in such
patience and resignation, such a confidence in
the love of his heavenly Father, under the most
severe dispensations, as shall impart a peace,
even at that season, which the world cannot give.
Let us dwell on this point more particularly.
The first of all Christian graces, and the foun
dation of all, is humility ; a deep sense of our
spiritual poverty, an experimental knowledge
that we are nothing but sin, and deserve no
thing but shame ; and a clear sense that we
have nothing, and can do nothing—no, not so
much as think a good thought, without the
assistance of the Holy Spirit.
And is such a virtue as this the seed of joy ?
—Yes, as surely as it is the seed of all other
virtues, as surely as it is contrary to the pride
of fallen nature, which is the source of all tor
ment. No sooner does humility enter a soul,
which before was all storm and tempest, than
it says to the sea of passion, " Peace, be still ;"
and there is a great calm.
In every branch of humility there is a sweet
ness not to be uttered : in the entrance into
120 SERMON VII.
such a state indeed, there is pain, but it is full
of penitent delight ; there is mourning united
with it, but even that mourning is replete with
blessedness. It is health to the soul, it heals
while it wounds. It comforts at the same time,
and in the same degree, as it softens the heart.
Humility not only removes all that swelling
anguish with which pride drinks up the spirits,
it not only implants consolation wherever it
comes, and brings rest to the weary soul, but
joy, which increases more and more unto the
perfect day.
Humility cannot but lead to faith ; a sight
of our spiritual diseases induces us to fly to the
cure of them. Who can feel himself sick, and
not desire to be made whole r What contrite
sinner does not rejoice in a Saviour ? and the
more he rejoices in this unspeakable gift, the
more firmly he believes that his Saviour is able
and willing to save to the uttermost—able to
save all that believe, for he is God ! and willing,
for he is God manifested in the flesh. Here
is joy, which none can divide from faith! joy
unspeakable and full of glory.
God ! the Lord God ! Jehovah ! God over
SERMON VII. 121
all ! the God to whom all things are possible,
hath undertaken the cause of fallen man 1 He
hath promised, he hath sworn to save ! nay, he
hath done more—he hath bowed the heavens
and come down, he hath been made man ! he
hath lived, and suffered, and died. Jesus Christ
hath died to save man ! Tell it out in all lands—r
let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be
glad ! publish ye, and praise, and say, " This is
the victory which overcometh the world—even
our faith." If we can believe, all things are
possible to him that believeth ; to him it is easy
to rejoice evermore—Yea! we cannot but re
joice in thy strength, O Lord Christ, and be
exceeding glad of thy salvation !
Now if it be so joyful a thing to believe that
Christ died to save sinners, what consolation
must it be to add to our faith, hope ? to be
assured that he died to save us ? If to know
that a ransom is paid for fallen man, and a new
covenant of mercy given him, be the source of
a peace which passeth all understanding, yea,
of joy unspeakable and full of glory, how must
he rejoice who feels within his own soul that
this ransom is paid for him ! whose heart bears
SERMON VII.
witness that he is within that covenant, arid
shall find mercy even in the day of venge
ance !
If the belief, that all who are faithful servants
of their great master have an house eternal in
the heavens, be a continual spring of gladness,
how shall he sing for joy with whom the Spirit
of God bears witness that he is faithful ! who
can lay hold of these great and precious pro
mises, whose eye God hath opened to look
into eternity, and to take a view of those man
sions of glory, into which he knows his blessed
Lord is gone before to prepare a place for him !
Such joy have all those that hope in God,
and the stronger their hope the greater it is :
but this is not all ; for hope leads to love, and
in this love happiness is complete.
Very excellent things are spoken of this hap
piness which flows from loving God ; whoever
possesses it feels more than ever can be spoken,
even if he spoke with the tongue of men and
angels. It is what Scripture terms the hidden
manna, the inexpressible sweetness whereof
none can conceive but he that partakes of it;
but some little imperfect knowledge may be
I
SERMON VII. 1'2$
attained from what appears in outward exer
cises of it.
Not to insist on the pleasure which the man
feels who loves his God, in manifesting love to
his neighbour for God's sake, how does he re
joice whenever he has an opportunity of pour
ing out his heart before him ! How is his soul
satisfied when his mouth praiseth him with
joyful lips! How does it increase when he joins
with the congregation of the faithful in prayer
and thanksgiving ! He needeth not the exhor
tation of man, nor even the command of his
Creator, to drag him to the house of prayer :
he needeth not be reminded that if he forbears
assembling himself with the people of God, as
the manner of most is, he casts himself out of
the congregation of saints, he renounces the
privileges of his baptism, casts himself out of
the sanctuary, and excommunicates himself
from the body of Christ. No, he is glad when
they say unto him, " Let us go into the house
of the Lord ;" but his joy overflows all bounds
when, in the memory of him whom his soul
loveth, he eateth the living bread which came
124 SERMON VII.
down from heaven, and drinketh the cup of
salvation.
Lo, thus is the man blessed that feareth the
Lord ! that beareth forth good seed ! these
sheaves shall he bring home in this life, how
ever he may now go on his way weeping.
These are the first fruits which he shall re
ceive even here, but the harvest is not yet : he
as yet knows and loves his God only in part,
therefore enjoys him in part only ; but the hour
approaches when that which is in part shall be
done away: yet a little while and he shall
come again with fulness of joy to reap his
entire harvest. Behold, " One standeth at the
door" who will complete what he hath begun ;
who shall ripen the seeds of grace into glory,
and, instead of the dew of heaven which now
refreshes his spirit, will give him rivers of
pleasure for evermore ! Amen.
125
SERMON VIII.
(Preached at Frederics, in the island of St. Simon's, Georgia, on
arrival ; March, 1736.)
The light of the body is the eye : if therefore
thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be
full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy
whole body shall be full of darkness.
Matt. vi. 12, 23.
The good providence of God hath at length
brought you to the haven where you desired to
be. This is the time which you so wished to
find—this is the place you have so longed to ar
rive at. What then ought to be your thoughts,
your designs, your resolutions, now the Al
mighty God hath granted your heart's desire ?
Consider well what ought to be your conduct ;
now choose whether you will serve God or not :
but consider that if you do serve him, you
must do it with all your mind ; that no man
6
126 SERMON VIII.
can serve two masters, for ye cannot serve God
and Mammon ; either you must give to God
your whole heart, or none. He cannot, wiir
not, have a divided heart ; either wholly lay
aside the thoughts of pleasing him, and choose
another master, or let the pleasing him be your
one aim in all your thoughts, all your words,
and all your actions. Believe our Lord himself,
you can find no middle way : " The light of
the body is the eye ; if therefore thine eye be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light :
but if thine eye be not single, but evil, thy
whole body shall be full of darkness."
I am persuaded there is not one of you here
present that will not earnestly attend while, in
the name of that God who hath hitherto de
fended us, and is now present with us, I
First briefly explain these important words
of our Lord, and
Secondly apply them to the present circum
stances.
And first, may the God who spoke them
enable me so to explain them, that the mean
ing may sink deep into your hearts !
The light of the body is the eye ;" that is,
SERMON VIII. 127
the intention is to the soul what the eye is to
the body. As every part of the body is directed
by the eye, so every power of the soul is in all
its movements directed by the intention I
As every turn of the foot or hand depends
upon and is governed by the eye, so on the
eye of the mind depends every deliberate move
ment of the understanding and the affections,
and consequently of whatever depends upon
these, as do most of our words and actions.
If therefore thine eye be single, that is, if thy
intention be not divided into two ends—if in all
thy thoughts, words, and works, thou hast only
one view, namely, to serve and please God, thy
whole body shall be full of light ; this single
intention will be a light in all thy paths ; all
darkness and doubt will vanish before it, all
will be plain before thy face ; thou wilt clearly
see the way wherein thou shouldest go, and
steadily walk therein. .
But if thine eye be evil, if thy intention be
not single, if thou bast a divided aim, if besides
that of pleasing God thou hast a desire to
please thyself, to do thy own - will—if thou
aimest at any thing but the one thing need
128 SERMON VIII.
ful, namely, a recovery of the image of God in
thy soul, thy whole body shall be full of dark
ness : thou wilt see no light which way soever
thou turnest thyself ; never wilt thou be free
from doubt and perplexity, never out of uncer
tainty and entanglement.
As thou art continually aiming at what can
not be achieved, thou wilt be continually dis
appointed. The thick darkness of ignorance,
and guilt, and misery, will gather around thee
more and more, nor wilt thou be able while
encompassed with such a cloud, ever to recover
the way of light and peace.
The sum is this : as long as thou hast but
one end in all thy thoughts, and words, and
actions, to please God, or, which is the same
thing, to improve in his ways of holiness, in
the love of God, and of thy neighbour, so long
shalt thou clearly perceive what is conducive
to it. Thy God, whom thou servest, shall so
tenderly watch over thee, that light, and love,
and peace, shall guide all thy ways, and shine
upon all thy paths ; but no sooner shalt thou
divide thy heart, and aim at any other end but
holiness, than the light from which thou turnest
SERMON VIII. 129
away being withdrawn, thou shalt not know
whither thou goest : ignorance, sin, and misery,
shall overspread thee, till thou fallest into utter
darkness.
Secondly, to apply these words to your pre
sent circumstances was the next thing pro
posed ; in order to do which more effectually,
I shall, by the assistance of God, give you
some directions concerning a single intention,
and exhort you to practise them.
I would not willingly believe that any of
you need to be directed to have a single eye in
your religious exercises. To aim at the favour
or praise of men, or indeed any thing beside
the pleasing God, in sacrament, prayer, or any
duty of the like nature, is such an affront both
to God and man, that we should be very cau
tious of charging any one with it, even in our
heart. It may be enough, therefore, barely to
observe, that there is no name sufficiently ex
pressive of the folly of those hypocrites who in
any of these solemn offices have any other view
than to please God and save their own souls.
But you are not, perhaps, so well aware that
the same singleness of intention is full as neces-
K
130 SERMON VIII.
sary in every part of business as it is in your
devotions ; yet this is the very truth. Unless
your single view be to please God, and to be
upright before him, the most lawful business
becomes unsanctified ; for it is no more allowed
a Christian to work, than it is to pray, with
any other intention ; and a mixture of impure
motives does as much pollute our employments
as it does our prayers.
Every thing that proceeds from, and is suit
able to, this intention, is holy, just, and good ;
and every thing which does not proceed from
an upright heart and single eye is so far evil
and unholy.
This, therefore, is the second direction I
would give—to preserve a single intention in all
your business, which indeed converts it into
religion, which ennobles every employment,
and renders the meanest offices of life a reason
able sacrifice, acceptable to God through Jesus
Christ.
Nor is a single eye less essential in our re
freshments than in our occupations and devo
tions, as every creature of God is good, if it be
sanctified by the Spirit of God and by prayer.
SERMON VIII. 131
Without this sort of prayer, at least an in*
tention to please him by using it, no creature
is good, nor can be used without injury to
ourselves ; and lest we should imagine that
meats and drinks were too little and insig
nificant matters for the Almighty to regard,
he has been graciously pleased to remove this
supposition, by giving you a third direction in
express words by his apostle, w Whether ye
cat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the
glory of God."
Whatever ye do :—this plainly comprises our
recreations as well as refreshments ; a fourth
direction therefore equally important is, let the
same pure intention be preserved in these like
wise. It is his will that you should use exer*
cise for your health, and delight your eyes
with the works of nature and wonders of
creation, in such a measure and manner as
will prepare you for business or devotion ; 80
far, therefore, as your present state renders them
necessary, to this end you are to use them, and
no other.
One direction more is important before I
close this head, and that is, that you, above all
K 2
SERMON VIII.
others, are required to keep a single eye in
your conversations. Whether devotion or busi
ness be the subject, or whether you converse
for social enjoyment and recreation, in what
ever case, you are enjoined to aim at the glory
of God. Any other motive is evil, and comes
from evil : it is an idle word, or conversation,
rather, as the term should be translated ; and of
every such idle word, our Lord plainly tells us,
we shall give an account at the day of judg
ment.
I have now laid before you, in the plainest
manner I was able, the directions wherein this
single intention must be observed ; nothing re
mains but to exhort you instantly, zealously,
and diligently, to practise them.
The God of your fathers hath lately given
you a most gracious testimony that he hath
not forsaken you or your children. Your eyes
have seen that " his ears are not heavy that
they should not hear, neither his hand short
ened that it cannot save." You have cried unto
him in your trouble, and he hath delivered
you out of your distress. He hath led you
through the terrors of the great deep ; he there
1
SERMON VIII. 133
made bare his mighty arm before you—at his
word the stormy wind arose and lifted up the
waves thereof—we reeled to and fro, and stag
gered like drunken men, and were at our wits'
end, when he made the storm to cease so that
the waves thereof were still. He hath prepared
a table for you in the way wherein you went ;
even there, with corn and wine hath he sus
tained you. Some of you he hath raised from
sickness, to some he hath forbidden sickness to
approach ; to all of you, who allowed spiritual
blessings to be blessings, he hath afforded them.
Yea in these he hath been found of them who
asked them not ; he hath spoken to the hearts
even of some who were unmindful of his mer
cies ; and now " he hath brought you to the
haven where ye would be." What reward then
will ye give unto the Lord for all the benefits
he hath done unto you ? Love him with all
your hearts, serve him with all your strength,
forget the things which ai$e behind—pleasures,
riches, honours—in a word, whatever does not
lead to God.
Behold all things about you are become new,
SRRMON VIII.
fee ye likewise new creatures. From this hour
let your eye be single. Whatever ye speak, or
think, or do, let God be your aim, and God
alone. Let your great end be to please him, in
all your business, your refreshments, your re
creations, your converse, as well as in religious
duties.—Let this be your one design.
" He that hath ears to hear, let him hear."
Have one intention, one desire, one hope, even
that the God whom ye worship may be your
God, and your All, in time and in eternity !
O be not of a double mind, think of nothing
else, seek nothing else—to love God and be
beloved by him is enough !
Fix your eyes upon this one point, and your
whole soul shall be full of light ! God will con
tinually lift up the light of his countenance
upon you, his Holy Spirit shall dwell in you,
and shine more and more unto the perfect day.
He shall purify your hearts by faith from every
earthly thought and unholy affection ; he shall
establish your souls with so lively a hope of
his favour, as already lays hold on the prize of
your high calling ; he shall fill you with peace,
SERMON VIII. 135
and joy, and love—love, the brightness of his
glory, the express image- of his person—love
which never ceaseth, never faileth, but still ex
tends its vivifying flame, still goeth on con
quering and to conquer, till what was a weak,
blind, wavering, sinful creature shall be filled
with all the fulness of God, and worship in
his presence when time shall be no more !
136
SERMON IX.
(Preached onboard the London Galley, between Charles Town
and Boston.)
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy mind, and with all thy strength.
Mark, xii. 30.
When God had formed man out of the dust,
and breathed into him the breath of life, when
he had stamped his own image and superscrip
tion upon him, in his understanding, will,
and affections, he gave him a law, even to
love Him in whose image he was made; and
love, the one thing which his Creator required
in return for all his benefits, he therefore re
quired, because it was the one thing needful to
perfect the happiness of his creature.
" Thou shalt love the Lord thy God" was the
whole of that law which God enjoined to man
SERMON IX. 137
in his original state ; but when he had wilfully
degraded himself from that state of happiness
and perfection, by transgressing the single pro
hibition which was appointed for the test of
his love, a more particular law became needful
for a remedy of those many inventions he had
found out, whereby, being alienated from the
love of God, he was enslaved to the love of
his creatures, and consequently to error and
vice, to shame and to misery.
A more particular law was accordingly given
him, by the rules whereof he was fully apprised
of every avenue at which sin and pain might
break in upon his soul. By this he was also
directed to those several means which his mer
ciful Creator had appointed for the renewal of
his nature ; and to complete its use, (till his
nature was restored to the image of Him who
created him,) it pointed out all those thoughts,
and words, and works, by so many express in
junctions, which the love of God (when that was
the spring of his soul) produced without any
injunction.
Yet we may easily perceive that, even in this
state of man, love is still the fulfilling of the
law ; of every law which hath proceeded out
SERMON IX.
of the mouth of God, at sundry times and in
divers places, and particularly of that which
in these last days he hath given us by his Son.
Love is the end of every commandment of
Christ, all of which, from the least even to
the greatest, are given to man, not for his
own sake, but purely in order to this. The
negative commands, what are they, but so
many cautions against what estranges us from
the love of God ? and the positive either enjoin
the use of means of grace, which are only so
many means of love, or the practice of those
particular virtues which are the genuine proofs
of love, and the steps whereby we ascend from
strength to strength towards a perfect obedi
ence of this first and greatest commandment—
that commandment which contains all, pre
ceded all, and which shall remain when all the
rest are done away ; " Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy
soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength."
I shall endeavour to lay down, First, a plain
sense of this commandment ;
Secondly, to prove this sense to be the tru«
one ; and,
SERMON IX. 139
Thirdly, to answer the grand objection
against it.
First, I am to lay down a plain sense of this
commandment.
The love of God may be taken in various
tenses : first, as it implies obedience to him.—
Thus St. John : " This is the love of God, that
we keep his commandments ;" and such a me-
tonomy, or putting the cause for the effect,
frequently occurs in the Sacred Writings, where
by, as the love of Him is placed for outward
obedience, of which it is the vital principle,
so the fear of God is said to be the departure
from evil, which is the necessary consequence
of it. By the same figure, the love of God
has been sometimes taken for a desire of en
joying his presence ; for this immediately flows
from love, and increases in the same proportion
with it : whereas some eminent men have un
warily confounded the stream with the fountain,
and have improperly termed the desire of en
joying God, love of desire, as if love and de
sire were all one ; but desire is as essentially
distinct from the love that produces it, as is
any fruit from the tree upon which it grows.
140 SERMON IX.
Love itself is, by the common consent of
mankind, and agreeably to universal expe
rience, divided into love of complacency or
delight, and love of gratitude or benevolence :
and accordingly, love of God may be divided
into love of delight and love of gratitude ; the
one regarding what he is in himself, the other
what he is to us. The boundless perfections of
his nature are an eternal ground of delight to
every creature capable of apprehending them,
and the numberless exertions of all those per
fections on our behalf lay the strongest claim
to our gratitude. In the former sense, every
reasonable creature is to love God, because his
power, wisdom, yea, and his goodness, are in
finite : in the latter, " We love Him (says the
apostle) because He first loved us." When
these fountains have once united their streams,
they flow with redoubled violence, and bear
the Christian strongly forward to please and
obey the All-merciful, and to be made one with
God the All-perfect ; to love the Lord his God
with all his heart, and with all his soul, and
with all his mind, and with all his strength.
As to the measure of love prescribed in the
SERMON IX.
words, all commentators agree that they mean
at least thus much—we must not love anything
more than God ; we may not love the creature
above the Creator; nay, that we must not love
any thing so much as Him—that he claims
of us a love of pre eminence ; that we must
reserve for him the highest seat in our hearts,
the largest and choicest share of our affection.
They are all likewise agreed that we may en
tertain no love which is contrary to the love
of Him ; that whatever affection we find, or
have reason to suspect, will either prevent the
kindling of the divine flame, or quench it
when kindled, or any way obstruct its in
crease, or diminish its heat or brightness—
to that affection we must not give place, no,
not for a moment, but immediately resist it
with all our might.
But we must rise higher than this ; or we
shall never attain the plain sense of the com
mand, " Thou shalt love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind, and with all thy strength ;"
which imports in ordinary construction (to use
the words of a great master of reason as well
142 SERMON IX.
as devotion), " that we love God, not only with
the highest and best, but with the whole of our
affection—that we love him not only with
every capacity, passion, and faculty, with the
understanding, will, and affections, but with
every degree of every power, with all the lati
tude of our will, with all the whole possibility
of our souls ; that we devote to him, not only
the highest degree of our love, but every degree
of it ; in one word, that God be not only the
principal, but the only object of our love."
(Norris's Sermons, vol. iii. p. 7.)
Not that the Almighty is so to be the only
object of our love, as to exclude his creatures
from a subordinate share of it. " The Lord re-
joiceth in his works :" consequently man, made
after his likeness, not only may, but ought to
imitate him therein, and with pleasure to own
** that they are very good ;" nay, the love of
God constraineth those in whose hearts it is
shed abroad to love what bears his image, and
we cannot suppose any love forbidden by God
which necessarily flows from the love of him.
And even that love of the creatures which
does not flow from the love of God, if it lead*
SERMON IX. 143
to him, is accepted. For this end hath he given
us them to enjoy, that by these steps we may
ascend to higher enjoyments ; therefore, what
ever love tends to the love of God is no more
forbidden than what flows from it.
Yet further : there are many of the works of
his hands which God expressly commands us
to love, and that, not only with a love of be
nevolence, but of complacency : for such surely
is natural affection ; such is that tenderest of
all passions towards our fellow-creatures, which
our blessed Redeemer does not disdain to com
pare to the love between himself and his
church ; and such is the delight which we
ought to have in the saints that are upon the
earth, and in those that excel in virtue. The
contrary opinion, that we are forbid to lova
any creature in any degree, supposes the all-
knowing God to command our love of himself,
and yet to prohibit the immediate necessary
effect of it.
It charges the All-wise with enjoining the
end, and in that very injunction forbidding
the means ; it blasphemes his most holy and
perfect law, as notoriously contradicting itself,
5
SERMON IX.
as requiring elsewhere what was absolutely
condemned in the very first commandment of it.
This, therefore, duly considered, the sense of
that command is easily resolved into this—Thou
shalt so love the Lord thy God with all thy
powers, and with the whole force of all, as ever
to remember that thou art bound, yea, by this
very law, to obey him whom thou lovest ; and
therefore to love those things which he com
mands thee to love so far as he commands it.
Secondly, to cherish that love which is the
necessary effect of thus loving the Lord thy
God, viz. the love of those men whom he has cre
ated, particularly those who are renewed afterhis
image, in righteousness and true holiness; and,
Thirdly, to use all the means which reason
and experience recommend as conducive to this
great end, especially to love all his creatures so
far as it tends to the love of thy Creator. In
deed the third rule includes both the preceding,
seeing that all obedience to God tends to the
love of him, and every other fruit of divine
love increases that love from which it sprung.
The full sense of the first commandment is
therefore contained in this single sentence—
SERMON IX. 145
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God alone for
his own sake, and all things beside only so
far as they tend to. him*:. t', ',>.; n
That this is the mark towards, which we are
all to press if we would attain! the prize of: our
high calling; that none can attain it unless
they press toward this mark, according to the
several abilities which God hath given them;
that this plain sense of the great, command
ment is the true one, I am in the second place
to show, first from the Holy Scriptures, se
condly from reason. . \' ,.,-: [ ...„•.' vr-i
From every part of the Holy Scriptures, it
appears that love is the proper worship of. a
reasonable nature. To go no further than the
words immediately preceding the text, " Hear,
O Israel (said our Divine Teacher), the Lord
thy God is one Lord, and thou shalt love the
Lord thy God." Thou shalt love Him—why ?
because He is the Lord thy God, and as such
has a just claim to thy love ; because love is
the worship due to thy God ; because it is the
proper homage of a rational being to his Cre
ator. " Thinkest thou that he will eat bulls'
flesh, and drink the blood of goats? Offerunto
SERMON IX.
thy God thanksgivings, and pay thy heart to
the Most Highest" Without this he will not
be pleased, though thou shouldest give him
thousands of rams, or all thy substance to the
poor. But with love every sacrifice is accepted,
with this He ever is well pleased. Hear, O
Israel, God is thy Lord ! therefore shalt thou
worship him, and all worship but love is abo
mination before him.
Therefore, " thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart ;" thou shalt not divide
thy heart ; he has the right to it all ; thou
mayest not alienate any part of it ; reserve for
him not the largest share, but the whole of thy
affections ; hadst thou more lords thou mightest
have more loves than one, but if thou hast no
other God, thou canst have no other love. It
is written, " Thou shalt worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shalt thou serve." Be
hold, love is the worship of thy Lord, this
alone is his reasonable service ; therefore, thou
shalt delight in the Lord thy God, and him
only «halt thou serve.
What wonder is it then, that the essential
wisdom of the Father knew no mean between
SERMON IX. 147
a single and an evil eye ! That his inspired
apostle exclaims with such vehemence of affec
tion, " Purify your hearts, ye double-minded ;"
that his beloved disciple, after " This is the
true God," immediately subjoins, "Little chil
dren, keep yourselves from idols." From what
idols and what idolatry we are to keep ourselves,
he elsewhere explicitly declares in those well
known words, " Love not the world, neither
the things of the world : if any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him."
Were any further proof from the Holy Scrip
tures required, let us hear St. Paul : " Whe
ther ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all
to the glory of God." It is here required that,
whatever use we make of any power which God
hath bestowed on us, whatever act of any fa
culty we exert, all should tend to the glory—
the love of God ; and it is enjoined expressly.
We need not argue from a parity of reason,
" whether ye eat or drink," therefore, whether
ye rejoice or love : we need not argue from
the less to the greater ; if every bodily action,
which at best profiteth but little, how much
more is every movement of our soul to be
148 SERMON IX.
subordinated to the end of our being ? —No,
we have yet a more certain word of direction,;
the very terms are, " whatever ye do." This
commandment indeed is exceedingly wide;
not a word of our tongue, not a thought of
our hearty can escape it : do ye act, do ye
speak, do ye reas6n, do ye love ? do all to the
glory of God.
It is true that, if the literal sense of these Scrip-
tureswere absurd, and apparentlycontrary to rea
son, we should be obliged not to interpret them
according ho the letter, but to seek for a looser
meaning ': to guard those, therefore, who desire
to love God, even as he requires, from this spe
cious pretence for idolatry, I proceed to show
that this very sense is not contrary, but agree
able to the strictest reason. And how reason
able it is, so to love the Lord our God with
all our heart and with all our strength, as to
love nothing else but for his sake and in sub
ordination to the love of him, may appear,
First, from the general acknowledgment of all
men, that we ought to love nothing above God.
This is granted to be of the last concern ; all
men confess that on this ' eternity depends.
SERMON IX. 149
Reason, therefore, must direct us to ensure
this point, to risk no hazard of so mighty a
stake; whatever we do, ,to secure from all pos
sible danger our passage into a happy, futurity,
But this cannot b,e., done while ,we entertain
any love insubordinate to the love of God ; for;
while we love any object without reference tp
Hjiji,; we are never certain that we shall not
love it above him. So long as the very disease,
of our nature is the loving the creature for its,
own sake; so long as this love so imperceptibly
steals upon us, that it is impossible to fix its
bounds and to say, "Hitherto sh alt thou go
and no further ;" it is equally impossible that
we should be safe from loving it more than,
God. ..." '
If reason then prohibits our running the,
least hazard of loving any thing more than
God, and if we must be in imminent danger
of doing soj while we love any thing without
reference to him, then reason, as well as the
Holy Scriptures, requires that we should so.
love God with all our hearts, as to love nothing
but for his sake, and in subordination to the
love of him.
150 SERMON IX.
The same truth may be evidently inferred
from that further concession made by all men,
" that we may not entertain any love which is
contrary to, or subversive of, the love of God—
which does, directly or remotely tend to it
for all love which does either, obstructs it: It
it does not lessen what we have already at
tained, it prevents our attaining what we other
wise might attain ; for the force of a divided,
can never be equal to a united heart ; nor is
it possible that a part of our strength should
Carry us so far as the whole. :
But this is not the heaviest charge against
that love of the creature which is not con
ducive to the love of God. No, it is not only
obstructive, but subversive of it. They are in
consistent and incompatible. Many loves in
deed may consist in the same heart, so they be
all subordinate to one ; but two ultimate loves
are as flat a contradiction as two firsts and two
lasts: so that when the son of Sirach says,
" Woe be the fearful hearts and faint hands,
and the sinner which goeth two ways," he can
only mean, either he that flatters himself he
goes both towards God and towards his idol ;
SERMON IX. 16 I
or rather that is unstable in his ways, some
times walking in one, sometimes in the other.
That this is frequently our own unhappy case,
experience is sufficient to prove; for not the
Almighty himself can make it possible to walk
in two contrary ways at the same time. AH
our habitual love must at any one time termi
nate either in God or in some of his creatures,
and if it terminates in him, then it does not
in them ; if in them, not in him.
We cannot therefore have two ultimate
loves ; and by uncontrovertible consequence,
when we have any ultimate love but that of
God, the love of God is not in us. Nor can
it be affirmed with truth, that there may exist
an insubordinate which is not an ultimate
love ; for as every end which is subordinate
to no other is itself an ultimate end, so every
love which is subordinate is not an ultimate
end: ultimate and subordinate being con
tradictory terms, between which there is no
mean.
But who is this, touching whom we thus
coldly debate whether he should wholly pos
sess or only share our affection ? Is it not the
J 52 SERMON IX,
Lord—our God ! the all-sufficient I the all-per.
feet? In whomi are hid all the treasures: of
loveliness, of goodness, of felicity? Is it not
He of whose .wisdom, of . whose bounty, of
whose mercies, there is no number? and are
we afraid of loving Him too much ! with too
fervent, too entire an affection ?. • I : .;•
Hath the ,love of God towards us been re
strained ? hath he set any bounds to this ocean ?
Who is He that hath raised us from the dust ?
who breathed into us these living souls ? who
endowed us with the capabilities, of enjoyment
in both worlds ? who upholdeth us with the
word of his power ? who protects us by his
gracious providence ? who redeemed us by the
blood of his Son ? who sanctifies us by the
graces of his Hoty Spirit?, ,. ,;»
Oh God ! are the creatures of thy hand,
the purchase of our Blessed Redeemer, dis
puting whether they, may not love thee too
much ? whether thou art worthy of all their
affection ? Does not the essential loveliness of
thy nature deserve, not only all, but infinitely
more than such finite creatures can offer ! Is
not our whole affection immeasurably less than
SERMQN iX. 153
the least, i^f thy mercies! Or if the whole
mite of out love could repay those we have
already received, is thine arm shortened? Is
not the omnipotent God ahle—is he not will
ing—nay, has he not,; sworn, to render us a
thousand fold for every particle of love we
give him, throughout a blissful eternity ? Can
we withhold from Him one atom from ;the
whole mass without tearing; a ; star from;) our
own crown ? and shall it be thought unreason
able that he should demand the whole ?.-that
he should require all our love ? Yea! worthy
art thou, O Lord, -of .all- the love of all the
creatures thou hastmade;!; especially of those
whom Thou hast redeemed ! whom Thou hast
guided by thy council, and wilt hereafter, re
ceive Jnto glory ! v -.; .•; .' .
The grand objection which has been fre
quently made against this sense of the great
commandment (to which most others are easily
reducible)^ and which I proposed to consider
in the third place, is this, " That did it oblige
us so to love God with all our heart as to love
nothing but for his sake, and in order to the love
of Him, such an obligation would be destructive
154 SERMON IX.
of that happiness which religion was designed to
establish ; it would reduce us to a gloomy and
melancholy state, and make the Christian of a
sad countenance ; deprive us of all the inno
cent pleasures of life, and reduce our enjoy
ments to so narrow a compass, that they would
not counterbalance our pains, and support us
under the evils to which we are now exposed,
so that 'if only in this life (even without the
persecutions of primitive ages) there were
hope, we should be of all men the most
miserable.' "
I shall reply first to the particular branches
of this objection, and then in general to the
whole.
With regard to the first, be it observed, that
the happiness whereof it supposes the entire
love of God to be destructive is a happiness
that is to result from an enjoyment of the crea
tures not referred to the great Creator, that is,
it is such a happiness as never did, nor ever
will exist. " That this happiness is not, can
not be found in any creatures (to use the
words of the above-cited author), is obvious
from experience, from the vanity which we
SERMON IX. 155
find in all things, and from the restlessness
and desire of change which is consequent
upon it : we try one thing after another, as
the searching bee wanders from flower to flower,
but gO off from every one with disappointment
and a deluded expectation* Though almost
every ; thing promises, nothing answers; and
even the succession of new enjoyments (the
best resource we have for the emptiness of
each) amuses but does not satisfy ; a glorious
happiness this ! vexation, disappointment, and
loss ! and of this happiness, it must be con
fessed, the love of God is absolutely destructive."
But does it not render men gloomy and me
lancholy, by depriving them of the innocent
pleasures of life ? They who speak thus seem
not to be aware how easy it is to produce a
cloud of witnesses, and those heathens as well
as Christians, who, though they allow there ar6
a. thousand sorts of pleasure, which, considered
with regard to the whole species, are neither
good nor bad, yet utterly deny that any indivi
dual pleasure is barely innocent. But we need
not pagan testimonies, since plain reason is
sufficient to show that this expression can
5
156 - SERMON IX.
never be used with propriety. It must import
either too much or too little ; for every plea
sure, weighed with the circumstances that
attend it, is either more ;or less than innocent.
If it tends to the love of God it is more ; if it
does not, it is less. Pleasures of all sorts used
in that proportion wherein they enliven and
strengthen our minds, arid render us more fit
for discharging the duties of our responsive
stations, deserve a better title than that of in
nocent ; they are virtuous and rewardable:
and pleasure of any sort, used in any other
proportion deserves not so good an epithet, as
implying a sinful and punishable waste of time
and other talents which God hath lent us. If
these be the innocent pleasures which are meant
in the objection, we own that the love of God
does destroy them ; but it deprives us of
none which in any way conduce to that even
cheerfulness, which is both the parent and
daughter of divine love, and the life of virtue
and the beauty of holiness.
The clearness and strength of reason with
which one of our most celebrated divines
(Young's Sermons, ii. 184) confirms this im-
1
SERMON IX. 157
portant truth, will excuse the repetition of his
words. .
" Some of the heathen philosophers were
of opinion that no actions (whether pleasing
or not) are indifferent, but that all are po
sitively good, or evil ; whereby they meant, not
that no actions are indifferent in their own
nature, but that no action is indifferent in
fact—in fact, I say, for in this state, actions
(beside their formal essence) include the end
and intention of the actor : and in this senses
they affirmed that a good man made all his
indifferent actions good, and on the contrary,
a bad man made all his indifferent actions
evil ; for the pious heathens laid down this for
a rule, that every man ought to lay down a
certain general purpose for his actions, viz. to
act agreeably to right reason, and while he
fixed his eye upon this end, so long all his
actions, even those which were in themselves
indifferent, were rendered wise and good 5 but
on the contrary, while no purpose was fixed,
all the actions of man, however indifferent in
their own nature, became loose, irrational, and
evil'. ' And thus St. Paul mOre clearly tells us,
153 SERMON IX.
that every Christian ought to establish in his
mind a general purpose to which every action
should be directed, " Whether ye eat, or drink,
or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God."
This is an aim that will sanctify every act,
though in itself indifferent ; but as long as we
have no regard to this general end, all the
mass of our indifferent actions become a pro
fane waste of our precious time, which the
Almighty assigned us for better uses, i. e. to
devote and give it back again to himself. We
should, therefore, often put this question to
our soul—
Die anima,quo tendisf et in quoddirigis arcurn?
' Say, my soul, whither aimest thou ? and whi
ther tends this action ? ' Hast thou the glory
of God in view ? This kind of reflection will
consecrate the soul in all she does, and make
every natural turn into a religious act, and lead
us to meet our God in every circumstance and
event, and converse with his wisdom, good
ness, and providence in our walks, in our
business, at our table, in our lying down and
at our rising up: in fine, it will render us
SERMON IX.
more pious towards God at our work, than we
can be without it at our prayers." >
As to the last part of this objection, that such a
love of God would reduce our enjoyments to so
narrow a compass that they would not counter
balance our pains and support us under the evils
to which we are now exposed, I answer, it never
was designed they should : God hath provided
far better supports for us than such feeble aids.
And in fact, who is he whom these did ever
support under agonizing pain, or heavy sorrow?
for whom did creature comforts ever suffice or
even cheer, when God wrote bitter things
against him ? when the waters came in, even
to his soul, and the floods of trouble poured
over him ? Not one, since the world began ;
*c miserable comforters are ye all," utterly un
able to heal the broken in heart—unfit medi
cines for the chamber of sickness—inefficient
cordials for the bed of death !
I come now to the direct and adequate an
swer to all the parts of this well-known ob
jection. The entire love of God, though it
does exclude all such enjoyments of his
creatures as neither directly nor remotely con
SERMON IX.
duces to our enjoying our Creator ; though it
does especially forbid, and effectually prevent
our leaning on those broken reeds , when af
fliction presses down our soul ; and ; though it
does set ; us 1 above what are sometimes mis
called innocent pleasures* that is, vain, unneces
sary,' trifling, useless, enjoyments ; yet it is
in no wise destructive of that happiness which
our blessed religion was designed to promote ;
so far from it, that love, entire love, is the point
wherein all the lines of our holy religion centre.
This is the great happiness which the great
Author of it lived and died to establish ; and
a happiness it is, worthy of the most high God!
worthy of infinite goodness and infinite wisdom
to bestow ! a happiness not built on imagina
tion, but real, and rational ; a happiness that
does not play before our eyes at a distance, and
vanish when we attempt to grasp it, but such
as will endure the closest inspection, and the
more it is tried it will delight the more. .In
the happiness of love there is no vanity, neither
any vexation of spirit : no delusion, no disap
pointment is here: peace, joy, and hope, ever
dwell with love; the man who loves God
SERMON IX. ldl
feels that God hath given him all things richly
to enjoy ; and he surveys with joy all the crea^-
tures which God hath made. Love increases
both the number of his delights, and the
weight of them, a thousand fold, for in every
creature he sees as in a glass the glory of his
great Creator ; and while every thing reflects
to his enlightened eye the image of Him whom
his soul loveth, the sense of that divine pre
sence, over and above the delight which he
experiences in common with other men, im
parts such a vital joy and gladness to his heart,
that, were eternity added to it, it would be
heaven !
Here then is the sufficient, and the only
sufficient support under all the evils of life.—
Evils ? nothing is an evil to him who loves
God ; all things to him are very good, for
each and all are alike under the direction of
his heavenly Father, and must work together
for his good. He has but one desire—to
delight in God ; and God hath given him the
desire of his heart : and while his spirit
cleaves steadfastly to him, he is safe from the
power of evil. Indeed if his heart were not
M
i
SERMON IX.
wholly with God, as many things as he loved
besides him, so many ways would he live
open to disappointment, and fear, and grief,
and misery. But so long as he has one object
of his love, and regards all things else only as
they minister unto it, his heart standeth fast ;
for he is assured that neither life nor death,
nor things present nor things to come, nor
height nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate him from the love
of God.
I shall conclude in the words of that excel
lent man above cited, who so well practised
what he taught, " Ye have heard what is the
full and true extent of divine love, and the
full and true import of the great command
ment—a commandment worthy of Him that
gave it, and worthy of the solemn mark of
attention wherewith it was more than once deli-
vered: " Hear, O Israel ! " and let all the whole
creation hear,—and silently and reverently
attend to this great law, which (lest any
should fancy himself himself unconcerned in
it) expressly is directed to every creature;
" Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
SERMON IX.
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy mind, and with all thy strength."
The language of the great God to every ra
tional creature is, " My son, give me thy heart,"
for it was I that made it ; it was I who gave
it thee, it was I who bestowed its vital motion,
and that for no other end but to direct and in
cline it towards myself. I only am thy true
essential good : in me alone canst thou find
rest for thy soul ; all the springs of happiness
are in me. Therefore, my son, give me thy
heart ; I alone merit, I alone can reward thy
love ; let none have any share in this supreme
affection, but devote it all to me thy God.
With angels, therefore, and archangels, and
all the company of heaven, having unclasped
our hold from the inefficient creation, let us
love the Lord our God, and him alone ; let
him not divide with the creature, (oh how un
fit a rival for so divine a guest !) but let him
reign an absolute monarch in the hearts he has
formed for himself. Yea, let us love the Lord
our God, with all our heart, and with all our
mind, and with all our soul, and with all our
strength !
M 1
]64 SERMON IX.
Unto God the Father who first loved us, and
made us accepted in the Beloved—unto God the
Son who loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his own blood—unto God the Holy
Ghost who sheddeth the love of God in our
hearts, be all love, and all glory, and all adora
tion, for time and for eternity ! Amen.
165
SERMON X.
(Preached at Islington Church, London; 1T38.)
Remember the sabbath-day^ to keep it holy.
Exodus, xx. 8.
" That the Sabbath was not ordained in the
beginning of the world, nor ever observed from
the creation till the time of Moses ; that being
given by Moses to the Jews, it was not ob
served as a moral precept, but, like other cere
monies, was sometimes kept and sometimes
not, as public or private business might occur ;
that lastly, it was for ever repealed at the de
struction of the temple :"—such are the asser
tions of those who would so remember the
sabbath as not to keep it holy at all.
In answer to so much of these objections as
seem to require an answer, and to the conclu
sions drawn from them, I shall endeavour to
show,
166 SERMON X.
First, that the command for keeping the
sabhath holy was given for wise ends, by such
an authority as none but the same which gave
can repeal it ;
Secondly, that it has not been repealed by
this authority, as the ends for which it was
given are still in force ; and,
Thirdly, what that keeping the sabbath holy
is, by which we obey this command, and an
swer the ends of it.
First.—The command of keeping the sabbath
holy was given for wise ends, by such an au
thority that none but the same which gave
can repeal it. I dispute not here whether or
not this command was given to Adam, or ob
served before Moses ; nor yet whether we are
to keep the sabbath upon the seventh day, as
was the practice of the Jews ; or on the first »
day of the week, according to the usage of the
Christian church from our blessed Lord's re
surrection to the present times ; my inquiry is
this, What is the authority which commands
us to keep one day in seven holy ? and what
were the chief ends for which this command
was given ? -
SERMON X. 167
The authority by which it was given was
the authority of God : it was the supreme
governor of the universe, who from the holy
place of Sinai spake all those laws, among
which was, " Remember the sabbath-day, to
keep it holy."
He it was, who declared again and again,
" Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep (Exodus
xxxi. 13, 14) : —it is holy unto you ; every one
that defileth it shall be put to death."
Now who but the Almighty God hath power
to repeal what the Almighty God hath once
established ? seeing therefore that it was he
who established this law, none but himself has
power to repeal it; and till he repeals it, it
must be the duty of all men to obey it, whether
the reasons for which his wisdom hath esta-
. blished it be known to them or not.
An incontrovertible reason for their obedi
ence (if they know no other) is this, that God
has given the command. But this is not the
case : the wise reasons of this command are, or
may be, known to all men; the chief designs
of it are almost every where delivered, together
with the law : the first we have in the second
S
168 SERMON X.
chapter of Genesis, ver. 3 : " And God blessed
the sabbath-day, and sanctified it, because that
in it he had rested from all his work which
God created and made ;" and again in the twen
tieth chapter of Exodus: " In six days the Lord
made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in
them is : . wherefore the Lord blessed the sab-
bath-day, and hallowed it." '.
In these words, three things are plainly af
firmed : —first, that God is the creator of this
world : —secondly, that having created it in six
days, he ceased from his work upon the seventh
day, and hallowed or sanctified it ; ordaining
that man, being made in the image, and for
the imitation of God, should imitate him in
this, in bestowing six days on the works be
longing to this world, and resting from all
these works on the seventh to meditate upon
a better.' '
We perceive here the chief reason of this
command ; the great end for which it was given,
even that man might learn to imitate God, to
fulfil the purpose of his creation, that he might
ever remember who it was that created himself
and heaven and earth ; that having finished his
SERMON X. 169
six days, he might upon the seventh retire from
this world, and ascend in heart and mind into
the heaven of heavens, whither his adorable
Creator rested from the works of his creation.
Another end of this command God hath de
clared, both on Mount Sinai and long after by
his prophet Ezekiel : " I gave them my sab
baths, that they might know I am the Lord
which sanctifieth them." That these sacred
days, so often as they returned, might confirm
them in the important knowledge, that God
was the author of their virtue and happiness as
well as of their being ; that, should he withdraw
his sanctifying power, they would as naturally
sink into sin and misery, as, should he withdraw
his animating power, they would fall into their
native dust.
Now as they were instructed by what means
holiness was to be attained, so that they might
actually attain it was a third wise end of the
Almighty's command to keep one day in seven
holy. This we learn from that other declaration
of God, wherein after it is written, " Ye shall
be holy, for I the Lord your God am holy ;" i%
follows in the very next verse, " Ye shall keep
i
6
170 SERMON X.
my sabbaths ;" plainly intimating that one
reason why they were to keep his sabbaths
was, that they might be holy as God is holy ;
that by dedicating to him one day in seven,
they might be enabled to spend the other six
as became those who acknowledged their
Creator and Sanctifier to be of purer eyes
than to behold iniquity ; that they might ever
be mindful of taking him for their example,
not only on one particular day, but in the
general course of their lives, which should be
holy, just, and good.
The sum of what has been hitherto observed
is this : —God who hath an unquestionable right
to command his creatures, and prescribe what
ever laws he is pleased to enforce ; who, though
under no obligation of acquainting man with
the reasons of his divine will, has not only
been pleased to make it known, and bid him,
" remember the sabbath-day to keep it holy,"
but has graciously condescended to acquaint
him with several of the reasons for so doing ;
the chief of which are these : — first, that
by imitating the sabbath of divine rest, man
might retain a more lively and lasting sense
SERMON X. 171
of the Almighty Being, the Creator of himself
and all things which exist : —secondly, that he
might constantly remember who it is that is
his Sanctifier as well as Creator:—thirdly,
that he might be ever mindful it is the grand
business of his life to imitate him in all his
imitable perfections, and to make the mercy,
justice, and holiness of God the pattern of all
his thoughts, words, and actions. -
Secondly.—The next question is, whether
this command has yet been repealed by the
authority which gave it, and whether these
ends for which it was given are still in force
or not.
As to the former part of the question it is
confidently affirmed that God did repeal it,
when Jesus Christ was made man ; to prove
which a famous controversialist gives us the
strength of his cause in these words : " In
these rigid vanities by which the Pharisees
had abused the sabbath, our Saviour thought
it requisite to detect their follies. They taught
that it was unlawful on the sabbath-day either
to heal the impotent, or relieve the sick, or
feed the hungry ; but he confutes them both
171 SERMON X.
by his actions and his disputations. Did they
accuse his disciples of gathering corn upon the
sabbath, being an hungred ? he tells them
what David did in the same extremity. His
commanding the impotent man to take up his
bed, was it so great a toil as to lift up the ox
or the ass out of the pit ? Nor had God so
spoken the word, but that he could repeal it ;
the Son of Man being Lord also of the sabbath.
Nay, it is observable that our Lord wrought
more works of charity upon the sabbath, than
on all the other days ; and several of them,
when there was no extreme necessity that the
cure should be performed on that day, or the
man perish. What then ? came our Saviour
to destroy the law ? No—but to let them un
derstand the right meaning of it, that they
might no longer be misled by the Scribes or
Pharisees."
Further, that the sabbath was to be repealed
is by this apparent :
. " First, that it was an institute of Moses ;
* Secondly, that it was an institute peculiar
to th& Jewish nation." (Dr. Peter Heylin's His
tory of the Sabbath." 1st edit. p. 168.)
SERMON X» 173
Thus far the historian, whose numerous as
sertions it may be worth while to examine
apart, beginning at that wherewith it ends, as
being most important.
The sabbath (he says) was first an institu
tion of Moses ; second, an institution peculiar
to the Jewish nation : now as every institute
peculiar to the Jewish nation was an institute
of Moses, we will inquire whether the hallow
ing the sabbath was an institute of Moses, or
not.
I therefore think it was not, because it was
instituted two thousand years before Moses
was born ; so saith the text in Genesis ex
pressly : " Thus the heavens and the earth were
finished, and all the host of them. And on
the seventh day God ended his work which he
had made; and he rested on the seventh day
from all his work which he had made. And
God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it."
Indeed so soon as it shall be proved that
there is an absurdity in taking this in the plain
literal sense, we shall be obliged to take it in a
less plain, in a figurative sense, and to affirm
that, though this is related as done at the
174 SERMON X.
creation, it was not done till the distributing
manna in the time of Moses, four or five and
twenty hundred years after the creation ; but
till this absurdity be shown, we have no pre
tence for giving up the letter. We can have no
pretence to interpret any scripture figuratively,
but when an absurdity follows a literal inter
pretation : this not being the case here, we may,
we must, conclude that the sabbath was insti
tuted at the creation ; therefore it was not an
institute of Moses ; and consequently that from
this supposition, which is obviously false, it can
not be inferred that it was to be repealed at all.
However, the objector avers, " it is inferred
that it actually was repealed from the assertions
before-mentioned, which are briefly these :
" The Pharisees thought it unlawful to do
even any works of necessity or mercy on the
sabbath-day.
*' Secondly, that our Saviour proved they
thought wrong, such works being lawful on
any day.
" Thirdly, that the Son of God being made
man could, if he pleased, set aside his own
command* .
SERMON X.
" Fourthly, that himself performed more
works on that than any other day : and,
" Fifthly, that he came not to destroy
but to fulfil the law, to teach men its right
meaning."
All and every one of these five propositions
we allow to be perfectly true, and should be
glad to know from which of the five we are to
infer the conclusion. Are we to say the Pha
risees having wrong views of the sabbath, there
fore the sabbath is abolished ? or that our Lord
proving their notions of it to be wrong, there
fore it is disannulled ? or that the Almighty
could if he pleased set it aside, therefore he
did set it aside? or that our blessed Saviour
performed works of necessity and mercy on
the sabbath-day, therefore we may do works
which belong neither to necessity nor mercy ?
or lastly, that the Son of Man came to fulfil
the law, therefore he destroyed this branch
of it f
I trust it will not appear presumption if,
notwithstanding all the arguments of this
learned author, I still conceive that the Al
mighty hath not repealed his own command
176 SERMON X.
respecting the sabbath ; nay, and that he never
will, till the great sabbath begins ; both because
he hath not done it yet, and because the rea
sons for which he gave it are still in full force,
and must remain so till the grand consum
mation of all things.
For, first, to preserve in man a lively and
constant sense of God being the Creator of all
things, this end of the sabbath must continue
so long as men continue upon the earth : this
reason for keeping it can never be wanting so
long as any of those creatures are living, who,
notwithstanding all the methods used to pre
vent it, are so prone to forget their heavenly
benefactor, who so readily lay hold on any
' pretence, nay, who are so willing without any
pretence at all, if not to think they are the
work of chance or their own hands, at least to
act as if they thought so.
And the second end of the sabbath can no
more cease than the first. That man should be
constantly and deeply sensible he can no more
sanctify than he could create himself, must
ever be of the last importance : it must be the
highest concern to men to remember they are
SERMON X. 177
usable to help themselves : to preserve the
impression of this great truth ever strong upon
their minds, that he who is born of a woman
must be born again of God, or it is impossible
to please him.
Thirdly ; —it is of equal concern to man to
remember that it is the great business of life to
imitate the divine example set before us. I
presume no one will venture to affirm that this
end of the sabbath has lost any measure of its
force ; that it does not hold full as strongly at
this day, as it did on the birth-day of creation;
it being therefore evident that God himself
hath given this command, and that he hath
not repealed it, and that it is sufficiently pro
bable he never will, since the designs of the
institution must ever remain in all their energy,
all that remains is to show, thirdly,
What it is to keep the sabbath holy so as to
obey the command and answer the ends of it.
To keep either a day or a place holy is
simply this, to set it apart to religious pur
poses ; this is both the proper and the common
sense of the word. By saying this day or this
place is kept holy, both the learned and the
N
178 SERMON X.
unlearned mean, it is dedicated to God, it is
appropriated to his service ; and to profane or
unhallow a holy day or place is, not to set it
apart to these uses ; to use it in the same
manner with other things which are not dedi
cated to God, not appropriated to his service ;
to perform in the consecrated day, or in the
holy place, the works of ordinary days and un
hallowed places4
To keep the sabbath- day holy, as well in
the proper or common sense of the word, is
therefore to set it apart to religious uses, to
dedicate it to the service of God : what is im
plied in this we shall easily perceive, if we
consider first, what we must—secondly, what
we may—thirdly, what we may not do, on the
sabbath of the Lord our God.
First, We must, if we would obey this com
mand at all, and answer the ends for which it
was ordained, employ a considerable part of
this day in prayers and praises to God ; we
must retire with him from this lower world
into those regions which are above the firma
ment; to contemplate on the various works
which he hath made, and on the goodness.
SERMON X. i 79
wisdom, and power of the Creator ; we
must speak of his marvellous acts, and de
light in the memorial of his abundant kindness.
That branch of his kindness, particularly,
whereby he daily renews the face of the earth,
whereby he restores fallen man to pardon and
peace, and gives him the second better life of
holiness and happiness. That this his last no
blest gift may not be in vain, we must now
especially work together with him, labour to
confirm ourselves in his likeness, by entreating
the assistance of his Holy Spirit (for we have
no power of ourselves to help ourselves) to be
holy because he is holy : we must make it our
especial aim that the Divine image in our souls
may be perfected : to bind mercy and truth
around our neck, to write them on the tablet of
our heart.
Secondly, Not that the human mind can be
every moment uninterruptedly intent upon
this, that might make even devotion a burden:
no, we have bodies as well as souls ; and this
our gracious Lord considered, though the Pha
risees did not ; he therefore took away the in
tolerable severity with which their traditions
n 2
180 SERMON X.
had loaded the sabbath, and made it of no
effect but to impede those designs, for the fur
therance of which it was ordained. He brought
it back to its original standard, to its just and
natural extent; accordingly both his words and
actions manifested that we may perform works
of necessity and mercy on this day ; that we
may do whatever cannot be done on another
day, or not without manifest inconvenience ;
such as enjoying the works of creation with me
ditation and gratitude, feeding and watering
cattle (for this is a work of necessity); we
may relieve our sick or indigent neighbours
(for this is a work of mercy) ; and visit the
prisoners and the afflicted.
Thirdly, This therefore we may do, but we may
not do any other work which can be done on
another day, and done without much inconve
nience ; the delaying of which a day longer,
would not give either to ourselves or our neigh
bours much loss or pain. Neither may we use
any such recreation on the sabbath as does not
further the ends for which it was ordained :
some recreation connected with those ends is
•flowed on this day, because few minds are
SERMON Xd 181
able to preserve a cheerful devotion and lively
gratitude without it ; it is therefore a proper
work of necessity as far as it conduces to both,
but we must go no farther; we may not indulge
ourselves in any recreation, I do not say which
disqualifies, but which does not promote pious
meditations. Here then is a short and certain
rule ; whatever aids devotion we may use,
whatever impedes or does not aid it we must
avoid, as it defeats the end of this sacred
institution.
It is the same with the day as the house of
God, and for this reason it is that the Almighty
more than once mentions them together : " Ye
shall keep my sabbaths and reverence my sanc
tuary."
We are not so to reverence the sanctuary as
not to show mercy, not to save life therein :
we may likewise do necessary works, such as
cannot be done elsewhere, or not without great
inconvenience, but we may not do ordinary
works ; the former are not contrary to its holi
ness, the latter unhallow, pollute, and profane
it ; and when either the temple or the sabbath
of God is made a day or a house of merchan
SERMON X.
dise, it will not be long before truth itself will
pronounce the one an abomination and the
other a den of thieves. If from what has been
said, it appears that this command, " Keep the
sabbath holy," was promulgated to man by
God, and that for wise ends, even to preserve
in him a deep abiding sense that God is his
creator, his sanctifier, and his pattern ; se
condly, that as God has not yet repealed this
command, so the ends of it are in full force;
and lastly, that the only way of keeping the
sabbath holy, of obeying this command, and
answering its design, is to abstain from all
works which neither necessity nor mercy re
quires, that we may set apart the day of God
for the service of God, which alone is to sanc
tify or keep it holy ; then is the sabbath no
institution of Moses, neither is it peculiar to
the Jewish nation, but the command to observe
it, as well as the reasons of that command,
extend to all ages and nations. Then if we
subtract from it the additions of the latter
Jews, and this one circumstance peculiar to
them, " Let no man go out of his place on the
sabbath-day ;" whereby the Almighty guarded
SERMON X. 183
it for a time, from the disobedience of their
stiff-necked forefathers, we may safely affirm
of the fourth commandment, as well as of the
other nine, that Jesus Christ came not to de
stroy, but to fulfil it; and till heaven and earth
pass away, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise
pass from this law till all be fulfilled.
Brethren, let me add one word of exhorta
tion, and be ye assured of this, that those who
watch over your souls as they that must give
account would not wilfully lead you out of
the way. If there be any here who will not
keep the sabbath holy, who says he cannot
submit to the rigour imposed, of so worship
ping the great, the good, the holy God ; who,
so far from estimating his high privilege, thinks
prayer and praise, meditation and pious dis
course, too heavy a burden to be sustained
during a whole day, and so resolves to spend
at least a part of this day, either in diversion
or business. I exhort all such to work rather
than play ! I exhort you that are parents, in
particular, if ye care not to train up your chil
dren to devotion, when they come from church
not to send them to the streets or market
J 84 SERMON X.
places, but rather of the two, to school : as to
the innocence of either, it is no importance
which you do, but the latter looks more like
prudence : if ye disregard the other world,
why should you neglect this ? why sell your
own and your children's souls for nothing?
Perhaps you may gain somewhat which you
value by industry—as to the command of God
you throw that quite out of the question ; this
is totally rejected either way ; you no more
hallow that day when you play, than when
you labour, and as to the ends, you destroy
them alike : you are no more endeavouring to
remember your Creator, to be thankful for his
benefits, and conformed to his holiness, while
ye pollute his holy day by diversion, than by
work ; but in the latter case you may gain
some earthly gain which you prize, and ex
change conscience for money.
If you lift up your hand against your God
in labour rather than idleness, you may have
this comfort in your rebellion, that ye did not
serve the Devil for nought.
Not that any who serve their heavenly
Father, who keep his day wholly sacred, and
SERMON X. 185
neither pollute it by diversions nor work, have
less reason to expect a reward from their divine
master, even in this present world.
For to these who would not be disobedient
to his command, even to acquire riches, who
love God better than pleasure, or gain, or
reputation, to these saith the Most High, " If
thou turn away thy foot from doing thy plea
sure on my holy day, and call the sabbath a
delight, the holy of the Lord honourable, and
shalt honour him, not doing thy own ways,
nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking
thine own words ; then shalt thou delight thy
self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride
upon the high places of the earth, and feed
thee with the heritage of Jacob, thy father: for
the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it."'
186
SERMON XI.
(Preached on board the Simonds.)
Brethren, I count not myself to have appre
hended : but this one thing I do, forgetting
those things which are behind, and reaching
forth unto these things which are before, I
press towards the markfor the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
Philip, iii. IS, 14.
It is observed that the several inspired writers
of the Holy Scriptures, who have professedly
treated of our progress in religion, and pointed
out the various steps in the scale of perfection,
have always represented their sentiments on
the subject by obvious allegories and familiar
allusions. Thus we find Christianity some
times compared to a race, at others to a war
fare ; and the passage of the Sacred Scripture
SERMON XI. 187
now before us is no way to be understood
without this metaphorical mode of interpreta
tion, the phrases used being in a great measure
borrowed from the circus, and the diversity
of races represented. Thus, when the Apostle
tells his Philippians that he counteth not him
self to have " apprehended," it must be re
marked, in order to understand him, that the
word we translate " apprehended " is in the
original Greek almost always applied in a
technical sense to him that wins and carries off
the prize ; it being the custom to place the
crown, which was to be the victor's reward,
over the goal, and the first of the competitors
that came in reached the prize and carried it
away with him. So that the meaning of St.
Paul is, that he doth not think himself already
possessed of his crown, nor yet so secure of
it as not to be exposed to some danger of
losing it : he doth not imagine that he hath
yet attained the reward of his labours, nor
sufficiently ascertained the victory ; and there
fore, as he emphatically proceeds " this one
thing I do," or this is my only care, " for
getting those things which are behind, and
188 SERMON XI.
reaching forth unto those things which are
before, I press towards the mark for the prize
of the high calling of God in Christ."
And here again are terms borrowed from the
races, to be explained. The phrase which we
have rendered " forgetting those things which
are behind," is in the original " not looking
behind me," and the term " reaching forward,"
is something stronger in the Greek, being ex
pressed by a word that signifieth " vehemently
to stretch forward." Now these are plain allu
sions to the Olympic Games, to the customs
of the competitors, who stand not idly looking
back, and examining either how far their anta
gonists are behind them, or how much of the
course they have passed over, but ardently
pursue their object, and endeavour to overtake
all that are before them, and arrive at the des*
tined mark as rapidly as possible.
The sense may be thus paraphrased—" My
brethren, I count not myself to have attained
my crown, nor do I think myself so certain
of it, that I cannot miss it ; but this one thing
I do; without considering how much of my
race I have run, or how many of my compe
•SERMON XI. 18Q
titors I have overcome, I stretch forward to
the utmost of my capacity to achieve my end ;
and having ever in my view the goal, and fixing
my eye on the way marked out for me to run, I
relax not my speed, that I may if possible attain
the crown which God in Christ hath promised."
The words thus explained will furnish us
with these several topics of discourse.
First, that in this world Christians are never
so certain of their reward, as to remit their
care without danger of missing it.
Secondly, that it is never to be attained by
resting contented with any degree of piety
short of the highest that may be attained in
this life : and,
Thirdly, that a constant progress towards
perfection is the indispensable duty of all
Christians.
We know that this world is a state of trial
and probation, wherein we are placed by Di
vine Providence to work the works of God, to
conquer and subdue the enemies of our sal
vation and those manifold sins and infirmities
whereby our nature is corrupted and depraved.
Now a state of trial always implies a state
1
1QO SERMON XI.
of danger, and, whilst we are only in our pro
bation for heaven, we must not think ourselves
secure from all possibility of miscarriage.
True it is, we are inheritors of the kingdom
of heaven, and we have the gracious promise
of our merciful Father to secure our title to it.
But it must be duly considered, that all his
promises are conditional, and that he has given
us power to perform (for the power to fulfil it
is his gift) our part of the condition ; if we
bury our talent in the napkin, and will not
fulfil it, we cannot claim our crown.
Our covenant with God consists in perpetual
war against the world, the flesh, and the devil.
These are our spiritual foes, which assail us with
never-ceasing vigilance, and as long as we live
upon this earth, and carry about with us a
body of sin and death, so long must we be
unavoidably exposed as well to their attacks,
as to the attacks of that powerful and invisible
enemy, who is represented in the Holy Scrip
tures as going to and fro in the world, seeking
whom he may devour. We know the power
and malice of this spiritual adversary, nor are
we ignorant of his devices, whereby he lieth
SERMON XI. 191
in wait to deceive : subtle and mighty as he is,
can we imagine that he will propose any temp-
tations which are unsuited to our frailty ? No :
he knoweth our weakness, and well adapts them
to our several dispositions, and so strong, I
had almost said irresistible they are, that
happy, thrice happy is he who is not some
times ensnared by his wiles.
He is the prince of the power of the air,
and therefore wanteth not strength to assault
ms. He is the old serpent that deceiveth, and
faileth not in craft to circumvent us : indeed
so great are both, that we can by no means
withstand either, without divine assistance ;
and all our hopes of victory are founded on
our faith in these consoling truths, " That
greater is He who is with us than he who is
against us ;" and that the God of Hosts is on
our side, " who will not suffer us to be tempted
above what we are able, but will with the
temptation make a way to escape, that we
may be able to bear it."
But further, we are exhorted in the Holy
Scriptures to be constantly on our guard, to
take to ourselves the whole armour of God,
1Q2 SERMON XI.
that we may be able to stand in the day of
temptation, and having done all to stand.
Again—we are cautioned, " that he that
thinketh he standeth should take heed lest he
fall," and commanded to work out our salva
tion with fear and trembling. Now to what
end are all these monitions, this care and fear
enjoined, unless there be some imminent dan
ger ? Why should we take to ourselves ** the
armour of God" were there no liability of our
being conquered by the enemies ofour salvation ?
Why take heed to our steps if there was no
danger of falling ? Were the crown of glory
already in our hands, our labours must needs
be at an end—we are expressly told that our
life must be a constant endeavour, that we
must daily strive against sin, and sedulously
watch against all the assaults of our enemy ;
and therefore, it may be concluded, that we
have not " apprehended" or attained the reward
of our labour, or acquired the utmost degree
of grace and Christian perfection from which
we never can be shaken or removed, till we
leave these tabernacles of clay.
. The great apostle St. Paul thought himself
Obliged tb press forward towards the mark of his
high calling ; arid it'woilld be the greatest pre
sumption of, Us tb imagine We had arrived at a
height of security which precluded the vigi
lance which this eminent saint so earnestly en
joins : if notwithstanding the zeal, the activity,
the abundance of revelations, bestowed upon
this favoured disciple of Christ, he deemed it
indispensable to work out his salvation with
fear and trembling, much more reason have
We not to be high-minded but fear. I know
there are some who hold it as an unquestion
able tenet of religion, that "grace once re
ceived never carl be forfeited." But this finis-
take has arisen from mixing metaphysics with
diviriity, and admitting every one's private
opinion as a rule of faith. When men began to
dispate concerning grace and free-will without
understanding' wherein either the one or the'
other consisted, it is not extraordinary that
difficulties should arise which reason was un
able to solve ; and that schism and heresy were
introduced into the church of Christ, by turn
ing points of philosophy into religious disputes,
and making the quirks and quibbles of school
19* SERMON XI.
men upon them of as much importance as if
they had been so many articles of faith.
Holy Writ has assured us, that as the wicked
man may turn from his wickedness, so like
wise the righteous man may turn from his
righteousness ; nay, that he may apostatise so
far as to commit things worthy of death,
and to be guilty of sins in which we are told,
he shall surely die. (Ezekiel, iii. 20.) And
the catholic church of Christ always thought
that all Christians in this world were constantly
exposed to temptation, and of consequence
in danger, i. e. in possibility, of falling.
We need not multiply quotations to prove
this ; it is evident from their solemn addresses
to the Almighty God in behalf of the penitents,
as recorded in the Apostolic Constitutions,
wherein every Christian was bound to acknow
ledge his own obnoxiousness to sin, and to
pray for preventing and restraining, as well as
assisting grace, to preserve him from falling ;
and when the penitent was restored, the con
gregation were commanded by the deacon to
pray, and afterward, by the mouth of the
priest or bishop did pray, for the reconciled
SERMON XI. 105
penitent, that . God would keep him steadfast
and immoveable in the way of righteousness, and
grant he might never fall or be shaken more.
Now their prayers would be, superfluous
were it not admitted that the most perfect
estate in this world is but a state of trial and
probation, and the highest attainments not sufr
ficient to exempt us from the danger of falling
away. The Son of God himself was tempted;
and he alone was tempted without sin : there
fore his disciples cannot expect to escape the
temptations of their great adversary, who
knows full well that the crown of glory is not
in this life given, and he is never without
hope of preventing us from gaining the prize;
and if his assaults be aided by any fancied, se
curity of our own, and come upon us un
awares, great is the danger of their success, to
our eternal loss. nv r u . aw.b
Having at large insisted on my first doc
trinal point, that no Christian is in this life
absolutely secured of his reward, or can pre
sume to be advanced so high as to be beyond
the , reach of danger, I proceed to a practical
0 1
1Q6 SEKMON XI.
inference deduced from what has been said,
which is this :—-• . .« ...»,.' ... ' . .
That if we are not excluded from all pos
sibility of falling from our station, forfeiting
the portion of grace we have received, and
missing our glorious reward, we are not at li
berty to indulge ourselves in ease and security.—
Vigour, industry, and perseverance, become the
necessary dutitis of Christians ; we must watch
and pray that we enter not into temptation,
and have power to overcome what we cannot
escape. We must continually strive to enter
in at the strait gate, and constantly oppose our
spiritual adversaries. As long as we are watch
ful we are safe, but if we trust to our best per
formances—alas! I need not tell you how
grievously we shall find ourselves deceived at
last. There is not a more dangerous delusion
than for a man to think himself beyond the
power of temptation : we then become careless
in our duty, negligent in our station, confident
in our own strength ; till, like Samson, we
" wist not that the Spirit of God is departed."
Caution and watchfulness are essential cha
SERMON XI. lQf
racteristics of a real Christian : it is frequently
enjoined by our blessed Lord himself to his
disciples, and by them the obligation extended
to all mankind, " What I say unto you I say
unto all—watch."
None are exempted from this duty, no ex
cuse can be urged for not performing it ; watch
therefore for the coming of your Lord, for
you know neither the day nor the hour of his
coming. Let your loins be girded, your lamps
burning, and ye yourselves like unto men that
watch for their Lord, that they may be ready
to enter in with him when he cometh ; for
many shall seek to enter in when the door is
shut.—Therefore, " blessed are those servants
whom his Lord when he cometh shall find so
doing." Stand therefore fast in the faith ; " be
strong, and quit yourselves like men," that so,
in God's good time, ye may at length attain
the crown which is laid up for all who perse
vere to the end. I grant he gives perseverance
to his people, but what are the marks by
which they are known ? They are those who
apply to him for this grace, who are ever
watchful over their own hearts, lest they
7
198 SERMON XI.
should be hardened through the deceitfulness
of sin, and who do persevere in faith and in
good works, giving all diligence to make their
calling and election sure.
Secondly : Our reward is never to be attained
by resting satisfied with any degree of piety
short of the highest. Christian perfection, or
universal iholiness, is the goal of our religious
course : hitherto then must all our aim be di
rected, all our endeavours tend ; to this are
all the promises of the Gospel made ; and
surely the highest reward deserves the most
arduous efforts, the most unremitting care.
The gates of heaven are opened wide, and we
are invited by God himself to enter in and
take up our everlasting residence in that king
dom of light and love and joy ; and will not
such a reward compensate well the labours of a
short life ? Are not fourscore years, even of
pain, well endured for an eternity of bliss ? or
should we murmur if our days on earth, which
are few and evil, are spent in the service of
God (whose service is perfect freedom, and
brings the only happiness here), instead of
being wasted in sinful pleasure, which is never
SERMON XI. 1Q0
unaccompanied with a sting, even in this state.
Is a treasure in that kingdom of heaven,
(where no moths or rust corrupt, and no
thieves break through and steal) of* less
value than the fading enjoyments of the
world ? ' «
My brethren, there is no shadow of com
parison ; and therefore, the same ardour and
diligence in working out our salvation, as the
children of this world evince in their pursuit
of riches, pleasures, and honour, is indis
pensable in a Christian.
Again, all our hopes of heaven are only found
ed upon the promises of God ; we have no man
ner of reason, therefore, to hope, if we fulfil
not those conditions which he gives us the power
to fulfil: now the only way proposed by the
Gospel is " to ask that we may receive," and
to aim at the highest degree of holiness of
Christian perfection. Is it not the word of
our blessed Lord himself, " Be ye perfect as
your Father in heaven is perfect ;" i. e. to offer
our spirits, souls, and bodies a holy sacrifice,
acceptable to God.. Now if this be so (and
what Christian presumes to say it is not?) who
200 9ERM0N XI.
soever does not aim, or wilfully abstains from
aiming at this point, may, for ought he knows,
stop short the mercy of God. • ,
Byt here it may be urged, that in the eter
nal house of God are many mansions, and
that the stations of the kingdom of heaven
shall differ in glory, and consequently that all
mankind are not expected to attain an equal
summit of piety, or be entitled to an equal de
gree of glory; in answer to which I must
observe, that though there be various degrees
in these happy mansions, yet he who aspireth
not after the highest is not prepared for the
lowest. The man who doth not sincerely >ens
deavour to become a perfect Christian. deceives
himself if he thinks he is a Christian at all.
True it is, the Almighty God knoweth our
frame and understandeth the weakness of our
nature, the strength and number of those
temptations to which we are exposed ; and
therefore vouchsafes of his infinite mercy and
goodness, not; to exclude us from his favour,
for those sins and backslidings of which we
repent, and strive against,, and watch, and
pray. But by this it cannot be proved that
SERMON XI.
we shpuld not aim to do his holy will in the
most perfect manner. This is the new cove
nant with man, and he has promised to give
ns a new heart and renew a right spirit, "wven
the power of loving Him with all our heart
and mind and strength.
Thirdly,, a, constant progress in Christianity
is the indispensable duty of all ranks and de
grees of Christians.
They that would hope in time to attain to
the highest degree of holiness, must, as the
Jloyal Psalmist expresses it, go on from
" strength to strength." As long as we can be
better than we are, and fancy ourselves so far
advanced that we cannot go farther, we have
especial need to follow the apostle's advice,
«' Not to think of ourselves more highly than
we ought to think." Alas ! whilst we are in
this world, we are surrounded with snares,
beset with temptation, are sometimes overcome,
often repent and sin again ; therefore we may
be sure that we have not yet attained, neither
are already perfect ; our crown is not put into
our possession, nor the victory over our spiri
tual enemies completely gained : still, there*
202 SERMON XI.
fore, must we fight and strive against them,
still must we press forward towards the mark of
our high calling.
While we are in this world we are but in
our road to heaven, and therefore must con
tinue marching on and overcoming. Life is
our pilgrimage, heaven is our home, and as we
have here no abiding city, so neither have we
any cessation of our labours; but death will
end them all, and if then we are faithful unto
death, God will give us the crown of eternal life.
Now he has promised to keep those faithful,
who love and serve him with all their hearts,
and who study to run the way of his com
mandments, and to go on unto perfection ;
and when we have done all, to say " we are
unprofitable servants." Aim, therefore, at ex
alted holiness, aspire after the highest degrees,
even the height of humility !
He that frequently performs his duty to God,
and labours earnestly to do good to his bre
thren, must not sit down self-satisfied, ima
gining no more is required of him—perish the
thought ! . . . . . '„ <
When we have done all the good offices
SERMON XI. 203
which opportunity affords, we must sedulously
seek out more ; and however charitable we may
have been to our brethren, yet if charity irt-
creaseth not, it faileth, and is not the genuine
grace recommended in Scripture ; it is but a
heathen, not a Christian virtue ; and what is
spoken of this may be said of all other virtues
in the Gospel—their improvement (which is
part of their essence) proves their authenticity.
Farther, it is a maxim universally true and
established by the general consent of mankind,
that he that maketh no progress is certain of
going backward. Now this maxim is as true
when applied to religion as to any other thing:
he, therefore, that stands still in the paths of
piety recedes, not only loses his time but his
ground. He that doth not constantly and
daily strive against the storm of vice and tor
rent of iniquity wherewith the world is now
overflowed will infallibly be carried down by
it : there is no resting in the mid way between
right and wrong, between heaven and hell;
we must pursue our course towards the one, or
make speedy advances to the other.
Habits we know are only to be acquired by
204 SERMON XI,
constant and repeated acts. He, therefore,
tbat would be religious, must be always exer
cised in religion : and he that would attain to
Christian charity must never relax in his
labours of love. If we continually labour in
the task our Great Master has assigned us, we
shall increase in the ability to perform it ; but
if we abate our zeal, our talent will be hidden
till it be taken from us. .• ! •
Besides, in order to acquire a habit, it is
not only necessary that there be repeated acts,
but we must endeavour that every act be pro-
portionably better than the last. He( that
contenteth himself with barely plodding at
the rudiments of learning will never make a
scholar ; and he that aspires no higher than
the; first steps in the scale of perfection will
never*, , be a Christian. It is St. Paul's ad
vice, to the Hebrews, that they should leave
the principles of the doctrine of Christ, and
go on unto perfection, not resting satis
fied with laying the foundations of Chris
tianity, but endeavouring to raise a propor
tionable superstructure thereupon ; and were
this advice duly observed, men would not con
SERMON XI »
tinue all their lives such babes in Christianity,
nor ; would a hoary head and ignorant mind be
so frequently conjoined, . as God knows they
are. : we should behold youth more sober and
old age more venerable, and each the wiser
and holier the longer they lived upon this
earth. i ,.>••
Thus have I shown, by these unanswerable
arguments, .
.. First, that Christians are never so certain of
their reward as to remit their care ; ., , \
Secondly, that it is never to be attained but
by perseverance, and by not resting satisfied
with any degree of piety short of the highest
aim ; and,
Thirdly, that Christians of all ranks and
conditions are indispensably obliged to make
a constant progress and proficiency in the
knowledge and practice of true Christianity.
These doctrines are so plain and evident that
they need no application, and so essential that
they will recommend themselves to your serious
consideration. Instead therefore of an exhort
ation, I choose rather to require you to join
in prayer to God that he would graciously
SERMON Xf.
assist us in the performance of them ; for
which purpose I conclude with an excellent
collect of our church.
i O God '. who declarest thy mighty power
most chiefly in showing mercy and pity, mer
cifully grant unto us such a measure of thy
grace, that we, running the path of thy com
mandments, may obtain thy gracious promises,
and be made partakers of thy heavenly trea
sures, through Jesus Christ our Lord ! —
Amen.
207
SERMON XII.' i !
; : ; ;f: • . '. r;i «>.' > »v;j/»)
(Preached at Cowes, in the Isle of Wight, 1735: at Savannah, in
Georgia, June, 1736: at Dr. Cutter's church, in Boston, Oct. 17^
1736. y . --7 . • • , 1 , <• . . «*»
And Elijah came unto all the people, and said,
How long halt ye between two opinions ? If
the Lord be God, then follow him : but if
Baal,follow him. 1 Kings, xviii. '21.
An exclamation this, in which Christians are
no less concerned than those Jews to whom it
was immediately spoken : for do we not, most
of us, halt between two opinions ? do we not
endeavour to do service to two masters ? and is
it not the frequent practice of the generality of
Christians to compound between God and the
world ? to contrive how to serve God, without
renouncing the service of the world, the flesh,
and the devil? Do we not see many, who make
loud professions of their zeal for religion, still
anxious for the good things of this Mfe? In
5
208 SERM.0N XII.
short, may we not truly say that while we all
pretend to be true worshippers of God, we do
every one in particular, at some seasons, set up
his idols in his heart, and divide his religious
Worship between that and his God ? To you
therefore is this Scripture given, and every one
is still concerned in this expostulation of the
prophet, How long will ye halt between two
opinions ? " If the Lord be God, then follow
him ; but if Baal, then follow him."
In discoursing on these words, I shall,
First, show who they are that come under
this censure of halting between two opinions ;
Secondly, consider the folly and danger of it;
Thirdly, conclude with an earnest exhorta
tion to an entire devotion of ourselves to God.
I am first to show who they are that come
under this censure. And here, I doubt, upon a
serious and impartial examination of ourselves,
we shall most of us stand self-condemned, and
when we inquire who they are, our conscience
will reply to each, Thou art the man. For
judge, I pray you, and judge as in the presence
of God ; are ye in heart and mind solely de*
voted to him ? have you no other design in all
SERMON XII* 209
your undertakings but to perform the will of
your Father who is in heaven, and finish the
work he hath given you to do? Who among us
can stand so severe a test, or whom will not
conscience condemn upon so strict a trial ?
Who is there that may be termed holy in the
sense of this word, as it implies a total renun
ciation of the world, the flesh, and the devil ;
and an entire and absolute surrender of himself
to God ? alas ! who can lay his hand upon his
heart and say, " that no private views, no
secret ends, mix with his devotion!" that God.
has not only some place in our thoughts, but
the whole of our souls and minds at his dis
posal, and reigns alone in the hearts he has
formed. There are many rivals who will dis
pute with him his right to absolute and entire
dominion : the world, with her pomps and
vanities, pleasures and delights, entertainments
and diversions, has monopolized a large share
of our affections ; sensuality also ruleth with
an almost uncontrolled sway ; nor is the evil
spirit of darkness without share of power and
influence over us.
Now while any of these have dominion,
r
SERMON XII.
while we set our hearts upon the flesh and its
gratifications, or fix our affections on things of
the world, or indulge hatred, ambition, malice,
and revenge, it must be owned that, if God
has any place in our thoughts, his empire is
disputed, his claim to our obedience questioned,
his supreme authority neglected : we are not
his devoted servants, since we give our service
to other masters ; nor can we be called his
faithful soldiers since we are likewise enlisted
under the banners of his enemy. Thus then
may they be said to halt between two opinions,
who are divided between God and the world,
who suffer the Creator and the creature to share
their affections, and who allow only a portion
of their heart and mind, to the service of their
heavenly Benefactor. Where the grace of God
has so far influenced the conscience as to en
gage the man to consider these things, and
yet the cares of this world, the lusts of the
flesh, and temptations of the devil, retain their
share of influence over him, this man may be
said to halt between two opinions*
Such is the case of him who, without a sur
render of his whole heart, professes himself to
3
SERMON XII. Ill
be a Christian. He will tell you that he regards
religion to be of the utmost importance. He
may be constant in the external duties of reli
gion, in the outward forms of worship, frequent
the service of the church, observe the fasts,
attend the sacraments ; and yet with all this
seeming zeal it may be found, that the world
has made a deeper impression on him than
religion, and he takes yet more pains to pro
cure an estate on earth, than to lay up for
himself a treasure in heaven : otherwise how
should it be possible that we should see the
same man conscientious in church, and knavish
in his counting-house ? how could we account
for public observances of pious rites, and over
reaching frauds in private transactions, of this
halting Christian. Of these two discordant
principles, obedience to the letter of the law,
and neglect of the spirit of it, from which
arises the inconsistency of his practice ? He
halteth between two opinions, and is therefore
sometimes found praising God, and at others
paying homage to mammon. And thus it
must always be with all who are divided be
tween God and the world. We are told it was
p 2
212 SERMON XII.
because the cares of this world, and the desire
of riches, were not rooted out of the heart of
those that heard the Gospel, but permitted to
grow up with the good seed of the word, that
this seed brought forth no fruit to perfection.
Indeed this part of the parable seems to have
an immediate reference to the case in question,
and particularly adverts to those who halt be
tween two opinions ; he that received the seed
in stony places is the same that heareth the
word, and " with joy received it ;" and yet if the
cares of the world and desire of riches (those
spiritual thorns and briars) are suffered to re
main, they will choak the good seed, as our
blessed Lord informs us they do.
There are other descriptions of persons whom
the text describes as halting between two opi
nions ; these are men who will renounce their
vices, with the exception of one darling sin ;
now this is a plain instance of double-minded-
ness and insincerity. While we acknowledge
the evil of sin in general, and yet retain that
one sin which easily besets us, the heart is not
wholly with God, it is hypocritical in his sight ;
and a more dangerous state than any other ;
6
SERMON XII. 213
for it leads us to deceive ourselves to the last ;
and because, like Herod upon hearing John
the Baptist, we may do many things gladly,
observe religious ordinances, and external wor
ship, we have no fear of our salvation till it is
awfully lost for ever.
The sum of the matter is this : all are con
cerned in the expostulation of my text, and
stand condemned by its censure, who are not
wholly devoted to God ; who have not abso-
lutely and entirely dedicated themselves to his
service ; who have not renounced the world,
the flesh, and the devil ; who have not with all
their faculties withdrawn themselves from the
consideration of every thing but God and divine
things, in the rule he has given in his Gospel,
to enable them the more perfectly to perform
his duty and service, to an obedience which
they acknowledge to be his due, and which
their hearts bear witness is a reasonable service.
All these may be said to halt between ^two opi
nions who preserve any the least respect to
any creature which belongs alone to God.
Whosoever loves any thing, fears any thing,
hopes any thing, without reference to Him,
214 SERMON XII.
hath set up his idol in his heart ; he is divided
in himself, and therefore cannot love, fear, and
serve God. It is on this account that St. Paul
calls the covetous man an idolator, because he
allows his desire of gain to share his affections
and his thoughts, which God and religion
ought wholly to engross. And as the covetous
man, so also is the sensualist, the passionate,
the proud, the ambitious ; each of them have
some end in their actions besides God : in
short, any one who pretends to be a Christian,
and admits any motive in his pursuits but God
and his holy will, halts between two opinions ;
he may with his lips confess the Lord to be
God, yet pays him not the homage and obe
dience due to him alone.
The folly and danger of which state comes
under the second general head : now the danger
will appear from the following considerations:—
First, that it is a state which the Almighty
hath no where promised to reward ; and,
Secondly, it is a state which he hath threat
ened with the severest punishments.
First, Heaven is the free gift of God through
Jesus Christ ; and therefore not to be attained
SERMON XII. 215
but on such terms as he has appointed : now
where has he promised to reward such a half
piety as we have described ? Has he any where
bound himself to accept it ? A sacrifice without
a heart ! hath he ever capitulated with us to
receive any service which falls short of all that
lies in our power ? a power imparted by his
divine grace to perform. Hath he purchased
the dominion over us by the Son of his love*
upon condition that the empire should be di
vided between him and his creatures ? No, the
promises are made to those alone who not only
seek, but strive to enter into the kingdom of
heaven. It is a holy violence preached in the
Gospel as essentially necessary to introduce us
into the peaceable possession of the kingdom
of God ; and it is this which distinguishes
every real Christian, and proves him to be a
disciple of Christ : after the utmost care and
diligence we are but unprofitable servants, nor
are our most strenuous endeavours the cause of
our salvation, which is the meritorious death
of our blessed Saviour; but they are the. con
ditions of it which he himself has laid down ;
or, in other words, faith which works by love,
SERMON XII.
even the love of God with all our hearts ; and
though, through the corruption of our nature,
we have all reason to be abased and deeply
humbled before God, yet are we to aim at per
fection ; and whosoever wilfully stops short of
any grace he may attain, stops short of the
mercy of God ; for though he has promised to
pardon for our Redeemer's sake all those sins
which by the frailty of our natures we have
committed, yet will he never pardon those
commissions of sin, and omissions of duty,'
which we wilfully live in, and continue to live
in, through a vain persuasion that it is not re
quired of us to follow the strict rules of the
Gospel ; rules which would never have been
enjoined, if God had not promised to give us
grace sufficient (if we implored it) to walk in
all his ordinances blameless. We say then,
that a state of voluntary imperfection, a half-
course between God and the world, is a state
which God hath in no place of Scripture pro
mised to reward, nor yet to accept : but there
is another . argument for the danger x>f it,
namely, the severe punishment denounced
against it. Many and obvious are the texts
SERMON Xllt. 217
wherein the Almighty hath threatened the
pains of hell to all those who will not obey his,
will;. and how this may be fulfilled without
this entire surrender of ourselves to his service
is more than Revelation has made known to
us. We are therein taught to love the Lord our
God with all our heart, with all our mind, and
to do him service with all our soul and with all
our strength ; and this, under pain of being
utterly excluded from his presence if we fail in
the performance of it.
We are expressly told in St. Luke, xiv. 33,
that whosoever he be that forsaketh not all that
he hath, cannot be the disciple of Christ. Now
what can possibly be more plain than these
words, the sense of which evidently is that,
unless we renounce every thing in this world
so far as that our affections may be placed
solely on God, we cannot be his disciples. And
if we be not his, what will become of our hope
of salvation by Jesus Christ? Certainly the
being excluded from the name of his disciple
is an exclusion from heaven, which he died to
purchase for us. But whoever desires to see
the awful condemnation which awaiteth this
218 SERMON XII.
state more fully represented, let him hear what
the Spirit of God saith to the angel of the
church of Laodicea (Rev. iii. 15, ]6): "I
know thy works, that thou art neither hot nor
cold ; so then because thou art lukewarm, and
neither hot nor cold, I will spue thee out of
my mouth." Tremendous doom of the luke
warm and indifferent in religion! see we not
here that the lukewarm Christian (if we will
call him such) is debased even below him who
professes no religion f " I wish thou wert either
hot or cold :"—so saith the Spirit; showing that
coldness, or an absolute neglect of religion*
was a more desirable state than lukewarm ness
or indifference : add to all which, the tremen
dous doom which attends it, " because thou
art neither hot nor cold," I will cast thee from
me, and withdraw my grace from every one
who maketh no better use of it than do the
lukewarm and indifferent.
The folly of living in such a state, of dividing
our hearts between God and the world, may
be easily collected from the danger of it. The
service of God is the most honourable, easy,
and profitable, that we can be occupied in ; , it
SERMON XII. 219
must therefore be the greatest folly to quit this
service, and engage with a cruel master on the
severest terms : yet so does every man who
seeks to compound between God and mam
mon, to divide his service between religion
and the world ; for no man can serve two mas
ters; we must of necessity renounce the service
of one. St. James declares, " the friendship of
the world is enmity with God : whosoever
therefore will be a friend of the world is the
enemy of God." Here we perceive there is
no such thing as a divided love : the love of
the world is absolutely inconsistent with the
love of God ; so that if we afford the world or
any thing in it a share of our affections, but
as he has commanded for his sake, in such
proportion do we become the enemies of God.
And can there be a greater instance of folly ?
to lose his favour, in whose favour is life eter
nal, and the glorious reward annexed to our
fidelity, for a small proportion of this world's
good ?
Be wiser : follow the prophet's advice. If
the Lord be God, serve him and him only ;
but if not, serve whomsoever you do serve
SERMON XII.
heartily, that ye may at least have the reward
of your services, for the man who is religious
by halves, that dares not wholly renounce the
service of God, and yet will not entirely devote
himself to his Divine Master, has taken the
ready way to divest himself both of the pleasure
of religion and of the world ; he has just enough
religion to embitter his delights, to poison all
his enjoyments ; nay, suffers all the pains, and
oftentimes more than the truly pious man en
dures even under martyrdom, and at the same
time loses all the satisfaction which ever ac
companies genuine piety.
I proceed thirdly, and lastly, to conclude
with an earnest exhortation to an entire devo
tion of ourselves to God.
. Ye have seen, brethren, the true nature of
the guilt of halting between two opinions,
which consists in dividing our affections be
tween God and the things he has made, and
placing only such a part of love upon our
Creator, as we can spai-e from his creatures.
Ye have likewise been shown the folly and
danger of such a state, which God has no where'
promised to reward, nay/ has denounced his
SERMON XII. 221
vengeance upon it. Now surely this will be
abundantly sufficient, if you believe it, to per
suade you totally to renounce the world, and to
set your affections on things above: ye have seen
that no less a degree of religion than this wilj
profit you ; that whoever wilfully falls short of
this falls short of the mercy of God : be strong
therefore and quit yourselves like men, be bold,
to assert your liberty, to vindicate the dignity of
your redeemed nature, to shake off the bondage
of corruption, and to demean yourselves as be
comes the children of God, and inheritors of,
the kingdom of heaven. Our gracious God, he
assured, is infinitely worthy of our highest
love, abundantly deserving of our best services^
he hath created and preserved us, and therefore,
has a claim to all we are, and all we can dpy in
return for such inestimable benefits. Nay, he,
has redeemed us from sin, and delivered up
from the bondage of corruption ; and therefore
we can never repay the least of his blegsjngs^
Bqt his mercy is pleased to accept such service
as we are able to perform, in consideration o|"
our weakness, and the poor corrupted state, of
pur nature, and . since we have ijothing^c^e-
.v
SERMON XII.
turn, he graciously receives the mean oblation
of ourselves, provided we present it with our
whole heart. And this surely no man will sup
pose too great a sacrifice for all the mighty
obligations that have been conferred upon him;
for while we serve God, we increase the per
fection of our being, and partake of His honour
and glory who dwelleth in the highest heavens.
To be admitted to worship Him before whom
the angels veil their faces is indeed the highest
honour wherewith any creature can be blessed ;
and to* devote ourselves to his service is only
1 to be secured of our title to this dignity and
pre-eminence, which the King of heaven and
earth vouchsafes to the heirs of immortality.
There may be other imaginary pleasures and
honours ; but in reality there is no other hap
piness, honour, or glory, but in the service of
God. All the felicity of this world can afford
us at best but a suspension of misery, a vain
shadow, and a vain hope! What can riches
effect but preserve us from the evil of want ?
we can enjoy no more than we want, and a
very little is sufficient to supply us with that;
all beyond is superfluity which brings neither
SERMON XII.
permanent satisfaction nor lasting advantage.
And who for such a reward as this would for
feit those exalted pleasures which flow so plen-
teously from the service of God ? Pleasures'
they are which fade not in the enjoyment, which
pall not on the senses, nor destroy the taste by
repetition, but increase to all eternity, which ex
tend our faculties, create new capabilities, and
perfect our nature. Such a scene of delight is his
life who lives wholly devoted to God, who suffers
not the world to intermingle with his affections,
whose heart is fixed above it, and whote soul
is freed from all cares but that of serving and
pleasing his Creator. O glorious task ! blissful
employment ! It is the felicity of angels ! a
foretaste of the joys of heaven ! a forestalling
the blessedness of eternity ! Cast away there
fore all obstructions of this love of God ; divest
yourselves of every base desire ; halt no more
between two opinions ; but, since ye own the
Lord to be God, beseech him to give you
grace to follow him and him alone ; to serve
him truly and faithfully with all your strength,
to love him with all your heart and mind,
-
224 SERMON XII.
to worship him in your body and in your
spirit, to be made perfect in the love and fear
of God, that so your happiness may be per
fected in the enjoyment of his heavenly king
dom throughout all ages, world without end.
Amen.
*
SERMON
PREACHED AT
ST. MARY'S IN OXFORD,
ON
Sunday, September 21, 1735,
ONE MONTH BEFORE HE WENT TO GEORGIA,
BY
JOHN WESLEY, M.A.
FELLOW OF LINCOLN COLLEGE, OXON.
227
SERMON XIII.
There the wicked cease from troubling; and
there the weary be at rest. Job, iii. 17-
when God at first surveyed all the works
he had made, behold, they were very good.
All were perfect in beauty; and man, the Lord
of all, was perfect in holiness : and as his
holiness was, so was his happiness ; knowing
no sin, he knew no pain. But when sin was
conceived, it soon brought forth pain: the
whole scene was changed in a moment. He
now groaned under the weight of a mortal
body, and what was far worse, a corrupted
soul. That Spirit, which could have borne all
his other infirmities, was itself wounded and
sick unto death. Thus in the day wherein he
sinned, he began to die ; and thus, " in the
midst of life we are in death ;" yea, " the whole
a 2
128 SERMON XIII.
creation groaneth together, being in bondage
to sin," and therefore to misery.
The whole world is indeed, in its present
state, only one great infirmary : all that are
therein are sick of sin, and their one business
there is—to be healed. And for this very end,
the great Physician of souls is continually pre
sent with them, marking all the diseases of
every soul, and giving medicines to heal its
sickness. These medicines are often painful
too ; not that God willingly afflicts his crea
tures, but he allots them just as much pain as
is necessary to their health ; and for that rea
son, because it is so. ,
The pain of cure must then be endured by
every man, as well as the pain of sickness.
And herein is manifest the infinite wisdom of
Him who careth for us, that the very sickness
of those; with whom he converses may be a
great means of every man's cure. The very
wickedness of others is, in a thousand ways,
conducive to a good man's holiness. They
trouble him it is true; but even that trouble is
<c health to his soul, and marrow to his bones."
He suffers many things from them ; but it is
SERMON XIII. 229
to this end, that he may be made perfect
through those sufferings.
But till perfect holiness be found on earth,
so neither will perfect happiness : While some
remains of our disease be felt, some physic
will be necessary to heal it. Therefore we are
more or less subject to the pain of cure, as well
as the pain of sickness. And accordingly, nei-.
ther do the wicked here cease from troubling,
nor can the weary be at rest.
" Who then will deliver us from the body of
this death?" Death will deliver us. Death
shall set those free in one moment, who were
all their life-time subject to bondage. Death
shall destroy at once the whole body of sin,
and therewith of its companion, pain. And
therefore, " there the wicked cease from trou
bling, and there the weary be at rest."
The Scriptures give us no account of the
place where the souls of the just remain from
death to the resurrection. But we have an ac
count of their state in these words ; in explain
ing which I shall consider,
First, How the wicked do here trouble good
men. And, ' .
3
230 SERMON XIII.
Secondly, How the weary are there at rest.
Let us consider, First, How the wicked
here trouble good men. And this is a spacious
field. Look round the world, take a view of
all the troubles therein ; how few are there
whereof the wicked are not the occasion.
" From whence come wars and fightings among
you?" Whence all the ills that embitter so
ciety ? that often turn that highest of blessings
into a curse, and make it good for man to be
alone I Come they not hence, from self-will,
pride, inordinate affection ; in one word, from
wickedness ? And can it be otherwise, so long
as it remains upon earth ? As well may the
Ethiopian change his skin, as a wicked man
cease to trouble both himself and his neigh
bour ; but especially good men : inasmuch as,
while he is wicked, he is continually injuring,
either them, or himself, or God.
First, Wicked men trouble those who serve
God, by the injuries they do them. As at first,
he that was born after the flesh persecuted
him that was born after the Spirit," even so it
is now. And so it must be till all things are
fulfilled; till'" Heaven and earth pass away,"
SBRMON XIII. 231
"all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall
suffer persecution." For there is an irreconcil
able enmity, between the Spirit of Christ and
the spirit of the world. If the followers of
Christ " were of the world, the world would
love its own : but, because they are not of the
world, therefore the world hateth them." And
this hatred they will not fail to show by their
words ; " they will say all manner of evil
against them falsely ;" they will find out many
inventions whereby even " the good that is in
them may be evil spoken of : " and in a thou
sand instances " lay to their charge the ill that
they know not." From words in due time
they proceed to deeds ; treating the servant*
as their forefathers did their Master, wronging
and despitefully using them in as many ways
as fraud can invent, and force accomplish.
It is true, these troubles sit heaviest upon
those who are yet weak in the faith ; and the
more of the Spirit of Christ any man gains,
the lighter do they appear to him : so that to
him who is truly renewed therein, who is full
of the knowledge and love of God, all the
wrongs of wicked men are not only no evils,
SERMON XIII.
but are matter of real and solid joy. But still,
though he rejoices for his own sake, he cannot
but grieve for theirs. " He hath great heavi
ness and continual sorrow in his heart for his
brethren according to the flesh," who are thus
te treasuring up to themselves wrath against
the day of wrath, and revelation of the right
eous judgement of God. His eyes weep for
them in secret places ; he is horribly afraid "
for them : " Yea, he could even wish to be ac
cursed himself," so they might inherit a bless
ing. And thus it is that they who can not
only slight, but rejoice in the greatest injury
done to them, yet are troubled at that which
wicked men do to themselves, and the grievous-
misery that attends them. • ■
How much more are they troubled at the
injuries wicked men are continually offering to
God ? This was the circumstance which made
the contradiction of sinners so severe a trial to
our Lord himself: " He that despiseth me de-
spiseth him that sent me." And how are these
despisers now multiplied upon earth ? who fear
not the Son, neither the Father. How are we
surrounded with those, who blaspheme the
SERMON XIII. 233
Lord and his Anointed, either reviling the whole
of his glorious Gospel, or making him a liar
as to some of the blessed truths which he hath
graciously revealed therein r How many of
those who profess to believe the whole, yet in
effect preach another Gospel ; so disguising
the most essential doctrines thereof, by their
new interpretations, as to retain the words only,
but nothing of the " faith once delivered to the
saints !" How many who have not yet made
shipwreck of the faith are strangers to the
fruits of it ? It hath not purified their hearts ;
it hath not overcome the world ; they are yet
" in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity." They are still " lovers of them
selves, lovers of the world, lovers of pleasure,"
and not " lovers of God." Lovers of God ?
No. " He is not in all their thoughts ! " They
delight not in him, they thirst not after him :
They do not rejoice in doing his will, neither
make their boast of his praise ! O faith work
ing by love, whither art thou fled : Surely
the Son of Man did once plant thee upon
earth. Where then art thou now f Among the
wealthy? No. The " deceitfulness of riches
234 SERMON XIII.
there chokes the word, and it becometh un-
fruitful." Among the poor? No. " The
cares of the world " are there, " so that it
bringeth forth no fruit, to perfection." How
ever, there is nothing to prevent its growth
among those who have neither poverty nor
riches—Yes, the desire of other things. And
experience shows, by a thousand melancholy
examples, that the allowed desire of any thing,
great or small, otherwise than as a means to
the one thing needful, will by degrees banish
the care of that out of the soul, and unfit it for
every good word or work.
Such is the trouble, not to descend to parti
culars which are endless, that wicked men con
tinually occasion to the good. Such is the
state of all good men while on earth ; but it is
not so with their souls in Paradise. In the
moment wherein they are loosed from the body*
they know pain no more. Though they are
not yet possessed of the fulness of joy, yet all
grief is done away. For there the wicked
cease from troubling ; and there the weary be
at rest." , ' . (! -.K l} Ts,; • --ion
.Secondly, "There the weary are atrest/'which
SERMON XIII.
was the second thing to be considered, not only
from those evils which prudence might have
prevented or piety removed even in this life,
but from those which were inseparable there
from, which were their unavoidable portion on
earth. They are now at rest, whom wicked
men would not suffer to rest before ; for into
the seat of the spirits of just men none but the
spirits of the just can enter. They are at
length hid from the scourge of the tongue :
Their name is not here cast out as evil. Abra
ham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the Prophets do
not revile or separate them from their com
pany. They are no longer despightfully used
and persecuted ; neither do they groan under
the hand of the oppressor. No injustice, no
malice, no fraud is there ; they are all " Israel
ites indeed, in whom is no guile." There are
no sinners against their own souls; therefore
there is no painful pity, no fear for them.
There are no blasphemers of God or of his
word, no profaners of his name or of his sab?
baths ; no denier of the Lord that bought him,
none that tramples upon the blood of his ever
lasting covenant r 'in a word, no earthly -or
SERMON XIII.
sensual, no devilish spirit ; none who do not
love the Lord their God with all their heart.
1. There, therefore, " the weary are at rest'*
from all the troubles which the wicked occa
sioned ; and indeed, from all the other evils
which are necessary in this world, either as the
consequence of sin, or for the cure of it. They
are at rest, in the first place, from bodily pain.
In order to judge of the greatness of this de
liverance, let but those who have not felt it
take a view of one who lies on a sick or death
bed. Is this he that was made a little lower
than the angels ? How is the glory departed
from him ! His eye is dim and heavy, his
cheek pale and wan, his tongue falters, his
hand trembles, his breast heaves and pants, his
whole body is now distorted and writhed to
and fro, now moist and cold and motionless,
like the earth to which it is going. And yet all
this which you see is but the shadow of what
he feels. You see not the pain that tears his
heart, that shoots through all his veins, and
chases the flying soul through every part of her
once-loved habitation. Could we see this too,
how ^earnestly should we cry out, ' O sin, what
SERMON XIII. 237
hast thou done? To what hast thou brought
the noblest part of the visible creation ? Was
it for this the good God made man ? O no!
Neither will he suffer it long. Yet a little
while, and all the storms of life shall be over!
And thou shalt be gathered into the storehouse
of the dead ! And there the weary are at rest.'
3. They are at rest from all these infirmi
ties and follies, which they could not escape in
this life. They are no longer exposed to the
delusions of sense or the dreams of imagination.
They are not hindered from seeing the noblest
truths by inadvertence, nor do they ever lose
the sight they have once gained by inattention.
They are not entangled with prejudice, nor ever
misled by hasty or partial views of the object.
And consequently, no error is there. O blessed
place, where truth alone can enter ! Truth un
mixed, undisguised, enlightening every man
who cometh into the world. Where there is
no difference of opinions, but all think alike, all
are of one heart and of one mind. Where that
offspring of hell, controversy, which turneth
this world upside down, can never come.
Where those who have been sawn asunder
238 SERMON XIH.
thereby, and often cried out in the bitterness
of their soul, Peace, peace, shall find what they
then sought in vain, even a peace which none
taketh from them.
4. And yet all this, inconceivably great as it
is, is the least part of their deliverance. For in
the moment wherein they shake off the flesh,
they are delivered not only from the troubling
of the wicked, not only from pain and sickness,
from folly and infirmity, but also from sin. A
deliverance this, in sight of which all the rest
vanish away. This is the triumphal song which
every one heareth when he. entereth the gates
of Paradise, " Thou being dead sinnest no
more : sin hath no more dominion over thee.
For in that thou diedst, thou diedst unto sin
once, but in that thou livest, thou livest unto
God."
5. "There-" then "the weary be at rest."
The blood of the Lamb hath healed all their
sickness, " hath washed them throughly from
their wickedness, and cleansed them from their
sin." The disease of their nature is cured ;
they are at length made whole ; they are re
stored to perfect soundness, They no longer
SERMON XHf. ' '299
mourn the flesh lusting against the spirit ; the
law in their members is now at an end, and
no longer wars against the law of their mind,
and brings them into captivity to the law of
sin. There is no root of bitterness left, no re
mains even of that sin which did so easily beset
them : no forgetfulness of " Him in whom they
live, move, and have their being : " no ingrati
tude to their gracious Redeemer, who poured
out his soul unto the death for them : no un
faithfulness to that blessed Spirit, who so long
bore with their infirmities. In a word, no
pride, no self-will is there ; so that they who
are thus delivered from the bondage of corrup
tion may indeed say one to another, and that
in an emphatical sense, " Beloved, now we are
the children of God ; and it doth not yet ap
pear what we shall be, but we shall be like
Him ; for we shall see him as he is." ,
6. Let us view a little more nearly the state
ef a Christian, at his entrance into the other
world. Suppose the silver cord of life just
loosed, and the wheel broken at the cistern ;
the heart can now beat no more ; the blood
ceases to move ; the last breath flies off from
5
240 SERMON XIII.
the quivering lips, and the soul springs forth
into eternity. What are the thoughts of such
a soul, that has just subdued her last enemy,
Death ? that sees the body of sin lying beneath
her, and is new born into the world of spirits?
How does she sing, " O Death, where is thy
sting ? O Grave, where is thy victory ? Thanks
be unto God, who hath given me the victory,
through our Lord Jesus Christ :" O happy
day, wherein I begin to live ! wherein I taste
my native freedom ! when I was born of a
woman, I had but a short time to live, and
that time was full of misery ; that corruptible
body pressed me down, and enslaved me to sin
and pain. But the snare is broken, and I
am delivered. Henceforth I know them no
more. That head is no more an aching head ;
those eyes shall no more run down with tears ;
that heart shall no more pant with anguish or
fear, or be weighed down with sorrow or care ;
those limbs shall no more be racked with pain;
yea, Sin hath no more dominion over me.
At length I have parted from thee, O my enemy,
and I shall see thy face no more. I shall never
more be unfaithful to my Lord, or offend the
SERMON XIII. 241
eyes of his glory ! I am no longer that waver
ing, fickle, self-inconsistent creature, sinning
and repenting, and sinning again. No : I shall
never cease, day or night, to love and praise
the Lord my God, with all my heart, and with
all my strength. But what are ye? Are all
these ministering Spirits sent forth to minister
unto one heir of salvation? Then, dust and
ashes, farewell :• I hear a voice from heaven,
saying, Come away, and rest from thy labours ;
thy warfare is accomplished, thy sin is par
doned, and the days of thy mourning are
ended.
7. Brethren, these truths need little appli
cation. Believe ye that these things are so ?
What then hath each of you to do, but to lay
aside every weight, and run with patience the
race set before him ? to count all things else
but dung and dross ; especially those grand
idols, learning and reputation, if they are pur
sued in any other measure, or with any other
view, than as they conduce to the knowledge
and love of God : to have th^s one thing " con
tinually in thine heart, when thou sittest in
R
242 SERMON XIII.
thine house, and when thou walkest by the
way, and when thou liest down, and when thou
risest up ; to have thy loins ever girt, and thy
light burning ; to serve the Lord thy God with
all thy might ; if by any means, when he re-
quireth thy soul of thee, perhaps, in an hour
when thou lookest not for him, thou mayest
enter where the wicked cease from troubling,
and where the weary be at refit.
'243
ON THE SIGHT OF A CORPSE.
By the Rev. Charles Wesley.
Ah lovely appearance of Death!
No sight upon earth is so fair,
Not all the gay pageants that breathe
Can with this dead body compare.
With solemn delight I survey
The corpse when the spirit is fled,
In love with the beautiful clay,
And longing to lie in its stead.
How blest is our brother bereft
Of all that could burden his mind!
How easy the soul that hath left
This wearisome body behind
Of evil incapable thou,
Whose relics with envy I see ;
No longer in misery now,
No longer a sinner like me.
This earth is affected no more,
With sickness, or shaken with pain ;
The war in the members is o'er,
And never shall vex him again !
No anger henceforward, or shame,
Shall redden this innocent clay ;
Extinct is the animal flame,
And passion is vanish'd away.
244
The languishing head is at rest,
It's thinking and aching is o'er ;
The quiet immoveable breast
Is heav'd by affliction no more :
The heart is no longer the seat
Of trouble or torturing pain ;
It ceases to flutter and beat—
It never shall flutter again !
These lids he so seldom could close,
By sorrow forbidden to sleep,
Lock'd up in eternal repose,
Have strangely forgotten to weep !
The fountains can yield no supplies,
These hollows from water are free,
The tears are all wip'd from these eyes
And evil they never shall see f
To mourn and to suffer is mine,
While bound in a prison I breathe,
And still for deliverance pine,
And press to the issues of death.
What now with my tears I bedew
O might I this moment become,
My spirit created anew,
My frame be consign'd to the tomb !
THE END,