(Preached at Frederics, in the island of St. Simon's, Georgia, on
arrival ; March, 1736.)
The light of the body is the eye : if therefore
thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be
full of light.
But if thine eye be evil, thy
whole body shall befull of darkness.
Matt. vi. 12, 23.
The good providence of God hath at length
brought you to the haven where you desired to
be.
This is the time which you so wished to
find—this is the place you have so longed to ar
rive at. What then ought to be your thoughts,
your designs, your resolutions, now the Al
mighty God hath granted your heart's desire ?
Consider well what ought to be your conduct ;
now choose whether you will serve God or not :
but consider that if you do serve him, you
must do it with all your mind ; that no man

can serve two masters, for ye cannot serve God
and Mammon ; either you must give to God
your whole heart, or none.
He cannot, wiir
not, have a divided heart ; either wholly lay
aside the thoughts of pleasing him, and choose
another master, or let the pleasing him be your
one aim in
all your thoughts, all your words,
and all your actions.
Believe our Lord himself,
you can find no middle way : " The light of
the body is the eye ;
if therefore thine eye be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light :
but
if thine eye be not single, but evil, thy
whole body shall be full of darkness."
I am persuaded there is not one of you here
present that will not earnestly attend while, in
the name of that God who hath hitherto de
fended us, and is now present with us, I
First briefly explain these important words
of our Lord, and
Secondly apply them to the present circum
stances.
And
first, may the God who spoke them
enable me so to explain them, that the mean
ing may sink deep into your hearts !
The light of the body is the eye ;" that is,

the intention
is to the soul what the eye is to
the body. As every part of the body is directed
by the eye, so every power of the soul is in all
its movements directed by the intention I
As every turn of the foot or hand depends
upon and
is governed by the eye, so on the
eye of the mind depends every deliberate move
ment of the understanding and the
affections,
and consequently of whatever depends upon
these, as do most of our words and actions.
If therefore thine eye be single, that is, if thy
intention be not divided into two ends—if in all
thy thoughts, words, and works, thou hast only
one view, namely, to serve and please God, thy
whole body shall be full of light ; this single
intention
will be a light in all thy paths ;
all
darkness and doubt will vanish before it, all
will be plain before thy face ; thou wilt clearly
see the way wherein thou shouldest go, and
steadily walk therein.
.
But if thine eye be evil, if thy intention be
not single, if thou bast a divided aim, if besides
that of pleasing God thou
hast
a desire to
please
thyself, to do thy own - will—if thou
aimest at any thing but the one thing need

ful, namely, a recovery of the image of God in
thy soul, thy whole body shall be full of dark
ness : thou wilt see no light which way soever
thou turnest thyself ; never wilt thou be free
from doubt and perplexity, never out of uncer
tainty and entanglement.
As thou art continually aiming at what can
not be achieved, thou wilt be continually dis
appointed.
The thick darkness of ignorance,
and guilt, and misery, will gather around thee
more and more, nor wilt thou be able while
encompassed with such a cloud, ever to recover
the way of light and peace.
The sum is this : as long as thou hast but
one end in
all thy thoughts, and words, and
actions, to please God, or, which is the same
thing,
to improve in his ways of holiness,
in
the love of God, and of thy neighbour, so long
shalt thou clearly perceive what is conducive
to it.
Thy God, whom thou servest, shall so
tenderly watch over thee, that light, and love,
and peace, shall guide all thy ways, and shine
upon all thy paths ; but no sooner shalt thou
divide thy heart, and aim at any other end but
holiness, than the light from which thou turnest

away being withdrawn, thou shalt not know
whither thou goest : ignorance, sin, and misery,
shall overspread thee, till thou fallest into utter
darkness.
Secondly, to apply these words to your pre
sent circumstances was
the next thing pro
posed ; in order to do which more effectually,
I
shall, by the assistance of God, give you
some directions concerning a single intention,
and exhort you to practise them.
I would not willingly believe that any of
you need to be directed to have a single eye in
your religious exercises. To aim at the favour
or praise of men, or indeed any thing beside
the pleasing God, in sacrament, prayer, or any
duty of the like nature, is such an affront both
to God and man, that we should be very cau
tious of charging any one with it, even in our
heart.
It may be enough, therefore, barely to
observe, that there is no name sufficiently ex
pressive of the folly of those hypocrites who in
any of these solemn offices have any other view
than to please God and save their own souls.
But you are not, perhaps, so well aware that
the same singleness of intention is full as neces-
K

sary in every part of business as it is in your
devotions ; yet this is the very truth.
Unless
your single view be to please God, and to be
upright before him, the most lawful business
becomes unsanctified ; for it is no more allowed
a Christian to work, than it is to pray, with
any other intention ; and a mixture of impure
motives does as much pollute our employments
as it does our prayers.
Every thing that proceeds from, and is suit
able to, this intention, is holy, just, and good ;
and every thing which does not proceed from
an upright
heart and single eye
is so far evil
and unholy.
This, therefore,
is the second direction
I
would give—to preserve a single intention in all
your business, which indeed converts it into
religion, which ennobles every employment,
and renders the meanest offices of life a reason
able sacrifice, acceptable to God through Jesus
Christ.
Nor is a single eye less essential in our re
freshments than in our occupations and devo
tions, as every creature of God is good, if it be
sanctified by the Spirit of God and by prayer.

Without this sort of prayer, at least an in*
tention to please him by using it, no creature
is good, nor can be used without injury to
ourselves ;
and
lest we should imagine
that
meats and drinks were too
little and insig
nificant matters for the Almighty to regard,
he has been graciously pleased to remove this
supposition, by giving you a third direction in
express words by his apostle, w Whether ye
cat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the
glory of God."
Whatever ye do :—this plainly comprises our
recreations as well as refreshments ; a fourth
direction therefore equally important is, let the
same pure intention be preserved in these like
wise.
It is his will that you should use exer*
cise for your health, and delight your eyes
with
the
works of nature and
wonders of
creation,
in such a measure and manner as
will prepare you for business or devotion ; 80
far, therefore, as your present state renders them
necessary, to this end you are to use them, and
no other.
One direction more
is important before I
close this head, and that is, that you, above all
K 2

others,
are required to keep a single eye in
your conversations. Whether devotion or busi
ness be the subject, or whether you converse
for social enjoyment and recreation, in what
ever case, you are enjoined to aim at the glory
of God.
Any other motive is evil, and comes
from evil :
it is an idle word, or conversation,
rather, as the term should be translated ; and of
every such idle word, our Lord plainly tells us,
we shall give an account at the day of judg
ment.
I have now laid before you, in the plainest
manner I was able, the directions wherein this
single intention must be observed ; nothing re
mains but to exhort you instantly, zealously,
and diligently, to practise them.
The God of your fathers hath lately given
you a most gracious testimony that he hath
not forsaken you or your children.
Your eyes
have seen that " his ears are not heavy that
they should not hear, neither his hand short
ened that it cannot save." You have cried unto
him
in your trouble, and he hath delivered
you out of your distress.
He hath
led you
through the terrors of the great deep ; he there

made bare his mighty arm before you—at his
word the stormy wind arose and lifted up the
waves thereof—we reeled to and fro, and stag
gered like drunken men, and were at our wits'
end, when he made the storm to cease so that
the waves thereof were still.
He hath prepared
a table for you in the way wherein you went ;
even there, with corn and wine hath he sus
tained you.
Some of you he hath raised from
sickness, to some he hath forbidden sickness to
approach ; to all of you, who allowed spiritual
blessings to be blessings, he hath afforded them.
Yea in these he hath been found of them who
asked them not ; he hath spoken to the hearts
even of some who were unmindful of his mer
cies ; and now " he hath brought you to the
haven where ye would be." What reward then
will ye give unto the Lord for all the benefits
he hath done unto you ?
Love him with all
your hearts, serve him with all your strength,
forget the things which ai$e behind—pleasures,
riches, honours—in a word, whatever does not
lead to God.
Behold all things about you are become new,

SRRMON VIII.
fee ye likewise new creatures. From this hour
let your eye be single.
Whatever ye speak, or
think, or do, let God be your aim, and God
alone. Let your great end be to please him, in
all your business, your refreshments, your re
creations, your converse, as well as in religious
duties.—Let this be your one design.
" He that hath ears to hear, let him hear."
Have one intention, one desire, one hope, even
that the God whom ye worship may be your
God, and your All, in time and in eternity !
O be not of a double mind, think of nothing
else, seek nothing else—to love God and be
beloved by him is enough !
Fix your eyes upon this one point, and your
whole soul shall be full of light ! God will con
tinually lift up the light of his countenance
upon you, his Holy Spirit shall dwell in you,
and shine more and more unto the perfect day.
He shall purify your hearts by faith from every
earthly thought and unholy affection ; he shall
establish your souls with so lively a hope of
his favour, as already lays hold on the prize of
your high calling ; he shall fill you with peace,

and joy, and love—love, the brightness of his
glory, the express image- of his person—love
which never ceaseth, never faileth, but still ex
tends its vivifying flame,
still goeth on con
quering and to conquer,
till what was a weak,
blind, wavering, sinful creature shall be filled
with all the fulness of God, and worship in
his presence when time shall be no more !