Tues., .January lst, 1751. I began the new year as usual, with the voice of joy and thanksgiving. 

Wed., January 2d. I visited a sick believer, who talked of death as of going to sleep. "When I think of the grave," said she, "I think it is a sweet, soft place; but my spirit shall mount above." 

Mr. W----- having always insisted on our sojourning with him a while, when he should have an house of his own, I carried Sally thither, to her two inseparable sisters, Betsy and Peggy. 

Fri., January 4th. I spent the evening at Mrs. Colvil's, and left my partner there. 

Sun. afternoon, .January 6th. M. C. and Mrs. D. brought her me back. We had the pleasure of frequent visits from them. 

Sun., .January 13th. I preached at Hayes church, morning and evening, on, "Come unto me, all that labour," and, "Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away," &c. They were patient, at least, of the truth. I rode back to town. 

Mon., January 14th. Mr. W.'s three sisters were at our family prayers; in which I was even overwhelmed with their burden, and constrained to warn them with tears and vehement expressions of my fear and sorrow. The arrows of conviction pierced one of their hearts. The others were rather confounded than alarmed. 

Sun., January 27th. I preached at the Foundery with great severity. 

Wed., January 30th. I got an hour's very useful conversation with Lady Piers. 

Sat., February 2d. My brother, returned from Oxford, sent for and told me he was resolved to marry! I was thunderstruck, and could only answer, he had given me the first blow, and his marriage would come like the coup de grace. Trusty lied Pertenet followed, and told me, the person was Mrs. Vazeille! one of whom I had never had the least suspicion. I refused his company to the chapel, and retired to mourn with my faithful Sally. I groaned all the day, and several following ones, under my own and the people's burden. I could eat no pleasant food, nor preach, nor rest, either by night or by day. (For an account of the probable reasons for Mr. Charles Wesley's opposition to his brother's marriage, the reader is referred to The Life of the Rev. Charles Wesley, vol. i., pp. 565--569.-Edit.) 

Sun., February 3d. I gave the sacrament, but without power or life. I had no comfort in it, no singing between, no prayer after, it. 

Thur., February 7th. My excessive cough helped to pull me down; and then a sore throat. My companion sympathized with me too sensibly. 

Thur., February 14th. She was often in great pain, especially to-day. I watched by her in great distress, but could not remove her pain by sharing it. I sent for Mr. Wathen, who prescribed what gave her immediate relief. I gave God, who heareth prayer, the glory. 

Sun., February 17th. I dragged myself to the chapel, and spoke on those words, "Thy sun shall no more go down," &c. The whole congregation seemed infected by my sorrow: both under the word, and at the sacrament, we wept and made supplication. It was a blessed mourning to us all. 

At the Foundery I heard my brother's apology. Several days afterwards I was one of the last that heard of his unhappy marriage. 

Mon., February 18th. I carried Sally out of the confusion to M. Colvil's. 

Sun., February 24th. After sacrament, Mr. Blackwell fell upon me in a manner peculiar to himself, dragging me to my dear sister. 

Wed., February 27th. My brother came to the chapel-house with his wife. I was glad to see him; saluted her; stayed to hear him preach. 

Sat., March 9th. I felt great emotion in the word, both morning and evening. 

Fri., March 15th. I called on my sister; kissed and assured her I was perfecfly reconciled to her, and to my brother. 

Mon., March 18th. I finished Marcus Anteninus, having learnt from him, I hope, some useful lessons, particularly not to resent, not to revenge myself, not to let my peace lie at the mercy of every injurious person. 

Tues., March 19th. I brought my wife and sister together, and took all opportunities of showing the latter my sincere respect and love. 

Thur., March 21st. At four in the morning I met the watchman, who told me the first news of the Prince's death. 

Mon., March 25th. I visited one on his death-bed, who had been converted from Delsm, and washed in the blood of his Redeemer. 

Tues., April 9th. I spent a week with M. Colvil, and Miss Degge, chiefly in reading, singing, and prayer. 

Sat., April 13th. I passed the evening with Sally at Mr. Ianson's, and saw the Prince's funeral pass. The house was full of strangers. We joined in many suitable hymns, till near midnight. 

Mon., April 15th. I heard Lovybond preach, most miserably. By how many degrees are such Preachers worse than none! 

Sun., April 21st. God was present in the word and sacrament, as in the months that are past, when the candle of the Lord was upon our heads. 

Thur., April 25th. Our Lord again confirmed Ms word: "In the world ye shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer," &c. 

Fri., April 26th. After intercession, I met J. Hutchinson, and engaged him for the next day: then laboured to stir him up to do the first works. 

Sun., April 28th. I buried our sister Pocock, a silent, secret, unpretending Christian, who died the death, as she lived the life, of the righteous. I strongly warned the bands against sin and apostasy. 

Tues., April 30th. I took horse in the afternoon, Mr. Lloyd and Sally in the chaise, and lodged at T. Hardwick's. 

 

 To Next Section