Fri., September 1st. By eleven we saluted our friend Vigor. I saw my house, and consecrated it by prayer and thanksgiving. I spent an hour at the preaching-room in intercession. I began the hour of retirement with joint prayer. Alone, I was in some measure sensible of the divine presence. I opened the book on those words, "While they spake, Jesus stood in the midst of them, and said, Peace be unto you." At six our first guests, Mrs. Vigor and her sisters, passed an useful hour with us. I preached on the first words I met, Rom. xii. 1: "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice," &c. The power and blessing of God was with us. Half-hour past nine I slept comfortably in my own house, yet not my own. 

Sat., September 2d. We had family prayer at eight. I began the New Testament. I passed the hour of retirement in my garden, and was melted into tears by the divine goodness. 

Sun., September 3d. Sally accompanied me to our feast in Kingswood. Poor Betsy was kept away by illness. 

Mon., September 4th. I rose with my partner at four. Both under the word and among the select band, we were constrained to cry after Jesus with mighty prayers and tears. We sang this hymn in my family: -- "God of faithful Abraham, hear His feeble son and thine, In thy glorious power appear, And bless my just design: Lo ! I come to serve thy will, All thy blessed will to prove; Fired with patriarchal zeal, And pure primeval love. "Me and mine I fain would give A sacrifice to Thee, By the ancient model live, The true simplicity; Walk as in my Maker's sight, Free from worldly guile and care, Praise my innocent delight, And all my business prayer. "Whom to me thy goodness lends Till life's last gasp is o'er, Servants, relatives, and friends, I promise to restore; All shall on thy side appear, All shall in thy service join, Principled with godly fear, And worshippers divine. "Them, as much as lies in me, I will through grace persuade, Seize, and turn their souls to Thee For whom their souls were made; Bring them to the' atoning blood, (Blood that speaks s world forgiven,) Make them serious, wise, and good, And train them up for heaven." 

In the evening was that word fulfilled, "Him that cometh unto me, I will in no wise east out," by the reception of a poor sinner to the favour of God in Christ Jesus. 

Thur., September 7th. As often as I minister the word, our Lord ministers his grace through it. He Messed me also in private, as well as family, prayer, and conference with my Christian friends; in a word, whatsoever I do prospers. 

Sun., September 10th. There was a multitude of guests at our Lord's supper; and none of them, I would hope, sent empty away. 

Fri, September 15th. My throat grew worse and worse, so that I could not preach in the evening. 

Sunday, October 22d, 1749. I rode with Mr. Waller and my family to Kingswood. After the sacrament, we found the usual spirit of prayer. 

Wed., October 25th. Among my hearers to-day at Bath, were a son of Lord Chief Justice Lee, my old schoolfellow, Sir Danvers Osborn, and Lord Halifax. They behaved decently, and were particularly taken with the singing. In the evening God sent forth his awakening power, and his fear fell on all that heard the word. 

Thur., October 26th. I visited my house in peace. Wed., November 8th. I set out for London, with my brother and Ned Perronet. We were in perils of robbers, who were abroad, and had robbed many the night before. We commended ourselves to God, and rode over the heath, Singing. 

Fri., November 10th. We kept a joyful watchnight at the Foundery. 

Sun., November 12th. I heard that our sister Somerset was gone to glory. God, who giveth power to them that faint was with my mouth, and strengthened me to preach the word with success. 

Fri., November 17th. I examined the classes; and returned in great bodily pain to Bristol. 

Fri., December 1st. I hardly reached my own house, quite exhausted as I was with pain of body and vexation of spirit. 

I had little power for several days, and less inclination to preach. My greatest comfort was the conversation of a few faithful friends, such as M. Vigor, S. Perrin, M. Davis, and Suky Burdock. 

Mon., December 18th. My birthday. Forty years long have I now grieved and tempted God, proved him, and seen his works. I was more and more sensible of it all day, till I quite sunk under the burden. 

Sun., December 24th. I preached with a little strength; exhorted the Society with more. 

Christmas-day. The room was full as it could contain. We rejoiced from four to six, "that to us a Son is born, to us a Child is given." 

I received the sacrament at the college. In the evening, all were melted down at our solemn love-feast. 

 

 To Next Section