Fri., September 1st. I took coach for London. Between five and six reached Mrs. Claggett's. They heartily joined me in praise and prayer. Mr. Claggett was very friendly. 

James Hutton supped with us. I found several at Bray's. After prayer he told me, God plainly forbids my return to America, by my success here. 

Sun., September 3d. I preached salvation by faith at Westminster Abbey; gave the cup. In the afternoon I preached at St. Botolph's; and expounded Rom. ii., at Sims's, to above two hundred people. 

Mon., September 4th. Charles Kinchin, now my inseparable companion, accompanied me to Bexley and Blendon. I prayed, and was comforted with the poor people. 

Tues., September 5th. Mr. Piers agreed to board my sister Kezzy. I read my sermon; prayed and rejoiced with Mrs. Delamotte, and the rest at Blendon. Charles was all thankfulness and love. I returned to town very ill of a sore throat. 

Sun., September 10th. I preached faith in the morning at Sir George Wheler's chapel, and assisted at the sacrament. In the afternoon at St. Botolph's. In the evening at Sims's I was much strengthened to pray and expound to above three hundred attentive souls, Another lost sheep was now brought home. 

Fri., September 15th. Meeting Charles Metcalf's mother, I laboured to convince her of unbelief (our first point with all). She yielded at last; and we joined in earnest prayer for her. 

Sat., September 16th. James Hutton came, and carried me perforce to Newgate; where we preached Christ to four condemned prisoners. At night my brother returned from Hernhuth. We took sweet counsel together, comparing our experiences. 

Sun., September 17th. At the early sacrament, my brother read prayers; I preached "all under sin" in Grace-church-street; the morning: at Queen's-street chapel in the afternoon. In the evening I preached faith, from Rom. ill., at the Savoy Society. My brother entertained us at night with the Moravian experiences. 

Fri., September 22d. At Bray's I expounded Eph. i. A dispute arising about absolute predestination, I entered my protest against that doctrine. 

Sun., September 24th. I comforted Mrs. Claggett, much threatened by her husband; and then Mrs. Hankinson, who has lost several boarders, yet is in nothing terrified by her adversaries. I read prayers in lslington church, and preached with great boldness. There was a vast audience, and better disposed than usual. None went out, as they had threatened, and frequently done heretofore; especially the well-dressed hearers, "whene'er I mentioned hell to ears polite," and urged that rude question," Do you deserve to be damned" 

We sang, rejoiced, and gave thanks at Mr. Stonehouse's; and again at Mrs. Hankinson's. I talked with one of her misses, to whom faith had come by hearing. 

Wed., September 27th. In our way to Oxford, I talked dosely with my fellow-traveller, Mr. Combes. He expressed his desire of faith: I was moved to sing, "Salvation by faith," then "Faith in Christ." I told him, if the Spirit had convinced him of unbelief, he could of righteousness also, even before we reached Oxford. I stopped and prayed that he might believe. Immediately he told me, he was in such a blessed temper, as he never before experienced. We halted, and went to prayers. He testified the great delight he felt, saying, it was heaven, if it would but continue. While we were discoursing, the fire within him, he said, diffused itself through every part; he was brim full of joy, (yet not knowing he believed,) and eager to praise God. He called upon me to join. "Was I now in heaven, I could not think of my sins; I should only think of praising God." We sang and shouted all the way to Oxford. 

I met our friends with Mr. Hutchins at Fox's. Mrs. Platt was full of life and love. We read the experiences of the Moravians. 

Thur., September 28th. I called on my friend that was, John Sarney, now entirely estranged by the offence of the cross. I rode to my constant friend, John Gambold. Mr. Combes communicated with us: his warmth, he told me, had returned through his professing his faith. I left Mrs. Gambold in confident hope of soon receiving it. I preached boldly at Oxford; prayed after God, with Mr. Wells. 

Sat., September 30th. I returned to town, having in some measure confirmed our friends at Oxford. My brother informed me of one, who was yesterday an open sinner, and to-day received into Christ's church, or the company of faithful people. Mrs. Claggett said, that this morning, in utter despair, she had heard a distinct whisper, "I am the Lord thy God, mighty to save." 

Sun., October lat. I read prayers and gave the sacrament at the quest-room. In the afternoon I read prayers, and preached at St. Margaret's, Westminster. 

Mon., October 2d. I dined at Mr. Brockmar's; and we admonished one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs. I went, with the three Miss Claggetts, to our poor sick woman. My brother and James followed; then Mrs. Metcalf and three of the Delamottes. We found her full of triumph, and vehement desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. We did this in remembrance of Him. 

Thur., October 5th. I went with Sparks to Newgate; shamefully unwilling: yet preached on repentance with earnest zeal. 

Sun., October 8th. I preached at Bexley "all under sin ;" finished my sermon in the afternoon. The people very outrageous. Mrs. Delamotte carried me home. I exhorted my friends in the kitchen. A sermon was read in the parlour. I preached faith in Christ. Mr. Delamotte made no objection, but seemed much pleased. 

Mon., October 9th. I walked with Will. to Bexley, where my sermon has occasioned a great uproar. 

Wed., October 11th. I got back to my friends in London. I spoke plainly to Mr. Claggett, who has been very violent toward his wife since I left them. 

Thur., October 12th. I was at West's with Bray and Sparks, and prayed, pleading the promises in much bodily pain. I asked in faith that it might leave me: it did, while I was walking to James's. 

Fri., October 13th. At seven I read prayers and preached at St. Antholin's. 

Sun., October 15th. I heard Hutchins at St. Lawrence's: had much comfort and meltings in prayer after the sacrament. I preached the one thing needful at Islington, and added much extempore; sang at Mr. Stonehouse's: Sims's was excessively crowded in the evening; spake with much boldness and warmth. At Bray's I found the bands meeting. Mr. Stonehouse was there, in a most childlike spirit. I was moved to pray for him earnestly, and according to God. I asked particularly that some one might then receive the atonement. While they were going, E---- came; complained of the pain and burden of sin, that bruised him. I took him aside with Hutchins. He received faith in immediate answer to our prayer; professed it; full of peace, and joy, and love. I expressed a strong desire to pray for Mr. Stonehouse. I prayed again with vehemence and tears. Bray was greatly affected; so were James and all the rest: yet no answer. Mr. Stonehouse said, the blessing was withheld from him to increase our importunity. 

Fri., October 20th. Seeing so few present at St. Antholin's, I thought of preaching extempore: afraid; yet ventured on the promise, "Lo, I am with you always ;" and spake on justification from Rom. iii., for three quarters of an hour, without hesitation. Glory be to God, who keepeth his promise for ever. 

Sat., October 21st. I waited with my brother on the Bishop of London, to answer the complaints he had heard against us, that we preached an absolute assurance of salvation. Some of his words were," If by ' assurance ' you mean an inward persuasion, whereby a man is conscious in himself, after examining his life by the law of God, and weighing his own sincerity, that he is in a state of salvation, and acceptable to God; I don't see how any good Christian can be without such an assurance." "This," we answered, "is what we contend for: but we have been charged as Antinomians, for preaching justification by faith only." "Can any one preach otherwise, who agrees to our Church and the Scriptures" "Indeed, by preaching it strongly, and not inculcating good works, many have been made Antinomians in theory, though not in practice: especially in 

King Charles's time." "But there is a heavy charge against us Bishops, by your bringing the Archbishop's authority for re-baptizing an adult." My brother answered, "That he had expressly declared the contrary: yet," added he," if a person dissatisfied with lay-baptism should desire episcopal, I should think it my duty to administer it, after having acquainted the Bishop according to the canon." "Well; I am against it myself, where any one has had the Dissenters' baptism." 

Next my brother inquired, whether his reading in a Religious Society made it a conventicle. His Lordship warily referred us to the laws: but upon our urging the question, "Are the Religious Societies conventicles" he answered, "No; I think not: however, you can read the acts and laws as well as I: I determine nothing." We hoped his Lordship would not henceforward receive an accusation against a Presbyter, but at the mouth of two or three witnesses. He said, "No; by no means. And you may have free access to me at all times," We thanked him, and took our leave. 

Sun., October 22d. I preached one thing needful at St. Clement's, to a very large audience, (many of whom stayed the communion,) and again at Sir G. Wheler's chapel. 

Tues., October 24th. I told Mr. Claggett, in one of his persecuting fits, that I should be glad to see him when on a sick-bed; that I had the satisfaction of having him my friend, when he was most so to himself, and to God. He went out to fetch Bishop Taylor to confute me; but opened upon a place, strongly asserting this living, justifying faith. He owned himself fully convinced; admired the hand of Providence; confessed he had loathed the sight of me, and hated me from his heart; but now loved me entirely, and all mankind; could hug me in his bosom; never knew such comfort in his life, as at this moment; could not be beat out of it by all the world. Alas! that this morning-cloud should ever pass away! 

Thur., October 26th. At M. Hind's I was charged by Mr. Capell, with particularly pleading the promises. I confessed, and justified it. James came to second me. We were both zealous, not angry. 

Fri., October 27th. I was at Mr. Sparks's, who is fully persuaded his sins are forgiven. 

Sun., October 29th. I preached with strength at St. George's; then at Ironmongers' Almshouses; and at night expounded Romv. to a large audience in the Minorlea. 

Thur., November 2d. I was much affected in praying for Mr. Stonehouse. 

Fri., November 3d. I sang with him; envied his exquisite tenderness of conscience. I walked with Metcalf and Betty Claggett to visit a woman dying in the faith; thence to Miss Reeves, who is now assured of her acceptance with God. 

Sat., November 4th. I preached at St. Antholin's, reconciling those who never differed, St. Paul and St. James. 

Sun., November 6th. I preached the three-fold state at St. Alban's, Wood-street: then expounded at Sims's. 

Tues., November 7th. At Newgate I was melted down under the word I spake. 

Wed., November 8th. At Bexley. Mr. Piers, through fear of the world's threatenings, had left off the meeting on Wednesday night. My sister would not give up her pretensions to faith; told me, half angry, "Well, you will know in the next world, whether I have faith or no." I asked her, "Will you then discharge me, in the sight of God, from speaking to you again If you will, I promise never more to open my mouth till we meet in eternity." She burst into tears, fell on my neck, and melted me into fervent prayer for her. 

Sat., November 11th. Charles Graves came, and rejoiced ray heart with the account of his having received the atonement. 

Sun., November 12th. Mr. Piers refused me his pulpit, through fear of man; pretending tenderness to his flock. I plainly told him, if he so rejected my testimony, I would come to see him no more. I walked back to town in the strength of the Lord; and expounded at Sims's. All were dissolved in tears. 

Mon., November 13th. Charles brought Mr. W. Seward; a zealous soul, knowing only the baptism of John. 

Tues., November 14th. I had another conference with his Lordship of London. "I have used your Lordship's permission to wait upon you. A woman desires me to baptize her; not being satisfied with her baptism by a Dissenter: she says sure and unsure is not the same." He immediately took fire, and interrupted me: "I wholly disapprove of it: it is irregular." "My Lord, I did not expect your approbation. I only came, in obedience, to give you notice of my intention." "It is irregular. I never receive any such information, but from the Minister." "My Lord, the Rubric does not so much as require the Minister to give you notice, but any discreet person. I have the Minister's leave." "Who gave you authority to baptize" "Your Lordship: and I shall exercise it in any part of the known world." "Are you a licensed Curate" "I have the leave of the proper Minister." "But don't you know, no man can exercise parochial duty in London, without my leave It is only sub silentio." "But you know many do take that permission for authority; and you yourself allow it." "It is one thing to connive, and another to approve. I have power to inhibit you." "Does your Lordship exert that power Do you now inhibit me" "O, why will you push things to an extreme I do not inhibit you." "Why then, my Lord, according to your own concession, you permit or authorize me." "I have a power to punish, and to forbear punishing." "That seems to imply, that I have done something worthy of punishment. I should be glad to know, that I may answer. Does your Lordship charge me with any crime" "No, no: I charge you with no crime." "Do you then dispense with my giving you notice of any baptisms for the future" "I neither dispense, nor not dispense." 

He railed at Lawrence on lay-baptism; blamed my brother's sermon, as inclining to Antinomianism. I charged Archbishop Tillotson with denying the faith. He allowed it, and owned they ran into one extreme, to avoid another. He concluded the conference with, "Well, Sir, you knew my judgment before, and you know it now. Good morrow to you." 

I read prayers at Islington, and baptized an adult; Mr. Stonehouse, M. Sims, and M. Breton, being the witnesses. 

Wed., November 15th. I dined at old Mr. Hutton's. They could scarcely be civil. Surely for Christ's sake have we lost this friendly family. 

Thur., November 16th. After morning prayers, I baptized Mrs. Bell with hypothetical baptism. I sang and prayed with assistance, at Mr. Stonehouse's. Then Mrs. 

Wren confessed, she had been in bondage ten years, but received the atonement on Tuesday night, while we were praying: was now perfectly free: full of peace, and joy in believing. Another professed her faith lately received. I dined at my friend Stonehouse's, who very kindly offers to keep my brother and me. 

M. Hankinson carried me to a poor woman, broken, bruised, and bound by sin. After prayer she arose, loosed from her bond, and glorified God. 

Sat., November 18th. I had a joyful meeting with my dear Charles Delamotte, just returned from Georgia. I found, in conversation, that he had received forgiveness five months ago; and continued in peace and liberty. 

Sun., November 19th. At Dr. Crow's desire, I preached in his church at Bishopsgate; and dined at Mr. Brockmar's, where Mr. Seward testified faith. 

I visited a poor woman of eighty-four; who told me she was reserved for some work of God: was soon beat out of her own works; and in the midst of prayer set at liberty. She rose, caught hold of me, declared her enlargement; that she was now at ease, ready to go into eternity this moment. She prayed for and blessed me with great earnestness. 

Mon., November 20th. I had a most comfortable sacrament at Bray's; Mr. Sparks, the three Miss Claggetts, &c., partaking. I passed the evening at Blendon, in prayer and thanksgiving. 

Tues., November 21st. I communicated again at Bray's. I triumphed with some who are persecuted for righteousness' sake. 

Wed., November 22d. I set out in the coach for Oxford. 

Fri., November 24th. I met Charles Kinchin there. I received the blessed sacrament at Mrs. Townsend's, with much comfort. 

Sat., November 25th. I felt a pining desire to die; foreseeing the infinite dangers and troubles of life. At Mr. Wells's I preached the faith of the Gospel to him and Mr. Heare. Charles carried me to the Castle. I read prayers, and was afterwards constrained to speak freely and fully. I was much cheered by it myself. I rode with Mr. Wells and Kinchin to Coggs, where we spent the evening in prayer and the Scriptures. 

Sun., November 26th. I preached the three-fold state at Coggs: then rode on to my brother Gambold's. 

Tues., November 23th. I dined in Christ-Church Hall, as one not belonging to them. 

Wed., November 29th. After morning prayers, I called on Mr. Whitefield, who pressed me to accept of a College living. I read prayers, and preached at the Castle. 

Thur., November 30th. I paid Mr. Gambold another visit, and parted with the sacrament. 

Tues., December 5th. I was at Convocation; where honest John Chicheley was presented with his degree; having before got orders, for which he came to England. 

Thur., December 7th. I read prayers again to the poor prisoners in Bocardo. 

Sat., December 9th. I was with the Dean; who complained of my brother's obscurity in his sermon on salvation; and expressly denied the assurance of faith, and earnest of the Spirit. 

Sun., December 10th. I preached at the Castle, "All under sin," and helped to administer the sacrament. I read prayers, and preached there again in the afternoon. 

Mon., December 11th. I came in the coach to Wycombe. I lodged at Mr. Hollis's, who entertained me with his French Prophets, equal, in his account, if not superior, to 

the Old-Testament ones. While we were undressing, he fell into violent agitations, and gobbled like a turkey-cock. I was frightened, and began exorcising him with, "Thou deaf and dumb devil," &c. He soon recovered out of his fit of inspiration. I prayed, and went to bed, not half liking my bedfellow. I did not sleep very sound with Satan so near me. I got to London by one the next day. George Whitefield came to J. Bray's soon after me. I was full of vehement desire in prayer. I heard him preach to a vast throng at St. Helen's. 

Thur., December 14th. I heard a glorious account of the success of the Gospel at Islington. Some of the fiercest opposers are converted. 

Fri., December 15th. At Mr. Stonehouse's I met Mrs. Vaughan, full of joy in the Holy Ghost, but not without a mixture of nature. 

Sat., December 16th. Heater Hobson and her sister called, being sick of love to Christ crucified. My soul, in and after prayer with them, was all desire and expectation. 

Sun., December 17th. I met Mr. Broughton at M. Hind's. The last time we had parted good friends, and he thanked me for my friendly offices with Miss Reeves. He now desired me to get from her a discharge. 

Mon., December 18th. She told me she fully released him from his promises, but durst not give him a written discharge, lest her brother should cast her off. 

Tues., December 19th. I asked my friend Stonehouse, "Dost thou believe in the Son of God" And he could confidently answer, "Yes, I do, and now know that I believe." We sang (M. Hankinson joining us) in the spirit of faith, and triumphed in the name of the Lord our God. 

Thur., December 21st. At St. Antholin's the Clerk asked me my name, and said, "Dr. Venn has forbidden any Methodist to preach. Do you call yourself a Methodist" "I do not: the world may call me what they please." "Well, Sir," said he, "it is pity the people should go away without preaching. You may preach." I did so, on good works. 

Sat., December 23d. I was deeply affected in singing at Blendon: retired, and poured out my soul in prayer for love. 

Christmas day. I preached at Islington in the morning, and gave the cup: George Stonehouse in the afternoon. 

Tues., December 26th. George Whitefield preached. We had the sacrament this and the four following days. On Thursday my brother preached; on Friday, George Whitefield; and on Saturday, Mr. Robson. The whole week was a festival indeed; a joyful season, holy unto the Lord. 

 

 To Next Section