Mon., May 2d. Between one and two in the morning, I betook myself to my usual bed, the floor. Charles Gr. breakfasted with me, and owned with tears, he had never felt any true joy but in religion. I earnestly recommended Law to him. 

At noon I visited Mr. Gainbold, right glad to see me. I found him much cheerfuller than usual: his sister just the same. In the afternoon I talked with the prisoners; very attentive: with the Dean; very kind and friendly. 

Tues., May 3d. At two Mr. Sarney rose to pray for me. I rose too, and set out for London, which I reached in a few hours. 

Thur., May 5th. I met Virelst and Counsel at Mr. Oglethorpe's, about the hearing they are shortly to have before the Board of Trade. When they were gone, Mr. Oglethorpe said, if the Government had dropped Georgia, he would not let the poor people perish, but sell his estate, which he could do for 45,000, and support them upon the interest. 

Fri., May 20th. At her desire, I waited upon Lady Betty Hastings. Her inquiries about Georgia were interrupted by the Bishop of Gloucester's coming. 

Sat., May 21st. I rode out of town to meet my brother and sister from Tiverton, and attended them to Mr. Powel's. 

Mon., May 30th. I carried my brother to the good Archbishop, who received us very kindly. 

Wed., June lst. I accepted an invitation from Mrs. Benson, and rode down to Cheshunt Nunnery. Miss Kitty and Mrs. Johnson were there before me. I was much delighted both with the place and company. After dinner I missed my letter-book, and rode back to town, seeking it in vain. By seven next morning I was at the Nunnery again; and returned to London in the afternoon. 

Fri., June 3d. Between six and seven this evening I took horse for Cheshunt, eighteen miles from London; got there by nine; and the next morning rode eighteen miles farther, to Hatfield, to see my sister Nancy. In the afternoon I returned to the Nunnery. 

Trinity Sunday, June 5th. We all went in an hired coach to Warmley; where I preached "Few saved;" and was pleased to see the family stay the unexpected sacrament. In the evening I rode back to town. 

Mon., June 6th. At ten we were again before the Board of Trade. Till twelve Carolina side was heard. Then our Counsel (confused enough) was heard for Georgia. 

Wed., June 8th. I made affidavit in Chancery-Lane, as to what I knew relating to Georgia. At one I called upon my uncle, and found him exceeding ill. 

Thur., June 9th. At the Board, part of our Charter and Acts were read, &c. I declared upon oath, that all the traders licensed were supposed to be within Georgia. After my affidavit was read, Murray made our defence; but so little to Mr. Oglethorpe's satisfaction, that he started up, and ran out. I dined with my brother at Lord Oxford's. Lady Oxford, Lord Duplin, and the famed Lady Mary, were of the company. 

Sat., June 11th. I found my uncle dying. He pressed my hand, showed much natural affection, and bade me give his love to his sister. I spent the evening at Cheshunt, in reading Mr. Law to the family,-my usual employment there. 

Sunday evening. I heard that my uncle died, a little after I left him. 

Mon., June 13th. I waited on my brother and sister a little way on their road to Tiverton. On Wednesday I breakfasted at the Nunnery. On Thursday night I attended my uncle to his grave. 

Fri., June 17th. I heard the last of my friend Appee's adventures here, from one Mr. Laba, a cutler; from whom he had just stole a watch, and run away with it to Paris. 

Sat., June 18th. I was before the Board of Trade for the last time, to hear Carolina's reply to Georgia. I spent the rest of the month between Cheshunt and Hatfield. 

Sat., July 2d. I was at the Nunnery; and the next day preached at Hatfield. I slept at Cheshunt. 

Mon., July 4th. In the evening I set out for Oxford. I came thither the next day, where James Hutton had got before me. In the evening young Gr. came to me at Sathey's, in an excellent temper. I encouraged him to go on in the narrow way; and strongly recommended stated hours of retirement. 

Thur., July 7th. I pressed the same upon poor Smith, in our walk to Mr. Gainbold's, where 1 found my sister Kezzy. I got back to dinner with Lady Cox and her sisters. In the evening Gr. told me, that on this day he first felt the beginnings of the change; and was convinced of the reality of what he only believed before upon my brother's and my testimony. He appeared full of joy and love. 

Sat., July 9th. I set out with James, for Wootton. Quite spent, I laid me down, and slept for a quarter of an hour upon the ground. By two we reached Marlborough, and by four, Wootton. My mother was lately come thither from Tiverton. 

Mon., July 11th. Meeting Ch. at Bath, we could get no farther. He carried us to see the quarries; where I narrowly missed being dashed to pieces. On Wednesday, July 13th, we came safe to Tiverton. 

Sat, July 23d, and Sun., 24th, at Wootton. Days never to be forgot! 

Mon., July 25th. I heard at Oxford that Charles Graves had been carried away by his friends, as stark mad. 

Thur., July 28th. I spied Robinson and Bateley in the long-walk, and crossed over to speak with them. They fell upon me unawares, desiring me to take some of the Cowley saints to Georgia; charged the Methodists with intrusion, schism, and bringing neglect upon the ministry. We differed toto coelo. I left them with, "Remember, you will be of my mind when you come to die." 

Fri., July 29th. We set out for London, with Mr. Morgan and Mr. Kinchin; and on 

Sat., July 30th, finished our travels at College-street, where I had the satisfaction of finding my old hearty friend, Benjamin Ingham. 

Mon., August 1st. I read Mr. Oglethorpe my brother's letter to the Trustees, charging Horton with raising a scandalous report about me. He would not advise one way or the other: which I interpreted as a dissuaslve, and therefore took no farther notice of the matter. 

Wed., August 17th. After spending some time at Hatfield, I set out with my brother Lambert, for London. At Epping he went back, full of good resolutions. 

Thur., August 18th. Hearing that Mrs. Delamotte was now in town, I went to see her. We fell into discourse upon resignation; and she seemed resolved to acquiesce in the will of God, detaining her Isaac from her. 

Sun., August 21st. I took horse again for Hatfield; read prayers, and preached at Wormley; called on Dr. Nichols, and rode on. My brother I left on the 24th, in excellent temper. I called and dined at Dr. Newton's. 

Thur., August 25th. After giving the sacrament to a sick woman, I breakfasted with Mr. Chadwick. We had some close talk about the new birth, with which he was greatly moved. I took the opportunity of recommending regular retirement, and religious acquaintance. I preached at Ludgate, dined with M. Musgrave, and called in the afternoon at Mrs. Delamotte's. The Cambridge youth was there; but we had no very useful conversation. 

Fri., August 26th. I waited upon His Majesty at Hampton Court, with the Oxford Address, by the advice of Mr. Potter. The Archbishop told me he was glad to see me there. We kissed their Majesties' hands, and were invited to dinner. I left that, and the company, and hasted back to town. The next day we waited upon His Royal Highness, and dined all together at St. James's. 

Wed., August 31st. I talked at large upon my state with Mr. Law, at Putney. The sum of his advice was, "Renounce yourself; and be not impatient." 

 

 To Next Section