Sun., May 5th. I preached from I Peter ii. 12: "Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as evil-doers, they may, by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation." I warned them of that day, already begun, and of that fiery trim approaching. 

At the Foundery I expounded Ezek. ix. A great cry followed. Surely there were many present who have the mark in their foreheads. The Lord increase their number! 

Wed., May 8th. The fast-day. I expounded Zeph. i. 2, then Joel ii., and lastly those awful words of God to Ezekiel: "Though Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, as I live, saith the Lord, they should but deliver their own souls." 

Tues., May 21st. I began examining the classes with my brother, and rejoiced in the success of our past labours. Amidst all the rage and havoc of Satan at the Tabernacle, the plague has not come nigh our dwelling. 

Fri., May 31st. I visited, at her own desire, a Roman Catholic gentlewoman, at Islington, who had refused her Priest, and would have none but my brother or me. She readily gave up her own merits, (which she owned was hell,) and the merits of all the saints, for those of Jesus Christ, her only hope, Mediator, and Saylout. I prayed in faith, and left her not far from the kingdom of heaven. 

We kept a watchnight. Dear Howel Harris I carried into the desk; and we sang together, and shouted for joy, till morning. 

Tues., June 4th. I baptized three adults; who all confessed the ordinance a seal of the covenant of forgiveness. 

Tues., June 11th. I was much revived by the sight of M. Davis's mother, departing in peace. For seventy years she lived, if it may be called life, a stranger to the covenant of promise. For these two last years, since faith came by hearing, she has never had a doubt or fear; but walked with Christ, and adorned the Gospel. Now she longs to go see him face to face. 

Wed., June 12th. Going to bed at M. Witham's, I could not rest, but must needs go to the other end of the town. In Holborn I found the reason,---a poor man, and countryman, challenged me, who had been converted by occasional hearing us, but, through neglect of the means, had fallen from his first love, and into poverty. I exhorted him to return to God, gave him somewhat, and parted. The next day he spent in seeking me everywhere, to restore a guinea I had given him by mistake. 

Sun., June 16th. I expounded Elijah's flight, and pining desire to die: we were strengthened by his weakness. My brother Taylor read prayers, and assisted at the truly blessed sacrament. In the evening also, we had the shout of a King in the midst of us, as at the beginning. 

Mon., June 17th. I preached at Brentford in our way to Bristol. The moment our Society met, Jesus appeared in the midst, and we lay an happy hour, weeping and rejoicing, at his feet. 

Wed., June 19th. Three miles on this side Salisbury, a still sister came out to meet, and try her skill upon, me. But, alas! it was labour lost! I knew the happy sinner, and all her paces. 

I found my sister as a rock in the midst of the waves. Mr. Hall's Society had all left the Church, and mocked and persecuted her for not leaving it. Many pressed me to preach; but I answered them, "My heart was not free to it." At four I set out with my sister; and reached Bristol in the afternoon of the next day. 

Fri., June 21st. I sent an account of our affairs here to a friend :--" The work of God goes on successfully. Great is the constancy of them that believe. Neither error nor sin can shake them. Several, since I left this place, have witnessed a good confession in death, particularly a girl of thirteen, and an old sinner of threescore. We had expelled him the Society for drunkenness; and he went on sinning, and repenting, and sinning again, till God laid his chastening hand upon him. After a great agony, he found redemption in the blood of Jesus. He lay some time rejoicing, and testifying the grace of Christ to the chief of sinners. When one said, 'Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord,' he replied, interrupting him, ' Even so, saith the Spirit in me.' To another, ' I am just entering the haven on a broken piece of the ship.' 

"I am just come from giving the sacrament to a young woman, rejoicing in death, with joy unspeakable. The day before my first visit, the Lord revealed himself in her. Her soul seemed all desire and love, ' ready to go this moment,' as she often testified, yet willing to tarry the Lord's leisure, or even to recover, if it were his will. 

"I have observed that all our people, without exception, be they ever so dark or weak before, when they come to die, recover their confidence. Would to God every soul, of every Christian denomination, might witness the same confession of eternal life in them, when they turn their faces to the wall!" 

Sun., June 23d, was a day much to be remembered. I preached to our colliers on Jer. xxxi. I; and received strong faith for the desolate Church of England. 

In the sacrament, the spirit of grace and supplication came down, and we prayed after God, that it might reach all our absent brethren. The backsliders we never forget at such gracious opportunities. Near four hours we were employed in doing this; and not one soul, I am persuaded, thought it long. 

I had just time to reach Conham chapel by two. From those words, "I will that they may behold my glory," while I was speaking of our Lord's appearing, we were alarmed with the loudest clap of thunder I ever heard. I thought it must have cleft the house. Most of the congregation shrieked out, as if the day of the Lord were come. 

A thought darted into my heart as quick as the lightning, "What, if it should be the day of judgment" I was filled immediately with faith, stronger than death, and rejoiced in hope of the glory of God. The same spirit rested on all the faithful, while I broke out into singing,- "So shall the Lord the Saviour come, And lightnings round his chariot play: Ye lightnings, fly to make him room, Ye glorious storms, prepare his way!" 

I went on for half an hour describing that final scene. The heart of every person present, I believe, either rejoiced or trembled. A mixed cry of horror and triumph was heard, till I dismissed them with the blessing. 

Afterwards we heard that an house, on one side our chapel, was almost demolished, both roof and walls, by the thunder-clap; the lead of the windows melted, and six persons struck down to the ground. On the other side of us, a gibbet was split into a thousand pieces. 

Sun., June 30th. I preached our sister Rogers's funeral sermon; whose blessed life and death were of a piece. 

Wed., July 3d. I took horse for London. The first night I preached at Cirencester; the two next at Evesham, where I found the Society increased both in grace and number. I was welcomed to London, on Saturday evening, with the joyful news of T. Maxfield's deliverance. 

Sun., July 7th. I preached on Luke xxii. 34; and many, I would hope, were stirred up to watch and pray. 

Sun., July 14th. The Lord set to his seal while I explained, "Who art thou, O great mountain before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain." We rejoiced in steadfast hope of the precious sanctifying promises. 

Mon., July 15th. The Lord comforted our hearts by the letters, and confirmed our faith, that the work he is now reviving shall never be destroyed. 

Sun., July 21st. In our prayer after the sacrament, the heavens dropped down from above, nay, and the skies seemed even to pour down righteousness. 

Mon., July 22d. I gave the sacrament to our sister H., who is coming to the grave as a ripe shock of corn. A poor trembling, tempted soul she has been; but, at the approach of death, all her fears are vanished; and she lies gasping for the fulness of eternal life. 

Thur., July 25th. I strongly exhorted the Society to constancy in the faith, and fervency in prayer. Their hearts were melted much, if one may judge by their tears. 

Sun. evening, July 28th. I took leave of the Foundery in those words, which I vehemently wished accomplished, "The redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Sion." 

Wed., July 31st. I joined with my brother to examine the Society at Bristol. Mr. Gwynne, of Garth, accompanied us, and rejoiced greatly in the grace given them. 

Thur., August let. We began our Conference with Mr. Hodgee, four of our own Assistants, Herbert Jenkins, and Mr. Gwynne. We continued it five days, and parted in great harmony and love. 

Fri., August 2d. At the watchnight our souls were satisfied as with marrow and fatness, while our mouth praised God with joyful lips. 

Wed., August 7th. While I was speaking from those words, "The end of all things is at hand," the Lord applied them to our hearts, and we felt the solemn weight of things eternal. 

He passed by us again in the bands, and showed us his goodness. For near two hours we tasted the powers of the world to come, in solid, serious joy. 

Sat., August 10th. I preached at Shepton-Mallet, where a great door is opening, and there are many adversaries. One of the devil's drunken champions attempted to disturb us; but my voice prevailed. They desired me to meet their little Society at an unusual place, to disappoint the mob. I walked forward toward the town, then turned back over the field, to drop the people, and, springing up a rising ground, sprained or broke my leg, I knew not which; but I fell down when I offered to set my foot to the ground. The brethren carried me to an hut, which was quickly filled with the poor people. It was soon noised about the town that I had broke my leg; some said my neck, and that it was a judgment upon me. 

The principal man of the place, Mr. P., sent me a kind message, and his bath-chair to bring me to his house. I thanked him, but declined his offer, on account of my pain, which unfitted me for any company, except that of my best friends,--the poor. With these I continued praying, singing, and rejoicing for two hours. Their love quite delighted me. Happiest they that could come near to do anything for me. When my strength was exhausted, they laid me on their bed, the best they had; but I could not sleep for pain. 

Sun., August 11th. I met the Society at six, and took in twenty new members. About eight the Surgeon from Oakhill came, and found, in dressing my leg, that it was not broke, but violently sprained. Many being come from far to hear the word, I got the brethren to carry me out in a chair, which they set on a table, and I preached, kneeling. I thought of Halyburton's best pulpit, which alone seemed preferable to this. For near an hour I forgot my maim; and appointed to preach again at Oakhill. 

The brethren carried me thither by noon in Mr. P.'s chair. My congregation was mostly Dissenters, not wise and rich, but poor and simple, and longing to be taught the first elements of Christ's doctrine. They stood listening in the hard rain, while I showed them "the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sin of the world." The word was not bound, but ran very swiftly through their hearts. For an hour I preached kneeling as before, and felt no pain or weariness till it was over: then my flesh shrunk at the twenty measured miles to Bristol. They set me on the horse, and by night I performed the journey, but in such extreme pain as I have not known, with all my broken bones and sicknesses. 

Tues., August 18th. I preached from, "They that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength ;" and then, confiding in the promise, went in my chair, and lay at Mr. Wigginton's, by the water-side. 

Between four and five next morning I was carried to Captain Philips's vessel, which was filled with our own people chiefly. We spent the day in singing and reading; and by six on Thursday morning, August 15th, landed at Cardiff. At night, most of the gentry of the town were at the room. I laboured to trouble the careless, as well as comfort the troubled, hearts. 

Sun., August 18th. Our greatest persecutor lent his chair to carry me to Wenvo. Indeed, the whole place at present seems turned towards us. But we do not depend on this peace as lasting. I preached at Wenvo, from Heb. xii. 1, to a weeping audience. My brothers Thomas and Hedges administered the sacrament. 

The room at Cardiff was crowded with high and low. I invited them to come thirsty to the waters. The same spirit was with us, as in the months that are past. Our love-feast was a feast indeed! 

Tues., August 20th. At the request of the prisoners, I had promised to preach in the jail; but Mr. Michael Richards came first, and threatened and forbade the jailer. If these souls perish for lack of knowledge, Mr. Michael Richards, not I, must answer it in that day. 

I was carried to Fonmon, with Mr. Hedges and Mrs. Jones. I once more met the church in her house. We were all melted down by the fire of the word. 

Wed., August 21st. This and every evening I got down to the chapel on my crutches, and preached to the family, with fifty harvesters and others that came from far. 

Fri., August 28d. I wrote thus to my brother :-- "Once more hear my raven's note,--and despise it. I look most assuredly, unless general repentance prevent it, for the day of visitation. Whether my apprehensions have aught divine in them, I never presume to say; neither am I concerned for the credit of my prophecy, or conjecture; but none of you all will more rejoice at my proving what you may call a false Prophet than I. For should I prove a true one, I expect Balaam's fate. In great weariness of flesh and spirit I conclude.       "Your Mantis  kakvn." 

Sun., August 25th. Mr. Gwynne's servant came to show me the way to Garth; but returned without me; my lameness still continuing, or rather increasing, by the use of the British oil, which inflamed and swelled my foot exceedingly. Probably it was the counterfeit sort. 

Mon., August 26th. I admitted several into the Society. I continued preaching twice a day the rest of the month. 

 

 To Next Section