Thur., May 1st. I endeavoured to strengthen the weak hands. Many rejoiced in sure and steadfast hope that their God will come, and save them. The disconsolate soul (that was, at Road) here found peace and pardon, and rejoiced with joy unspeakable. 

Fri., May 2d. I rode back to Bristol, and was met with the news of our victory in Scotland. I spoke at night on the first words that presented, "he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord." We rejoiced unto him with reverence, and thankfully observed the remarkable answer of that petition, "All their strength o'erturn, o'erthrow, Snap their spears, and break their swords, Let the daring rebels know The battle is the Lord's!" 

O that, in this reprieve, before the sword return, we may know the time of our visitation! 

Sun., May 4th. From preaching to the Conham stocks and stones, I hastened to Baptist-Mills, and called, "Come now, and let us return unto the Lord; for he hath torn, and he will heal us." In the Society I exhorted the backsliders to return. We heard a general cry of fear, and grief, and joy, in answer to our prayer, and sweetly felt the most sensible presence of God. 

Sun., May 11th. He showered down blessings upon us at His table. We were carried out in prayer, especially for the Clergy. 

Mon., May 12th. We had a Conference four days with Mr. Hodges, Mr. Taylor, and our own sons in the Gospel. 

Whitsunday, May 18th. We had asked in prayer last night a double blessing for this day; and the answer came. I rejoiced from four to six. The second time I preached in the wood. In the sacrament the skies poured down righteousness. Mr. Hodges read prayers at Conham. I preached a fourth time to a quiet multitude at the Mills; and then exhorted the Society to walk worthy their holy calling. This might properly be called the Lord's day. 

Thur., May 22d. Many heard His voice who stood at the door and knocked; but in the Society they all seemed ready to open the door. 

Fri., May 23d. I passed two hours with a young Clergyman, who is determined to know nothing but Christ crucified. His name is already cast out as evil in his own parish, for endeavouring to do them all the good he can. Our Lord, it seems, is answering our long-continued prayers for labourers. 

Sun., May 25th. Our Lord was made known to us, as he always is, in the breaking of bread. Let the Quaker and orthodox dispute about the ordinance: our Saviour satisfies us a shorter way. 

Wed., May 28th. I reasoned at Bearfield, on" righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come." The Judge stood at the door, and applied his own awful words, "The trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised." 

Thur., May 29th. In conference I found many of our children in a thriving condition. Not one of those that are justified dreams that he is sanctified at once, and wants nothing more. 

Fri., May 30th. In great deadness I was revived by praying with one of a fearful heart. I rode to Wick, and preached forgiveness of sins to the simple-hearted poor. Mr. H. and his family were present, and carried me home with them. The large house and garden, the five little children, and sweet behaviour of their mother, and, above all, the open generous temper of Mr. H., made me fancy I was got to Fonmon-castle, and conversing again with our friend come back from Paradise. 

Sun., June 1st. It rained most part of the day. At Baptist-Mills I was told, the child of a Papist had much displeased his father by saying, "I believe it will be fair, because Mr. Wesley is to preach here." But so it was: about five the clouds dispersed, the rain ceased, and we had a blessed opportunity. 

Mon., June 2d. I set out with my charioteer, Mr. Waller; baited an hour at Publow, where the wickedness of one, and the enthusiasm of another, has quite destroyed the work of God. Mr. Meriton administered private baptism to a child of our host's, who is escaped once more out of bad hands, and no longer makes the Spirit swallow up the letter. By night we got to Coleford. 

Tues., June 3d. My morning's congregation drank in every word. I spake with the Society severally. When I saw them last there was scarce a justified person among them: now fourscore testify their having experienced the pardoning love of God. 

I baptized an Anabaptist; and all her fears and troubles fled away in a moment. 

I preached at one in the shell of their house. The hearers without were as many as those within, though it rained hard. They are hungry souls; and therefore they shall be filled. 

I rode and preached in Shepton-Mailet. I spent an hour with the principal man of the town; met the classes at my host Stone's, and slept in peace. 

Wed., June 4th. Driving down a steep hill in our way to Sherburn, the horse stumbled, and threw me out of the seat. I fell on my back upon the wheel, my feet were entangled in the chaise; but the beast stood stock still, so I received no harm, but was only stunned and dirtied. We were four hours going five miles. It rained incessantly, and blew an hurricane, this and the day following. By nine at night we were glad to reach W. Nelson's house in Portland. 

Fri., June 6th. I preached to an houseful of staring, loving people, from Jer. 1. 20. Some wept, but most looked quite up-awakened. At noon and night I preached on an hill in the midst of the island. Most of the inhabitants came to hear, but few as yet feel the burden of sin, or the want of a Saviour. 

Sun., June 8th. After evening service we had all the islanders that were able to come. I asked, "Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by" About half a dozen answered, "It is nothing to us," by turning their backs; but the rest hearkened with greater signs of emotion than I had before observed. I found faith at this time that our labour would not be in vain. 

Mon., June 9th. At Southwell, the farthest village, I expounded the song of Simeon. Some very old men attended. I distributed a few books among them, rode round the island, and returned by noon to preach on the hill, and by night at my lodgings. Now the power and blessing came. My mouth and their hearts were opened. The rocks were broken in pieces, and melted into tears on every side. I continued exhorting them from seven till ten, to save themselves from this untoward generation. 

We could hardly part. I left the little Society of twenty members confirmed and comforted. 

Tues., June 10th. I came to Axminster, and preached next morning in the bowling-green to above one thousand well-behaved people, on, "Come unto me, all that travail," &c. I got to Exeter by night. 

Sat., June 14th. I went forth at Tavistock, to call sinners to repentance. A large herd of wild beasts were got together, and very noisy and tumultuous they were. At first I stood on a wall, but their violence forced me thence. I walked to the middle of the field, and began calling, "Wash ye, make you clean," &c. The waves of the sea raged so horribly, that few could hear; but all might see the restraining hand of God. I continued in prayer mostly for half an hour, and walked quietly to my lodgings through the thickest of the King’s enemies. 

Sun., June 15th. I offered Christ once more to s larger audience, who did not seem like the same people. The power of the Lord was present to convince. I endeavoured to strip them of all pretensions to good, insisting that the natural man has absolutely nothing of his own but pure evil, no will or desire to good, till it be supernaturally infused, any more than the devils in hell. 

After church I expounded the prodigal son; and many listened to their own history. 

Mr. Kinsman's Society complained of a brother who had made a division, and carried away fifteen of their members. I went to him and his company. They told me they were convinced, by reading my brother's books, of universal redemption; and therefore met by themselves to avoid dispute, and confirm one another in the truth. I persuaded, and carried them back to their brethren. 

Mon., June 16th. Some of Mr. Whitefield's Society importuned me to go to Plymouth. I went, resolving to preach only in the streets or fields. A confused multitude were got together, and tolerably quiet, while I showed them the necessity of conversion. 

Tues., June 17th. While I preached from Isal. i. 16, an whole army of soldiers and sailors stood behind me shouting and blaspheming. A wall of brass was betwixt us. They raged, but could not pass their bounds, or stop the course of the Gospel. 

The Society were now so exceeding urgent with me, that I could not refuse praying with them in their room, and provoking them to love, and to good works. I found no difference between them and our children at Kingswood, or the Foundery. 

Wed., June 18th. At five I expounded in the Tabernacle Zech. xiii. 6: "What are these wounds in thy hands" &c. Then at the Dock, to above one thousand artless souls, who even devoured the word. 

Thur., June 19th. Many of the rich heard, or seemed to hear, me in the evening. In much love I warned the Society against the Antinomian errors, which they were blindly running into. 

Fri., June 20th. I urged that legal saying of our Lord, as some would call it,) "If ye love me, keep my commandments." 

I preached Christ crucified to a multitude at the Dock. The word was as a fire, and melted down all it touched. We mourned and rejoiced together in Him that loved us. I have not known such a refreshing time since I left Bristol. 

I spake with several in private who had received benefit by the word. One who had found forgiveness clave to me, and would have gone to any of our Societies which I should advise. But I advised her to stay for a plainer direction. 

Sun., June 22d. I preached on an hill in Stoke church-yard. It was covered with the surrounding multitude, upward of four thousand, by computation. I expounded the good Samaritan. Some reviled at first, on whom I turned, and with a few words silenced them. The generality behaved as men fearing God. They followed me with their blessings. One only cursed, and called me Whitefield the second. 

I took my leave of Mrs. Wheatly and others, whom I greatly love for their love to my brethren Graves, Grinfill, Maxfield, whose bonds they had compassion on. The Lord recompense them in that day! 

Our own children could not have expressed greater affection to us at parting. They could have plucked out their eyes and given them us. Several offered me money; but I told them I never accepted any. Others would have persuaded Mr. Waller to take it; but he walked in the same steps, and said their love was sufficient. 

Tues., June 24th. I got to Mr. Bennet's. 

Wed., June 25th. I read prayers and preached in Trismere church. They seemed to feel the word of reconciliation. 

Thur., June 26th. I came to Gwennap, and encouraged the poor persecuted sheep by that promise, Zech. xlli. 7 --9. The Lord smiled upon our first meeting. 

Sun., June 29th. Upon examination of each separately, I found the Society in a prosperous way. Their sufferings have been for their furtherance, and the Gospel's. The opposers behold and wonder at their steadfastness, and godly conversation. I preached the Gospel to the poor at Stithian; the poor received it with tears of joy. 

My evening congregation was computed upward of five thousand. I preached the pardoning God from the returning prodigal; and felt, as it were, the people sink under the power of Him that sent me. They all stood uncovered, knelt at the prayers, and hung narrantis ab ore. For an hour and an half I invited them back to their Father, and felt no hoarseness or weariness afterwards. I spent an hour and an half more with the Society, warning them against pride, and the love of the creature, and stirring them up to universal obedience. 

Mon., June 30th. Both sheep and shepherds had been scattered in the late cloudy day of persecution, but the Lord gathered them again, and kept them together by their own brethren; who began to exhort their companions, one or more in every Society. No less than four have sprung up in Gwennap. I talked closely with each, and find no reason to doubt their having been used by God thus far. I advised and charged them not to stretch themselves beyond their line, by speaking out of the Society, or fancying themselves public teachers. If they keep within their bounds as they promise, they may be useful in the church: and I would to God that all the Lord's people were Prophets, like these.' 

In the evening I preached to our dearest children at St. Ives, from Isai. xxxv. 10: "The redeemed of the Lord shall return," &c. He Brought us some steps forward on our journey by that meeting. 

Thur., July 3d. At Lidgeon I preached Christ crucified. I spake with the classes, who seem much in earnest. I showed above one thousand sinners at Sithney the love and compassion of Jesus towards them. Many who came from Helstone, a town of rebels and persecutors, were struck, and confessed their sin, and declared they would never more be found fighting against God. 

Fri., July 4th. At Wendton an huge multitude listened to the invitation, "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters." I explained to the infant Society the design of their meeting. 

Sun., July 6th. At Stithian I rebuked the Societysharply, and gave them a fortnight to know their own mind, whether they will serve God or Mammon. 

At Gwennap near two thousand listened to those gracious words that proceeded out of His mouth, "Come unto me, all that travail, and are," &c. Half of them were from Redruth, which seems on the point of surrendering to the Prince of peace. 

The whole country finds the benefit of the Gospel. Hundreds who follow not with us, have broke off their sins, and are outwardly reformed, and, though persecutors once, will not now suffer a word to be spoken against this way. Some of those who fell off in the late persecution, desired to be present at the Society. I addressed myself chiefly to the backsliders. God touched their hearts. Several followed me to my lodgings, and desired to be admitted again. I received them back upon trial. 

Sat., July 12th. I showed them at Metra (who were growing rich) the farther rest for the people of God, and inculcated the first great lesson of humility. 

Sun., July 13th. Most of St. Just Society were present. I applied those seasonable words, "Will ye also go away" with great severity and love; besought them to cast up the stumbling-block of sin; to turn unto the Lord with weeping, and fasting, and mourning, that the Gospel-door might be again opened among them. I urged the same thing upon them in the Society-room; and with many tears they promised amendment, and requested me to come to them again. 

I went to church at Zunnor, and thence to my congregation, whom I showed the twofold rest of pardon and holiness. I talked with their young exhorter, Madern, and advised him to practice, before he preached, the Gospel. 

At St. Ives no one offered to make the least disturbance. Indeed, the whole place is outwardly changed in this respect. I walk the streets with astonishment, scarce believing it St. Ives. It is the same throughout all the county. All opposition falls before us, or rather is fallen, and not yet suffered to lift up its head again. This, also, hath the Lord wrought. 

I put a disorderly walker, the first of the kind, out of the Society. 

Fri., July 18th. I preached with much freedom at Wendton. A poor drunkard exclaimed for a few moments, and turnedhis back. I did not wonder when I heard he was an alehouse-keeper. Una cum gente tot annos Bella gero. 

Men of his craft are generally our sworn enemies. 

Sat., July 19th. I had a visit from Captain Trounce, the man who last year hindered my brother from preaching, and threw him over the wall. 

I rode to Sithney, where the word begins to take root. The rebels of Helstone threatened hard. All manner of evil they say of us. Papists we are, that is certain; and are for bringing in the Pretender. Nay, the vulgar are persuaded I have brought him with me, and James Waller is the man. But a law is to come from London to-night, 

to put us all down, and set 100 upon my head. We had, notwithstanding, a numerous congregation, and several of the persecutors. I declared my commission, "to open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light," &c. Many appeared convinced, and caught in the Gospel net. 

Sun., July 20th. Near one hundred of the fiercest rioters were present, who a few months since had cruelly beat the sincere hearers, not sparing the women and children. They were hired by the pious Minister for that purpose. Now these very men, expecting a disturbance, came to fight for me, and said they would lose their lives in my defense. But there was no occasion for their service; all was quiet, as it generally is when Satan threatens most. 

I crossed the country to Redruth. I walked through the town a mile to church, and was surprised by the general civility. 

I drew the congregation after me to the field, more than eight thousand, as was supposed. I expounded the good Samaritan. Surely He has a multitude of patients here. 

Mon., July 21st. I had heard sad accounts of St. Just people; that, being scattered by persecution, they had wandered into by-poths of error and sin, and been confirmed therein by their covetous, proud exhorter, J. Bennet. From St. Ives I came, on Wednesday noon, July 23d, to his house in Trewallard, a village belonging to St. Just. I found about a dozen of the shattered Society, which quickly increased to fifty or sixty. I perceived as soon as we kneeled down, that there was a blessing in the remnant. We wrestled with God in his own strength from one till nine, with only the preaching between. I acknowledged, God was with them of a truth. My faith for them returned, and I asked, nothing doubting, that the door might again be opened, and that he who hinders might be taken out of the way, as God knew best. This man was once a gentleman of fortune, but is now a poor drunken spendthrift, brother to Dr. Borlase, and retained by that dispenser of justice to supply the defect of the laws. This champion they send forth drunk on all occasions. It was he that pressed my brother for a soldier; dragged away Edward Grinfill, though past age, from his business and family, for a soldier and sailor; assaulted Mr. Meriton, to serve him the same way; seized on Mr. Graves, the third Clergyman, in bed, and hurried him on board a man-of-war. In a word, he seems raised up by Satan to support his tottering kingdom, and swears continually, there shall never be any more preaching at St. Just. For a year and an half Satan has seemed to triumph in his success: so much good may one sinner hinder, if armed with the sins of God's people. In praying for this poor soul I thought heaven and earth would meet. The Spirit of prayer bowed down all before him. We believed the door would be opened for preaching at this time. Between six and seven I cried in the street to about one thousand hearers, "If God be for us, who can be against us" The wall of brass surrounded us. None opened his mouth, or appeared on Satan's side. The little flock were comforted and refreshed abundantly. 

I spake with each of the Society, and was amazed to find them just the reverse of what they had been represented. Most of them had kept their first love, even while men were riding over their heads, and they passed through fire and water. Their Exhorter appeared a solid, humble Christian, raised up to stand in the gap, and keep the trembling sheep together. 

I was ready for rest, but none could I find all night, through the multitude of my small bed-fellows. At four I talked with more of the Society, and adored the miracle of grace, which has kept these sheep in the midst of wolves. Well may the despisers behold and wonder. Here is a bush in the fire, burning, yet not consumed! What have they not done to crush this rising sect but, lo ! they prevail nothing! Non hydra secto corpore firmior Vires dolentem crevit in Hereulem. 

For one Preacher they cut off, twenty spring up. Neither persuasions nor threatening, flattery nor violence, dungeons, or sufferings of various kinds, can conquer them. Many waters cannot quench this little spark which the Lord hath kindled, neither shall the floods of persecution drown it. 

Thur., July 24th. I rode with a merry heart to Lidgeon, and called many sin-sick souls to their Physician. I met the Society at Zunnor: how unlike those of St. Just ! I rebuked them sharply; silenced one of their Exhorters; and returned to Trewallard by Friday noon. 

Fri., July 25th. From one to three we poured out our souls in prayer for a nation laden with iniquity. I was led undesignedly to pray for our drunken persecutor; and the Spirit came pouring down like a river. We were filled with the divine presence. I had left my Hymn-book in my chamber, and stepped up for it. One came after me with news that Mr. Eustick was just coming to take me up. I went down to the congregation; but my friend Eustick was gone, without beating man, woman, or child. He only asked if Mr. Wesley was there, for he had a warrant to apprehend him; went out at the other door, and told those he met he had been searching ail the house for Wesley, but could not find him. We supposed he had not got sufficient courage, that is, drink, for his purpose, and expected his return. To make the devil a liar, I began preaching an hour before the appointed time. The flame was kindled in a moment. I had only to speak, and leave God to apply. He filled us up to the brim with faith, and love, and joy, and power. The Spirit of the Lord lifted up, and caused us to triumph, and tread on all the powers of the enemy. 

After a short interval, I received strength to preach again in the court-yard, on "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me" The two-edged sword did great execution. I concluded with that hymn,-- "Glory and thanks and praise To Him that hath the key! Jesus, thy sovereign grace Gives us the victory; Baffles the world and Satan's power, And open throws the Gospel-door," &c. 

Sun., July 27th. I met the Society at Morva. I went to church at St. Just, and then to my old pulpit, the large stone by brother Chinhall's house. I preached from Matt. xxii. 1. All was quiet till I came to those words, "And the remnant took his servants, and intreated them spitefully, and slew them." Then one begun throwing stones; but I went on exhorting them to save themselves from this untoward generation. My discourse was as mixed as the multitude: law, Gospel, threatenings, promises which I trust the Spirit applied to their several cases. 

I rode to St. Ives, and expounded the woman bowed down with a spirit of infirmity. 

Mon., July 28th. I began my week's experiment of leaving off tea; but my flesh protested against it. I was but half awake and half alive all day; and my headache so increased toward noon, that I could neither speak nor think. So it was for the two following days, with the addition of a violent purging, occasioned by my milk-diet. This so weakened me, that I could hardly sit my horse. However, I made a shift to ride to Gwennap, and preach, and meet the Society. I would have eaten afterwards, being very faint and weary, but could get nothing proper. 

Fri., August let. I left two or three of a doubtful character out of the Society at St. Ives, not daring to trust them with the honour of God and his people. At the hour of intercession, our hearts were moved, and we desired to return to God, in weeping, and fasting, and mourning. They promised henceforward to meet the true members of the Church of England at the throne of race on this day. 

Sat., August 2d. At Sithney I spoke with one who had been set at liberty from the guilt of sin the first time he heard me, I think as soon as I had named my text. I preached Christ crucified in the evening, and on Sunday morning, August 3d, to many who seemed truly desirous to know him. 

From evening service at Redruth, I rode back to my own church, the valley, near our room at Gwennap, and found at least five thousand sinners waiting for the glad tidings of salvation. I bade them to the great supper, in my Master's name and words and even compelled them to come in. 

Tues., August 5th. I preached there again, and rejoiced over those blessed mourners. Some, I heard, were then filled with all joy in believing. 

Thur., August 7th. I asked, at Trewallard, "What are those wounds in thy hands" The Lord himself answered, and made himself known to us by the marks of his sufferings. 

Before preaching, I read them the late Act against swearing; of which a hundred had been sent my brother by a Justice of Peace. I thought his design best answered by reading it in our largest congregations. Last Sunday I read it at Gwennap. I believe it was blessed to many. I rejoiced over this steady people. Near a hundred and fifty are gathered again, and knit together in the love of Jesus. 

Fri., August 8th. I met the Society at five, and more of the power of God than ever. I thought he would give us a double portion at parting. We tasted the powers of the world to come, while the Spirit applied his own word, "These are they that came out of great tribulation." 

I got back to St. Ives by one; and we humbled ourselves under the mighty hand of God. He did now begin to lift us up. A spirit of mourning ran through our hearts; and again in the evening, while I explained, "The Spirit and the Bride say, Come." 

Sun., August 10th. At Gwennap, nine or ten thousand, by computation, listened with all eagerness, while I commended them to God, and to the word of his grace. For near two hours I was enabled to preach repentance towards God, and faith in Jesus Christ. I broke out again and again into prayer and exhortation. I believed not one word would return empty. Seventy years' sufferings were overpaid by one such opportunity. 

Never had we so large an effusion of the Spirit as in the Society. I could not doubt, at that time, either their perseverance or my own; and still I am humbly confident that we shall stand together among the multitude which no man can number. 

Mon., August 11th. I expressed the gratitude of my heart in the following thanksgiving:-- "All thanks be to God, Who scatters abroad, Throughout every place, By the least of his servants, his saviour of grace: Who the victory gave, The praise let him have, For the work He hath done; All honour and glory to Jesus alone!" &c. 

I preached, at St. Eudy's, "Repent, and believe the Gospel." Mr. Bennet and Thompson were present. As I was concluding, a gentleman rode up to me very fiercely, and bade me come down. We exchanged a few words, and talked together more largely in the house. The poor drunken Lawyer went away in as good an humour as he was then capable of. 

I had more difficulty to get clear of a different antagonist, one Adams, an old enthusiast, who travels through all the land, as "Overseer of all the Ministers." 

Tues., August 12th. Mr. Bennet's church was crowded at night. He read prayers, and I preached on, "They that be whole have no need of a Physician." 

Wed., August 13th. I offered to preach in Tavistock; but to such stocks and stones as I have not seen, no, not at Conham. The words rebounded as from a wall of brass. So great a bar I have seldom felt; and was therefore forced in a quarter of an hour to dismiss them. 

Thur., August 14th. Many letters I had received from Plymouth, importuning me to visit them in my return. A brother met us on the road thither, and informed me of what I expected, the indefatigable pains Satan has taken to alienate the minds of the people. Yet I complied with the request of Herbert Jenkins, Mr. Kinsman's family, and many others, by preaching in their house once more. 

Fri., August 15th. I showed a simple people at the Dock the blessedness of mourning; and they tasted it in that hour. 

Sat., August 16th. I spent the morning in conversing with Mrs. Stephens, M. Patrick, M. Hide's family, and other sincere followers after Christ. I baptized a young woman, who, in the ordinance, lost her burden of sin, and was soon after filled with joy in believing. 

Sun., August 17th. My subject was, "They that be whole have no need of a Physician," &c. The number of the sick, I believe, increases. We walked back from the field with the voice of praise and thanksgiving. 

Mon., August 18th. I took boat for the Dock with sister Gregory, Veel, Poppleston, and Herbert Jenkins. In perils by water, in perils among false brethren! The rough, stormy sea tried our faith. Some supernatural courage I had given me for the rest. None stirred, or we must have been overset. In two hours our invisible Pilot brought us safe to land; thankful for our deliverance, humbled for our littleness of faith, and more endeared to each other by our common danger. 

I found thousands waiting for the word of life. The Lord made it a channel of grace. I spoke and prayed alternately for two hours. The moonlight added to the solemnity. Our eyes overflowed with tears, and our hearts with love. Scarce a soul but was affected with grief or joy. We drank into one spirit; and were persuaded that neither life nor death, nor things present, nor things to come, shall be able to separate us. 

I spent all Wednesday, August 20th, at Tavistock, to encourage their poor scattered Society, under the reproach which one had brought upon them all. 

Thur., August 21st. I published the dying love of Jesus in Trismere church; and on 

Fri., August 22d, I enforced the duty, (Matt. vii. 7,) and pleaded the promise, in full assurance of faith. I was refreshed by the sight of my brother Thompson. At night I preached in Laneast church, to a people seeking the Lord. 

Sun., August 24th. I preached morning and evening, not my own words, at St. Ginnys. 

At Mr. Bennet's, I heard, from Captain Hitchins, that J. Trembath was still alive, but his son Samuel departed in full triumph. His last words were, "Ready wing'd for their flight To the regions of light, The horsemen are come, The chariots of Israel, to carry me home!" 

Thur., August 28th. At Bristol I met my brother, returned from Wales. 

Fri., August 29th. The Lord gave me words of comfort for our own dear children in the Gospel. 

Sun., August 31st. In expounding the woman bowed down, we found the ancient blessing. We concluded the day and month with a joyful love-feast. 

 

 To Next Section