Wed., May 2d. I took horse at three, and came, weary, to Bristol by night. Fri., May 4th. Hearing the Moravlans had been soliciting some of our children, I exhorted them, this evening, to "put on the whole armour of God;" and his power wasto confirm the souls of the disciples. 

Sun., May 6th. The Lord was with us as in the former times, both at the sacrament and while I applied to thousands that word, "Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee." 

Sun., May 13th. I baptized Hannah, M. Gibs's maid; and the whole congregation with her were conscious of the descent of the Spirit, who bears witness with the water. 

Tues, May 15th. I set out with Mrs. Vazeille, &c., for Ludlow, and the nextslay saluted our friends there. During our nine days' stay, they showed her all the civility and love that they could show: and she seemed equally pleased with them. 

Thur., May 24th. My Sally was so very ill in the evening, that I gave up the hope of her company to town; but the next morning, 

Fri., May 25th, she would go, notwithstanding we all dissuaded her. At eight we mounted; had fair weather after last night's excessive rain. She mended every stage. I preached in the evening at Worcester. 

Sat., May 26th. Our brother Watson met us with a chaise, and carried Mrs. Vazeille and Sally to M. Keech's in Evesham, by noon. Mr. Waller and I rode by them. I preached with life and liberty. 

Sun., May 27th. I accepted the Hayor's offer of the Town-hall. The door was quite open. Many gentry and others listened to the word of life. So again in the evening. I rejoiced with the Society, whose enemies God has made to be at peace with them. 

Mon., May 28th. We saw Blenheim in our way to Oxford. Our old friend Mr. Evans received us with his wonted hospitality. 

Tues., May 29th. I showed Mr. W. and Mrs. Vazeille the buildings and gardens. I gave the sacrament to H. Neal, a true daughter of affliction, and preached again at night. 

Wed., May 30th. We had a long day's journey to St. Anne's. It was past nine before we got under shelter. Mrs. Rich was there, who, with our old friends, received us gladly. 

Thur., May 31st. Hr. W. and Mrs. Vazeille went to town. 

Sat., June 2d. We took up our quarters for eight or nine days at Mrs. Vazeille's. 

Mon., June 4th. I preached at the chapel with the usual blessing. 

Thur., June 7th. I carried Sally to see our old friends at Newington-green. It is remarkable that the first time Mrs. Stotesbury ever saw her, she said within herself, "That person is to be my Minister's wife." 

Mon., June 11th. I paid our friends at St. Anne's a short visit, and returned the next day. 

Wed., June 13th. I fetched back my hostage from Chertsey. 

Mon., June 18th. I called on H. Dewal at Croydon, and drove on to Westerham, where we met an hearty welcome from Hr. Waller's mother and sister Dudley. I walked in Mr. Turner's, and then in General Campbell's, gardens He appeared, carried us into his house, and entertained us with great courtesy. 

Tues., June 19th. I rode back to the Foundcry, and read the letters. 

Thur., June 21st. I took horse at three, and waked them at Westerham. I passed the day with them in the gardens, reading, singing, and conversing. 

Fri., June 22d. I met a daughter of my worthy old friend Mr. Erskine, at the Found cry. She was deeply wounded by the sword of the Spirit; confessed she had turned many to Deism, and feared there could be no mercy for her. 

Sat., June 23d. A woman whom I baptized perceived her sins to be then washed away. I found much of the spirit of contrition among the penitents. 

Sun., June 24th. My text was, "Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith the Lord;" and his consolations were not small with us. At the sacrament they abounded. Poor Mrs. C----- told me, she was "in an agony." 

I believe God owned me more this day on account of one who, in an abusive letter, had affirmed, that the Lord was departed from me. 

Thur., June 28th. I prayed by our faithful brother H-----, just departing in the Lord, and to him. 

Fri., June 29th. The scriptures for the day were much blessed to my comfort. My mouth and heart were both opened to preach the word. The presence of the Lord made it a solemn sacrament. 

I visited the widow (Hogg) in her affliction, and tried to turn it into the right channel. We continued in watching and prayer till one. 

Mon., July 2d. I buried our late brother Hogg, and preached at his grave to a countless multitude on, "These are they that came out of great tribulation," &c.The Lord gave me utterance, and them the hearing ear. 

Mon., July 9th. I administered the sacrament to a dying believer, lately called; but now made equal to them that have borne the heat and burden of the day. 

Wed., July 1 lth. I preached a written sermon at Spitalfields, on my beloved friend and brother Hogg. The chapel was crowded, and the house of mouriling was turned to an house of great rejoicing. 

Mon., July 16th. I rode to St. Anne's, and returned in such a storm of thunder, lightning, and rain, as I hardly remember to have seen out of America. 

Wed., July 18th. I had the satisfaction of bringing back to Mr. Erskine his formerly disobedient daughter. She fell at his feet. It Was a moving interview. All wept. Our heavenly Father heard our prayers. 

I preached immediately after, on, "And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me." We had a double blessing and power. Poor Jane Cox said, she was even compelled to receive Christ. 

Fri., July 20th. We kept a solemn watchnight at Spitalfields. 

Sun., July 22d. After evening service I set out with Robert Windsor; got two or three hours' rest at Mr. Manning's; and, 

Mon., July 23d, breakfasted with Mr. Evans in Oxford. I lodged at Worcester; and, by eight on Tues. morning, July 24th, found Sally well at Ludlow. Every evening we retired to pray together; and our Lord's presence made it a little church. 

Sat., July 28th. I wrote to M. Gwynne, earnestly beseeching her to do all in her power to reconcile her son and daughter. 

Tues., July 31st. The word I preached this day at Leominster was accompanied with the power and blessing of God. 

Tues., August 7th. At seven I set out with Sally for Bristol, without the consent of the rest. It rained small rain till we came to Leominster; and so most of the way to Ross. 

Wed., August 8th. It rained hard soon after we set out; but quickly gave over. We had a rough, dangerous passage at Frommelow. We dined at Cambridge inn, and had a trying journey, "driven by the wind, and battered by the rain." Sally was frightened with the thunder, which often forced us to trees and huts for shelter. Yet at seven, by the assistance of God, we entered our own house in peace. 

Fri., August 10th. Sally accompanied me in my visits to the sick. 

Sun., August 12th. The Lord met us, who remembered him in his ways. 

Mon., August 13th. I met my sister Hall in the church-yard, and carried her to the room. I had begun preaching, when Mr. Hall walked up the room, and through the desk, and carried her off with him. I was somewhat disturbed; yet went on. 

Wed., August 15th. He came up again, calling me by my name. I fled, and he pursued; but could not find me in my lurking-place. 

Tues., August 28th. Many rejoiced in hope, our Lord applying that precious promise, "I will allure her, and will bring her into the wilderness, and will speak comfortably unto her." 

 

 To Next Section