FRIDAY, April 3d. I set out for Bristol, to which God brought me safe by Saturday evening. I expounded at the malt-house Rev. ii. 24; and God was with my mouth. 

Sun., April 5th. I spake words of comfort to many mourners, from Isai. xxx. 18: "And therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious unto you," &c. Again Godgreatly to be feared was in the midst of our congregation, and revived many drooping hearts. 

Mon., April 6th. I prayed by one supposed at the point of death. He rejoiced to meet the King of terrors, and appeared so sweetly resigned, so ready for the Bridegroom, that I longed to change places with him. 

I visited three murderers under sentence of death, who were ready to say, "Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord." 

Thur., April 9th. I got some hours for visiting our numerous sick, most of whom I found in a good way: only one backslider, B. Hawks, was in the depth of dispair. 

I preached at Kendalshire, and gathered up the wreck. In riding back my horse threw me; but I know who caught me in his arms. 

Fri., April 10th. I found a dying sinner rejoicing in God her Saviour. At sight of me she cried out, "O how loving is God to me! but he is loving to every man: he loves every soul as well as he loves mine." Many like words she uttered in triumphant faith, and witnessed in death the universal love of Christ Jesus. 

Sat., April 11th. To-day He called forth another of his dying witnesses; the young woman whom, at my last visit, I left in utter despair. This morning she broke out into, "I see, I see it now, that Jesus Christ died for me, and for all the world." From that time she testified, with much assurance, that Christ gave his life a ransom for all. Some of her words to me were, "Death stares me in the face; but I fear him not. He cannot hurt me, 'And death may shake his dart in vain.' 

Your report is true. God is love, pure love; love to every man. The Spirit which is in me tells me that Jesus Christ died for me and the whole world." 

The next I saw was our brother S., "With joyful eyes, and looks divine, Smiling, and pleased in death." 

He, likewise, had in himself the witness of God's all-redeeming love, and could stake his soul upon the truth of it. Who will show me a predestinarian that dares die for the truth of reprobation 

Sun., April 12th. At Kingswood, while I was repeating B. H.'s dying testimony, the Spirit came down "as a mighty rushing wind." Just then the predestinarians came in from hearing Cennick. In battles of shaking did He fight with them. We were all in a flame of love. 

I gave the sacrament to the bands of Kingswood, not of Bristol, in obedience, as I told them, to the Church of England, which requires a weekly sacrament at every cathedral. But as they had it not there, and on this particular Sunday were refused it at Temple-church, (I myself, with many of them, having been repelled,) I therefore administered it to them in our school; and, had we wanted an house, would justify doing it in the midst of the Wood. I strongly urged the duty of their  receiving it as often as they could be admitted at the churches. 

I had prayed God to show me some token if this was his will concerning us: and, indeed, my prayer was answered; for such a sacrament was I never present at before. We received the sure pledges of our Saviour's dying love, and were most of us filled with all peace and joy in believing. I preached a fourth time at Bristol: read the bands my Journal of what has lately passed in London. It occasioned a grief which, mixed with pity, violated not their joy. I gave them all the treatise on Predestination. 

Mon., April 13th. While I was in great love, warning the bands, the Spirit of powercame down, the fountain was set open, my mouth and heart enlarged, and I spokesuch words as I cannot repeat. Many sunk under the love of Christ crucified, and were constrained to break out, "Christ died for all." Some confessed, with tears of joy, they were going to leave us, but could now die for the truth of the doctrine. 

Tues., April 14th. I was enlarged in prayer for the malefactors who are to die to-morrow. 

Thur., April 16th. One of our old men in the Wood complained to me, that the separatists had got from him the treatise against Predestination, and burnt it. In like manner they answer all they can lay hands on; but they do nothing, unless they could burn one more book,--the Bible. 

At Kendalshire God gave me wor,ts to maintain his cause. I showed the end of Messias being cut off; namely, "to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sin, and to bring in everlasting righteousness." One soul, as I afterwards heard, was added to the witnesses of Jesus. 

Fri., April 17th. For the sake of many poor soldiers present, I enlarged on the "faithful saying, That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners." 

Sat., April 18th. I called to see one that was a-dying: it was Hannah Richardson. 

Sun., April 19th. Returning from Baptist-Mills, I heard that our sister Richardson had finished her course. My soul was filled with strong consolation, and struggled, as it were, to go out after her, "as heavenward endeavouring." Jesu, my time is in thy hand: only let me so follow her, as she has followed Thee! 

The voice of joy and thanksgiving was in the congregation, while I spake of her death. Our sister Purnell has proved a true Prophet, that many of the Society would quickly follow her, but God would first finish his work, and cut it short in righteousness. 

Mon., April 20th. The hand of the Lord was upon me at Downing, while I enforced his universal call, "Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth." Many felt the earthquake which precedes the coming of the Son of man. We prayed and sung alternately for two hours; and the Lord, we trust, enlarged and established our hearts. 

Tues., April 21st. I hastened to the joyful funeral of our sister Richardson. The room was crowded within 'and without. My subject was, "I know that my Redeemer liveth," &c. (Job xix. 25.) I spoke searchingly to the hearsay-believers; and then largely of her, whose faith they might safely follow. Great was my glorying and rejoicing over her. She, being dead, yet spoke in words of faith and love, which ought to be had in remembrance. Surely her spirit was present with us; and we were in a measure partakers of her joy, a joy unspeakable and full of glory. 

The whole Society followed her to her grave. Through all the city Satan raged exceedingly in his children, who threw dirt and stones at us: but the bridle was in their mouths. After the burial we joined in the following hymn :- "Come, let us who in Christ believe, With saints and angels join, Glory, and praise, and blessing give, And thanks to grace divine.   "Our friend, in sure and certain hope, Hath laid her body down, She knew that Christ will raise her up, And give the heavenly crown. "To all who big appearing love, He opens paradise, And we shall join the hosts above, And we shah grasp the prize. *' Then let us wait to see the day, To hear the welcome word, To answer, Lo, we come away, We die to meet our Lord." 

 Wed., April 22d. I sharply reproved three or four inflexible Pharisees; then prayed the Lord to give me words of consolation, and immediately I was filled with power, which broke out as a mighty torrent. All our hearts caught fire as in a moment andsuch tears and strong cryings followed, as quite drowned my voice. I sat still while the prayer of the humble pierced the clouds, and entered into the ears of the Lord of sabaoth. All present received an answer of peace; and, from his love in their hearts, testified that Christ died for all. 

Thur., April 23d. In the evening I gathered up a stray sheep at Bristol, and carried her to the word which she had long forsaken. I strongly exhorted the people to put on the whole armour of God. God doubly confirms the word when it is denied. 

Fri., April 24th. At the intercession I had great faith in prayer, that all things shall happen for the furtherance of the Gospel. 

A predestinarian was struck us with the pangs of death, and earnestly desired our prayers. 

I spent the afternoon in confirming the weak. In the evening I opened the book where it was written, "And now, I beseech thee, let the power of my Lord be great, according as thou hast spoken;" (Num, xiv.;) that famous history of the spies, who brought up an evil report of the promised land. I said, "Let us go up at once and possess it, for we are well able to overcome it." God inclined their hearts to listen unto me, rather than the men that went up with us, who say, "We are not able to go up against the people, for they are stronger than we. We can never conquer all sin: we must sin sometimes." 

I rode to Kingswood, where many were come from far to spend the night in watching and prayer. We had much of the divine presence; but remained myself like Gideon's fleece; fill, at midnight, a cry, "Behold, the Bridegroom cometh!" The flame was kindled, and the Lord our God was among us as in the holy place of Sinai. 

Sat., April 25th. The word at night was refreshing to our souls. Our thanksgiving-notes multiply more and more. One wrote thus :--" There was not a word came out of your mouth last night, but I could apply it to my own soul, and witness it the doctrine of Christ. I know that Christ is a whole Saviour. I know the blood of Christ has washed away all my sins. I am sure the Lord will make me perfect in love before I go hence, and am no more seen. O for a thousand tongues to sing My dear Redeemer's praise! '"&c. Sun., April 26th. I proceeded in Num. xiv., and warned the hearers lest, a promise being made them of entering into rest, any of them should come short of it through unbelief. 

God every day adds fresh seals to my ministry; as many testify in their notes of thanksgiving. 

Thur., April 30th. I went on in Num. xiv. Many eyes were opened to see that land of promise which God hath sworn to give unto all who believe. 

We find a continual increase of faith and strength. It is good for us to be assaulted by Satan and his children. They watch for our halting, which makes us watch against it. 

Fri., May 1st. I visited a sister dying in the Lord; and then two others, one mourning after, the other rejoicing in, God her Saviour. 

I found our sister Hooper sick of love. Her body, too, sunk under it. 

While I finished my discourse on Num. xiv., God fulfilled his promise, "Lo, I am with you always." 

I was now informed their another of our sisters, E. Smith, is gone home in triumph. She witnessed a good confession of the universal Sayfour, and gave up her spirit with those words, "I go to my heavenly Father." 

Sun., May 3d. At Kingswood as soon as I had named my text, "It is finished!" the love of Christ crucified so constrained me, that I burst into tears, and felt strong sympathy with Him in his sufferings. In like manner, the whole congregation looked upon Him whom they had pierced, and mourned. 

I joined the Society in thanksgiving for our departed sister. We found where she was, by the sweet power and solemn awe with which the divine presence filled us. 

Mon., May 4th. I passed an hour in weeping with some that wept; then rejoiced over our sister Hooper. The more the outward man decayeth, the inner is renewed. For one whole night she had wrestled with all the powers of darkness. This is that evil day, that fiery trial. But, having done all, she stood unshaken. From henceforth she was kept in perfect peace, and that wicked one touched her not. 

In conference B. Walters told me that last night God had opened her eyes under the word, and the love of Christ, the Saviour of all men, quite overpowered her soul. 

I saw my dear friend again, in great bodily weakness, but strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. "The Spirit," said she, "bears Witness every moment with my spirit, that I am a child of God." I spoke with her Physician, who said he had little hope of her recovery; "only," added he, "she has no dread upon her spirits, which is generally the worst symptom. Most people die for fear of dying: but I never met with such people as yours. They are none of them afraid of death; but calm, and patient, and resigned to the last." He had said to her, "Madam, be not cast down." She answered smiling, "Sir, I shall never be cast down." 

At Downing I explained good old Simeon's confession: "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace," &c. Our sister Hooper was present in spirit. I hastened Back, and asked, "How are you now" Her answer was, "Full, full of love." 

I met the bands in Kingswood. One, who, in fear of God, and mistrust of himself, had heard Mr. W____, assured me he had preached barefaced reprobation. The people fled before the reprobating lion. But again and again, as he observed them depart, the preacher of sad tidings called them back, with general offers of salvation. Vain and empty offers indeed! What availed his telling them that, for aught he knew, they might be all elect. He did not believe them all elect; he could not: therefore he only mocked them with an empty word of invitation; and of God sent him to preach the Gospel to every creature, God, according to his scheme, sent him to deceive the greatest part of mankind. 

Tues., May 5th. We had much of the spirit of supplication among our colliers. I could not but look on it as a good omen, that, while I was praying for the increase of our spiritual children, a wild collier brought me four of his children, and threw the youngest on the table before me, crying," You have got the mother, take the bairns too." 

Wed., May 6th. I found our sister Hooper just at the haven. She expressed, while able to speak, her fulness of confidence and love; her desire to be with Christ; her grief at their preaching the other Gospel Some of her words were, "Does Mr.Cennick still preach his wretched doctrine O what has he to answer for, for turning his poor sister out of the way I But my Lord will pity, and not suffer her to die in that delusion." 

At my next visit, I saw her in her latest conflict. The angel of death was come, and but a few moments between her and a blessed eternity. We poured out our souls to God for her, her children, ourselves, the Church and Ministers, and all mankind. I had some perception of her joy. My soul was tenderly affected for her sufferings, yet the joy swallowed up the sorrow. How much more then did her consolations abound! The servants of Christ suffer nothing. I asked her whether she was not in great pain. "Yes," she answered, "but in greater joy. I would not be without either." "But do you not prefer life or death" She replied, "All is alike to me; let Christ choose; I have no will of my own." This is that holiness, or absolute resignation, or Christian perfection! 

Two days ago, I asked her if she expected to recover. She answered, God had in the beginning of her sickness given her notice of her departure. And I now remember, she told me some months ago, that Mrs. Purnell, on her death-bed, had said, "You shall shortly follow me." 

A few moments before her last, I found such a complication of grief, joy, love, envy, as quite overpowered me. I fell upon the bed, and in that instant her spirit ascended to God. I felt our souls were knit together by the violent struggle of mine to follow her. 

When I saw the breathless temple of the Holy Ghost, my heart was still, and a calm resignation took place. We knelt down, and gave God thanks from the ground of our heart. We then had recourse to the book of comfort, and found it written, "He was a burning and a shining light: and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light." The next word was for us: "Let us labour therefore to enter into that rest." Even so, come, Lord Jesus, and give us an inheritance among all them that are sanctified! 

After her death, they found a memorandum in her handwriting: "On such a day Mr. Wesley came to town; the next day I received a fresh witness. November 2d. I received, early in the morning, such a manifestation of God's love, as is not to be expressed." 

One night, I remember, she told me she knew, while coming to us, we should have that extraordinary power among the bands; that in the way God had given her a sight of the new Jerusalem. This she did not mention to others, nor indeed many manifestations of Christ, being exceeding jealous lest she should take any glory to herself. O that all who tell what God hath done for their souls, would tell it with like humble reverence! 

I met the hands; a solemn assembly. I cautioned the treatable, and comforted the feeble-minded. My mentioning our sister's release occasioned much thanksgiving to God. 

Thur., May 7th. I visited Hannah C., full of love to her Saviour, crying out, "Liberty, liberty! This is the glorious liberty of God's children. O, who can name the name of Jesus, and not depart from iniquity God loves me. God loves every man. Jesus Christ is the Saviour of the whole world." 

I could not but observe, and bless God for, this answer to our dying sister's prayer. 

At the room, I opened the book on, "And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me." Was I to search after the strongest scriptures for universal  redemption, I could not choose so well as Providence chooses for me. God at this time made bare his arm. I knew not how to give over, but continued my discourse till nine. 

Many witnesses stood forth, and testified God's love to all. 

Fri., May 8th. We solemnized the funeral of our sister Hooper, and rejoiced over her with singing; particularly that hymn which concludes,-- "Thus may we all our parting breath Into the Saviour's hands resign; O sister, let me die thy death, And let thy latter end be mine!" 

My text was, "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace." A great multitude attended her to her grave. There we sang another hymn of triumph; and I found myself pressed in spirit to speak to those who contradicted and blasphemed. While I reasoned on death and judgment to come, many trembled; one woman cried out in horrible agony. We returned to the room, and continued our solemn rejoicings, all desiring to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. 

Sun., May 10th. I gave the sacrament to the colliers; preached on Elijah's small, still voice; went out into the highways, and concluded the happy day with & feast in Kingswood. 

Mon., May 11th. At Downing I explained, "I will heal thy backslidings, I will love thee freely." He who gave the promise, applied it. I was quite melted down by it. 

Several wept much, and loved much, because they had much forgiven. 

Thur., May 14th. I visited our sister Lillington, whom her Saviour had brought to a bed of sickness, before she knew he was her Saviour. She told me, two nights ago she saw herself as it were dropping into hell, when suddenly a ray of light was darted into her soul, and filled her with all peace and joy in believing. All fear of hell, death, and sin fled away in that same moment. 

I saw two more of our sick sisters; then two of the brethren in Kingswood, who were all rejoicing in hope of a speedy dissolution. I preached at Kendalshire, and visited one of the bands there, who walked through the valley of the shadow of death, and feared no evil. I prayed by a seventh in Bristol, who laughed at the King of terrors. If God be not with us, who hath begotten us these 

Fri., May 15th. I saw our sister Lillington again; still without fear, desiring nothing but to be with Christ. "I never felt," said she," such love before: I love every soul; I am all love,--and so is God. He is loving unto every man: He would have all men to be saved." 

Sat., May 16th. I visited another of our sisters, who was triumphing over death. I asked her," Do you know Christ died for you" "Yes," she answered joyfully, "for me, and for the whole world. He has begun, and he will finish, his work in my soul." "But will he save you," I said, "from all sin" She replied, "I know he will. There shall no sin remain in me." 

I was sent for to another, who had lately heard a preacher of reprobation. The tempter would not lose the advantage, and immediately suggested, "You are one of those for whom Christ did not die." This threw her into a fever. I found her dying in despair; preached the true Gospel, (Gospel to every creature,) prayed, and left her a prisoner of hope. 

Whitsunday, May 17th. The fire was kindled while we were singing, "Bear we witness unto Thee, Thou thy light to all dost give, That the world through it may see Their Saviour, and believe." 

One cried out, "It is the truth!" Several found the same constraint of the all-loving Spirit. We Messed the God and Saviour of all men, who never leaves himself without witness, where his true Gospel is preached. 

Mon., May 18th. A poor soldier confessed to me, that God had opened his eyes to see his universal love: I was repeating that verse,- "Arise, O God, arise, Thy glorious cause maintain; Hold forth the bloody sacrifice, For every sinner slain." 

By all I can discern, he did in that moment receive the atonement. 

I settled the bands in Kingswood. Toward the end, an awful sense of God fell upon us; and we trembled, seeing Him that is invisible. 

Tues., May 19th. I am more and more confirmed in the truth by its miserable opposers. I talked lately with Mr. H , and urged him with this dilemma: "For what did God make this reprobate to be damned, or to be saved" He durst not say God made even Judas to be damned, and would not say God made him to be saved. I desired to know for what third end he could make him; but all the answer I could get was, "It is not a fair question." 

Next I asked, "Whether he that believeth not shall not be damned, because he believed not" "Yes," he answered; and I replied, "Because he believeth not what" 

Here he hesitated, and I was forced to help him out with the Apostle's answer, "That they all might be damned who believed not the truth." "What truth," I asked again, "but the truth of the Gospel of their salvation If it is not the Gospel of their salvation, and yet they are bound to believe it, then they are bound to believe a lie, under pain of damnation; and the Apostle should have said, ' That they all might be damned who believed not a lie.'" This drove him to assert, that no mall was damned for actual unbelief, but only for what he called original; that is, for not believing before he was born. "But where," said I, "is the justice of this" He answered, not over-hastily, "I confess there is a mystery in reprobation." Or, to put it in Beza's words, which I then read him, "We believe, though it is incomprehensible, that it is just to damn such as do not deserve it." 

Farther I asked him, "Why does God command all men everywhere to repent Why does he call, and offer his grace to, reprobates Why does his Spirit strive with every child of man for some time, though not always" I could get no answer, and so read him one of his friend Calvin's: "God speaketh to them, that they may be the deafer; He gives light to them, that they may be the blinder; He offers instruction to them, that they may be the more ignorant; and uses the remedy, that they may not be healed." (Calvin, Instit., 1. iii., c. 24.) 

Never did I meet with a more pitiful advocate of a more pitiful cause. And yet I believe he could say as much for reprobation as another. I told him his predestination had got a millstone about its neck, and would infallibly be drowned, if he did not part it from reprobation. 

At Kingswood I preached on those much-perverted words, "I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me ;" that is, his Apostles. He does not take in believers of future ages till verse 20. Then in verse 21 he prays for the unbelieving world; "that," to use Mr. Baxter's words on the place, "by their concord, the worm may be won to Christianity." (Paraphrase on New Testament: see again on verse 23, "That this lustre of their excellency and concord may convince the world that thou hast sent me.") So far is our Lord from not praying for the world at all, that in this very chapter he prays once fir his first disciples, once for believers in after-ages, and twice for the world that lieth in wickedness, that the world may believe, -that the world may know. 

He who prays for all men himself, and commands us to pray for all men, was with us, and showed us, with the demonstration of his Spirit, that he is not willing any should perish, but that all should come to the knowledge of the truth, and be saved. 

Wed., May 20th. I was called to a dying woman, who confessed she had often railed on me in her health, but was now constrained to send for me, and ask my pardon, or she could not die in peace. We prayed our Lord to speak peace and pardon to her soul. Several such instances have we had of scoffers, when their feet come to stumble on the dark mountains. 

Fri., May 22d. I preached a funeral sermon over sister Lillington, and attended her to her grave; where we rejoiced in hope of quickly following her. I gave an exhortation to repentance, though Satan greatly withstood me; thereby teaching me, never to let go unwarned the poor sinners that come on such occasions. 

I passed the night with my brother, at Kingswood, in watching unto prayer. I would this primitive custom were revived among all our brethren. The word of God encourages us to be in watchings often. I returned by two to Bristol; and at five found strength to expound in the room. 

Sun., May 24th. I preached on Jacob wrestling for the blessing. Many then, I believe, took hold on his strength, and will not let him go, till he bless them, and tell them his name. 

I heard my brother at tile Mills, and attended him to the Society. We had the cloud on our assembly. A woman was constrained to testify, "God this moment assures me that my pardon is sealed in heaven." The prince of this world was displeased. One of his subjects threw a stone into the room, which had no permission to hurt. We accepted it as a challenge to stay, and continued an hour longer, singing and praising God. 

Mon., May 25th. I visited one, who had been grievously tormented with the spirit of reprobation, but now rejoiced on a bed of sickness, free from all fear, and trouble, and sense of pain. "I am confident," she said, "that Jesus Christ will finish his work in me. That wicked one toucheth me not. He can no more make me doubt of God's universal love. Jesus is the stronger. He is the Saviour of all mankind. It is a glorious Gospel you preach. I stake my soul upon the truth of it." 

While I was passing by the bowling-green, a woman cried out, "The curse of God light upon you," with such uncommon bitterness, that I could not but turn and stop to bless her. When I asked her why she cursed me, she answered, "For preaching against Mr._____." I had indeed a suspicion, from her dialect, that she was one of the self-elect; but stayed heaping coals of fire upon her head, till at last she said, "God bless you all." 

Thur., May 28th. In the evening I expounded Ezek. xviii. Some were grieved, and I myself also, at the necessity laid upon me to convince gainsayers, and not to employ both hands in building. Yet our Lord owned me here also, and the hammer of his word broke the rock of absolute predestination in pieces. One, who had been long entangled 

with it, now testified that he had delivered her soul out of the snare of the fowler. 

Sat., May 30th. I passed an hour with a spiritual Quaker, and rejoiced to find we were both of the same religion. 

Sun., May 31st. Throughout this day I found my strength increase with my labour. Many at the Mills were affected deeply with our Lord's description of his coming to judgment. (Matt. xxiv.) 

I read in the Society my account of H. Richardsoffs death. She, being dead, yet spoke so powerfully to our hearts, that my voice was lost in the sorrowful sighing of such as be in captivity. To several God showed himself the God of consolation also: particularly to two young Welshmen, whom his providence sent hither from Caermarthen. They had heard most dreadful stories of us Arminians, freewillers, perfectionists, Papists; which all vanished like smoke when they came to hear with their own ears. God applied to their hearts the word of his power. I carried them to my lodgings, and stocked them with books, and sent them away, recommended to the grace of God, which bringeth salvation unto all men. 

Thur., June 4th. I met with one who said she was in the full liberty of the Gospel, and much displeased that I did not acknowledge her: "but the spiritual man is discerned of none, though I discern you; you are justified, but you have not my gifts." Upon my coming closer, she was very abusive, called me "child of the devil," &c., and denounced judgments against our whole Society for not receiving her. 

In the evening-Society God wrought wonderfully. I have seldom known such a night. We rejoiced till near midnight with joy unspeakable. 

Fri., June 5th. The morning word was as a sharp, two-edged sword, a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Mary Stretten, the poor self-deceiver I spoke with yesterday, could not bear it, but cried out, "You are a child of the devil, and your Society are all accursed." I let her speak on, that she might show herself; then warned the high-minded, lest they also should fall into the condemnation of the devil. See the false assurance of unbelief, and tremble! One, in the gall of bitterness, the bond of iniquity, persuades herself that she is in the glorious liberty of the sons of God. 

I visited one, who had violently maintained the impossibility of knowing our sins forgiven in this life. But Christ hath taught her better on her death-bed. She was overjoyed to see me. I prayed over her in faith; and left her calmly waiting for the salvation of God. 

I prayed by another of the bands, who has recovered in sickness the confidence she had long lost. 

I walked out of town to a third, who lay a-dying, and could not rest till she had seen me. She had been a great opposer of this way, which now she confesses to be the only way of salvation. 

I was sent for to rejoice with our brother G., in an high fever. The witness testified, "I come quickly." Therefore consolations did much more abound. 

Sat., June 6th. W. H. informed me, that last night he was delivered, under the word, from the snare of predestination. 

Mon., June 8th. A woman spoke to me of her husband. He was under strong convictions, while he attended the word; but the first time he heard the other Gospel, came home elect, and, in proof of it, beat his wife. His seriousness was at an end. His work was done. God doth not behold iniquity in Jacob; therefore his iniquity and cruelty towards her abound. He uses her worse than a Turk, (his predestinarian brother,) and tells her, if he killed her he could not be damned. 

I visited the woman whom I had left waiting for the redemption she had long denied. She cried out at sight of me, "O, blessed be God that ever I heard you I You have been the saving of my soul." I taught her to speak more exactly. Her faith wrought powerfully by love. Her mouth was full of prayers and blessings. She continued for two days praising God; and then he took her to himself. 

Wed., June 10th. I warned one of the bands, who, by his Ahab-like humility, had deceived many. I prayed our Lord, if he approved my plainness of speech, to give us an answer of peace. 

Immediately the spirit of supplication burst forth. We wrestled with God for a blessing on ourselves, on all who wait for full redemption, on those who blaspheme the glorious liberty of his children. The Spirit made intercession with groans unutterable. Many called upon God out of the deep; others rejoiced with joy unspeakable, and full assurance that we had the petitions we asked. 

Sat., June 13th. Some days since, I was sent for to one whom I had put out of our Society for disorderly walking. He earnestly desired to see me. I found him senseless, and at the point of death, as was supposed. I was surprised to-day at hearing he was still alive, and in his senses. He was overjoyed to see me, and I to find the Lord had again been merciful unto him. 

Tues., June 16th. Seeking a sick man, near Hanham, whose name I had forgot, I called at some of the huts for direction. At last a child informed me of one who lay a-dying. It was not the man whom I meant, but whom God meant, and sent me to bring him good news at the eleventh hour. 

The woman asked me how Thomas Reed did: the very man I wanted to find, and was now directed to. He was one that had drawn back; but gladly received me now. 

No dying man is grieved to hear Christ died for all. 

I spoke with one of the bands, most barbarously used by her husband, because she will not forsake God and his people. An hundred times, she said, he has carried a knife to bed with him, to cut her throat. Her soul is alway in her hand. She sleeps in the shadow of death, and fears no evil; knowing he can have no power over her, except it be given him from above. She ventures her life upon that word, "How knowest thou, O woman, but thou mayest save thy husband" 

I preached in the wood on that dreadful word," Sell all," never with more assistance. How has the devil baffled those teachers, who, for fear of setting men upon works, forbear urging this first universal duty! If enforcing Christ's own words is to preach works, I hope I shall preach works as long as I live. 

Wed., June 17th. I gave the sacrament to our sister Brimble, dying in such strong agonies as I have not seen before, no, not in Hannah Richardson. She had no fear of hell, yet was so deeply convinced of original sin, as made all who heard her tremble. She could not let go her confidence that God would finish his work in her, though there were so few hours betwixt her and eternity. 

We met in Kingswood, to humble our souls with fasting, and deprecate the national judgments. In the evening, God gave me words to stir up some who were settled upon their lees. How long have we called him "Lord, Lord," and not done the things which he bade us, not denied ourselves, and taken up our daily cross! 

Thur., June 18th. I visited our brother Haskin's father, at Sison, whom God has showed that he is a sinner, but not yet that he is the chief of sinners. I left him desirous to know even as he is known. Soon after, he entered upon his last agony. By his vehement prayers to the Saviour of sinners, and by the faith which God gave his son, I trust God made a short work in his soul, and received it without spot to himself. 

Fri., June 19th. I expounded the fall of Jericho, and felt the truth of every word I spoke. Howel Harris was present; and afterwards confessed to me, that he felt the power by which I spake, restraining him from denying the truth, and filling him with strong desires of its accomplishment. 

At the watchnight I preached again on the same subject, with double power. It was a glorious night indeed. We followed the ark, and the shout of a King was in the midst of us. 

Mon., June 22d. I visited one of the Society on her death-bed. God sent me to her that she might preach to me. She conjured me not to depart from the word; said, "The Ministers will endure a great-fight of afflictions; but go on to preach Christ the Saviour of all men, whose blood cleanseth from all sin. Christ died for all: none can resist this truth. I have not yet attained, but know He will fill up what is lacking in my faith." 

Wed., June 24th. I asked her if she had a new heart. She answered, "No; but I shall receive it with the sacrament." After administering, I repeated the question, and she bore witness to the truth: "Every one that is perfect shall be as his Master." God, she said, had then taken away the evil heart, and she had no sin remaining in her. I told her that time and temptation would show. 

Thur., June 25th. I found her still the same, declaring she had felt no motion of evil or self-will since the occasion of stumbling, as she thinks, was taken away. 

Fri., June 26th. Suky Harding informed me, that Howel Harris, coming from the room that night to her master's, had stopped their railings, saying, he would hear nothing against his brother Wesleys, for they were true Ministers of Christ, and children of God. He confessed, before a large company of our enemies, he had found such power under the word, that his soul was lifted up to the third heaven; he longed to be free from sin, which he hated; he lay open to the light; "and if," said he, "the Scriptures say Christ died for all, I will say so too." By many such words he utterly confounded them. But who can touch pitch, and not be defiled The very next day he came, and threatened to declare against me as a deceiver. 

Sun., June 28th. A day much to be remembered. I preached in Bristol on repentance; at Kendalshire on temptation, with more life. My strength increased with my work; so that in the afternoon I was filled with power; and again at Baptist-mills. 

Last night Howel Harris told me he would come to our Society. I bade him come in God's name. We were singing, "Thee triumphantly we praise, Vie with all thy hosts above; Shout thine universal grace, Thine everlasting love;" 

when W. Hooper, by my order, brought him. I prayed according to God; gave out an hymn which we might all join in. The hand of the Lord was upon me. I asked Howel whether he had a mind to speak, and sat by for half an hour, while he gave an account of his conversion by irresistible grace, mixing with his experience the impossibility of falling, God's unchangeableness, &c. I could not but observe the ungenerousness of my friend; and after hearing him long and patiently, was moved to rise up, and ask in the name of Jesus, "Ye that are spiritual, doth the Spirit which is in you suffer me still to keep silence, and let my brother go on Can I do it without bringing the blood of these souls upon me" A woman first cried out, (Mrs. Rawlins, I think,)" The wounds of Jesus answer, ' No.'" Then many others repeated, "No, no, no ;" and a whole cloud of witnesses arose, declaring, "Christ died for all!" 

I asked again, "Would you have my brother Harris proceed, or would you not If you would hear him, I will be silent all night." Again they forbade me in strong words; upon which I gave out, "Break forth into joy, Your Comforter sing," &e. 

They did break forth as the voice of many waters, or mighty thunderings. O what a burst of joy was there in the midst of us! The God and Saviour of all men magnified his universal love. 

Howel Harris would have entered into dispute, but was stopped. "Then," said he, "you thrust me out." "No," said I, "we do not: you are welcome to stay as long as you please. We acknowledge you a child of God." Yet again he began, "If you do not believe irresistible grace ;" and I cut off the sentence of reprobation which I foresaw coming, with, "Praise God, from whom pure blessings flow, Whose bowels yearn on all below; Who would not have one sinner lost; Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost." 

Here Mr. Labbe pulled him away, and carried him from us. We betook ourselves to prayer, in which the Spirit wonderfully helped our infirmities. Great was the company, both of mourners and rejoicers. We perceived God had taken the matter into his own hand, and was arose to maintain his own cause. My mouth, and all their hearts, were opened. I spake as I never spake before, and all agreed in one testimony. John Doleman, and Francis Vigor, a young Quaker, received forgiveness of sins; and all that knew Christ, an increase of faith and love. 

I acknowledged the grace given to our dear brother Harris, and excused his estrangement from me through the wickedness of his counsellors. I spake, I know not what, words of exhortation and instruction. 

The Spirit of their Father spake in many; and this I have found since, that just when I began to stop Howel, several felt in themselves that the time was come; and, if I had deferred it, would themselves have rebuked the madness of the Prophet. 

Mon., June 29th. I called on a sister in Bath, and exhorted a few to "save themselves from this untoward generation." At their desire I opened the Scripture, and warned them from the first words, "Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins." (Num. xvi. 26.) 

Sat., July 4th. While the letters were reading,* we had a glimpse of the felicity of God's chosen, and rejoiced in the gladness of his people, and gave thanks with his inheritance. 

[* The Wesleys and Mr. Whitefield were all in the habit of reading in their religious meetings extracts from the letters of their correspondents, relative to the progress of the Gospel in various parts of the world.--EDIT.] 

I visited a dying woman, who fell upon me with revilings for not coming sooner to give her the sacrament. She went on so violently, that I feared her last breath would go in curses. I hoped she was not in her senses; but the attendants assured me this was her language continually. She had no trouble about her soul. When I told her she would be lost if she died unchanged, she answered, "You will go to hell before me." I could not account for it, till they told me she was a constant hearer of the predestinarians. We joined in prayer for her; and God gave us a faint spark of hope. 

Tues., July 7th. I visited her a second time, and perceived the strong man was bound: if so, he may be cast out. This is the Lord's doing. 

I prayed by another who had been exceeding mad against Christ and his people. But the fierce persecutor is now struck to the ground, and asks," Lord, what wouldest thou have me to do" I doubt not but the scales will fall from his eyes before they are closed in death. 

I received an earnest invitation to Cardiff, where some are fallen asleep, and some turned back into Egypt. 

Fri., July 10th. I spent most of the afternoon in reading Gell on the Pentateuch. Never man, uninspired, spake as this man speaks. I wonder where the devil has hid him so long. But the good providence which has put him into our hands, will now, I tnlst, "set him on a candlestick, that he may shine to all that are in the house." 

Sat., July 11th. I preached at Bristol, then among the colliers, a third time at Bath, a fourth at Sawford, and yet again in the Wood. Let God have the glory. Preaching five times a day, when he calls me to it, no more wearies the flesh than preaching once. 

Satan took it fil to be attacked in his head-quarters, that Sodom of our land, Bath. While I was explaining the trembling jailer's question, he raged horribly in his children. 

They went out, and came back again, and mocked, and at last roared, as if each man's name was Legion. My power increased with the opposition. The sincere were melted into tears and strong desires of salvation. 

Sun., July 12th. I preached from Titus ii. 11, &c. The power and seal of God is never wanting while I declare the two great truths of the everlasting Gospel, universal redemption and Christian perfection. 

At Kingswood I received Jane Sheep into the fold by Baptism, which she felt in that moment to be for the remission of sins. 

Mon., July 13th. I set out with our brother Hooper, and by three reached Cardiff. At six I met, and laboured to stir up, the Society; and the Lord was with my mouth. 

Tues., July 14th. I warned them against apostasy, from 1 Cor. x. I preached in the afternoon to the prisoners, "How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim" Above twenty were felons. The word melted them down. Many tears were shed at the singing that, "Outcasts of men, to you I call," &c. 

At night, for near three hours, I described the grace of God which bringeth salvation to all men. 

Wed., July 15th. I encouraged them to expect salvation from indwelling sin by that blessed promise, "Who art thou, O great mountain before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain." 

I rode to Wenvo, and asked my brother Hodges if he had forbid letting me preach. He told me his church, while he had one, should be always open to me. It was full at so short a warning. I read prayers, and preached from Isai. lii.: "Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion," &c. 

I rode on five miles farther with Mr. Wells, Hodges, and others, to Fonmon-Castle. Mr. Jones, who had sent for me, received me very courteously. He civilly apologized for his first questions which he asked me as a Magistrate, whether I was a Papist, whether a member of the established Church of England, &c.; was fully satisfied with my answers, and found we were contemporaries at the same College. 

After dinner he sent to Porthkerry; where, at his desire, the Minister lent me his pulpit. After Mr. Richards had made him a promise of it, he sent again, desiring him to act without bias or constraint, by either granting or refusing the church, as his conscience directed. 

I read prayers, and preached "God so loved the world." God was amongst us, and a mighty tempest was stirred up round about Him. He shook many souls out of their carnal security. Never hath He given me more convincing words. The poor simple souls fell down at the feet of Jesus. Their shepherd, also, was deeply affected, and hid his face, and wept; especially while I was praying for him. After sermon he begged my pardon for believing the strange reports concerning me. God had spoke the contrary to his heart, and the hearts of his people; for, when we were gone out of the church, it was still filled with the cries of the wounded. 

I yielded to Mr. Jones's importunity, and agreed to delay my return to Bristol, that I might preach here once more, and pass a night at the Castle. Mr. Richards pressed me first to come to his house. 

I hastened back to Cardiff, and, in great bodily weakness, showed unawakened sinners their state in dead Lazarus. The word was quick and powerful. 

Thur., July 16th. I discoursed on Lazarus raised. I dined at Lanissan, and preached to the Society and a few others, chiefly predestinarians. Without touching the dispute, I simply declared the scriptural marks of election; whereby some, I believe, were cut off from their vain confidence. The sincere ones clave to me. Who can resist the power of love A loving messenger of a loving God might drive reprobation out of Wales, without once naming it. 

In the evening, at Cardiff, Mr. Wells and Hodges shamed me by patiently sitting by to hear me preach. My subject was, "Wrestling Jacob." Some whole sinners were offended at the sick and wounded, who cried out for a Physician: but such offences must needs come. 

Fri., July 17th. I expounded the woman healed of her bloody issue. The power of the Lord was present. We took leave of each other with many tears; and I earnestly exhorted them to continue in the grace of God. 

I dropped most of my company on the road, that I might meet Mr. Jones at Mr. Richards's. He came with Mrs. Jones; and was met by a Minister whom, with some others, he had invited to his house, with a view of reconciling them to me. None but Mr. Carne accepted his invitation. His address was not so smooth as theirs who dwell in Kings' palaces; but I said little till I could speak as one having authority. With difficulty Mr. Jones restrained him from breaking out. 

He flew out on sight of the multitude in the church-yard, and a motion made for my preaching there. It was then proposed to take down one of the windows, that those without might hear: but, on Mr. Carne's again threatening to go away, we went into the church, as many as could, and the rest stood without. 

Mr. Carne stood up all the prayers and sermon-time. The First Lesson was a remarkable word to me: "Then said I, Ah, Lord God ! behold, I cannot speak: for I am a child. But the Lord said unto me, Say not, I am a child: for thou shalt go to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee thou shalt speak. Be not afraid of their faces: for I am with thee to deliver thee, saith the Lord. Then the Lord put forth his hand, and touched my mouth. And the Lord said, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth. Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee: be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them. For, behold, I have made thee this day a defenced city, and an iron pillar, and brazen walls: and they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee: for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee." (Jer. i.) 

The Second Lesson was John v. The Psalms, also, spake nothing but encouragement. I expected that to be now fulfilled, "Show some token for good upon thy servant, that they who hate me may see it, and be ashamed, because thou, Lord God, hast holpen and comforted me." 

I never read prayers with more inward feeling. Like strength was given me to explain the "good Samaritan" for two hours. Out of the abundance of my heart my mouth spake. Great was the company of mourners, whose tears God put into his bottle; and they shall reap in joy. 

I could not help smiling at Mr. Carne, who had come, as he said, on purpose to judge me; and his judgment was, "Sir, you have got very good lungs: but you will make the people melancholy. I saw them crying throughout the church." Then he turned on Mr. Jones, and told him he would make himself ridiculous all over the country by encouraging such a fellow. I was afraid of despising him, and therefore passed on, and left them together. Mr. Jones almost overcame his evil with good, but could not prevail upon him to come under the same roof with me. 

However, the poor people were glad to accept of his invitation to hear me again at the Castle. We ate our bread with gladness and singleness of heart: and at seven I preached to some hundreds in the court-yard. My three brethren, Richards, Wells, and Hodges, stood in the midst of them, knelt on the ground in prayer, and cried after the Son of David. He breathed into our souls strong desires. O that he may confirm, increase, and satisfy them! 

The voice of praise and thanksgiving was heard in this dwelling-place. Before, at, and after supper we sang, and blessed God with joyful lips. Those in the parlour and kitchen were continually honouring, by offering him praise. I thought it looked like the house of faithful Abraham. We called our brethren of Kingswood to be present with us in spirit, and continued rejoicing with them till morning. 

Sat., July 18th. I took sweet counsel with Mr. Jones alone. The seed is sown in his heart, and shall bring forth fruit unto perfection. His wife, a simple, innocent creature, joined us. I commended them to the grace of God in earnest prayer, and then, with my Cardiff friends, went on my way rejoicing. 

I consented, that some should ask Mr. Coldrach for the use of his pulpit. He civilly answered, that he would readily grant it, but the Bishop had forbade him. "Doth our law judge any man before it hear him, and know what he doeth" 

At two I set out for the Passage. The boat was just ready for us. By nine I found my brother at the room, the Lord having blessed both my going out and my coming in. 

Thur., July 23d. I was sent for by a predestinarian that was till death approached. Her miserable comforters she would none of now, but said, "Blessed be him that cometh in the name of the Lord and Saviour of all men." 

I visited one of our own flock, a joyful prisoner of hope. The Lord, when he came, found her watching for that great salvation. 

I reproved an invincible Pharisee at Mr. Farley's, whose whole discourse is of herself. She told us, as she does all the world, how often she goes to prayers and sacrament, how many sermons she hears, what good she does, &c. She breathes out threatenings and woes against our Society, for not acknowledging her gifts. "Godloves no one upon earth as well as her." Never have I seen a professor more full of pride, and self, and the devil: yet she pretends to the full assurance of faith. 

Sat., July 25th. We met at ten to pray for a blessing on my brother's sermon, which he is preaching at this hour before the University. 

Sun., July 26th. Our hope was much confirmed by those words which' I enforced at Kingswood, "Stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord ;" or, as it is afterwards expressed, ".Speak unto tile children of Israel, that they go forward." 

I discoursed in the afternoon on the same subject, from Isai. lxiv. 5: "Thou meetest---those that remember thee in thy ways," &c. Hence I magnified the law of Christian ordinances, exhorting those who wait for salvation, to be as clay in the hand of the potter, by stirring themselves up to lay hold on the Lord. God gave me much freedom to explain that most active, vigorous, restless thing, true stillness. 

I preached a fourth time at the Mills, and a fifth time in the room, on the one tiling needful. 

Mon., July 27th. The neighbourhood of the fair fills our room with strangers. Again God put his words in my mouth, and set me to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down: to build also, and to plant, if it be his blessed will concerning me. 

Tues., July 28th. God be praised, there is some ground for that coinplaint of a predestinarian, that the plague of perfection reigns at Bristol, and many of the Welsh catch it. O that all mankind were infected with this plague! if it is a plague to be healed of every plague. 

One serious youth I spake with to-day, who did run well: but from the time that he was persuaded to believe there was no falling after justification, he did begin to fall, as he now confesses, into carelessness, self-indulgence, and at last into known sin. 

Fri., July 31st. Still by patience, and comfort of God's holy word, many daily lay hold on eternal life. He gave us this night strong consolation. O that in the strength thereof we might travel to his holy mountain! 

Sun., August 2d. In my way to Kingswood, I met Mr. Wynn, of Painswick, who informed me, that when I was last there, a word I directed to another on a sick bed was applied to him; and he, in that moment, received remission of sins. He had heard of nothing farther, and yet wanted something more, he knew not what, till God sent him hither. Now he rejoices in hope of redemption from all iniquity. 

I got unawares with my chaise among the cod-pits. We were going to alight, when the horse started, and overturned us. I leaped over both horse and chaise; but our sister Gaseath was thrown out upon her head, and the chaise turned topsy-turvy over her. She lay between the wheels, untouched by either; the horse lay quiet upon his back. We all rose unhurt. Thou, Lord, shalt save both man and beast: how excellent is thy mercy! 

I preached a funeral sermon over our sister Rachel Peacock, who died in the Lord most triumphantly. She had had continual joy in the Lord, which made her cry out, "Though I groan, I feel no pain at all: Christ so rejoices and fills my heart." Her mouth also was filled with laughter, and her tongue with joy. She sang hymns inceasantly. 

"Christ," said she, "is in my heart, and one minute with the Lord is worth a million of ages. O how brave it is to banquet with the Lamb!" 

She was always praising God for giving her such patience. All her desires were unto the Lord, and she continued calling upon him, in all the confidence of love, till he received her into his more immediate presence. 

At the sight of her coffin, my soul was moved within me, and struggled as a bird to break its cage. Some relief I found in tears, but still was so overpowered, that, unless God had abated the vehemence of my desires, I could have had no utterance. The whole congregation partook with me in the blessedness of mourning. 

Mon., August 3d. I visited our sister Reed, on a bed of sickness. All her doubts and fears are vanished at the approach of death, and she rejoices in confident hope that the Lord will sanctify her wholly, before he takes her hence. 

Wed., August 5th. I saw our brother Stanley, in the same, if not an higher, state, dying with eternal life abiding in him. 

Thur., August 6th. To-night God shook many souls by the word of his power. My subject was the pool of Bethesda. 

Coming to pray by a poor Welshwoman, she began with me, "Blessed be God that ever I heard you! Jesus, my Jesus, has visited me on a bed of sickness. He is in my heart. He is my strength. None shall pluck me out of his hand. I cannot leave him, and he will not leave me." It was the spirit of her Father that spoke in her: "O, do not let me ask for death, if thou wouldst have me live. I know thou canst keep me from ever sinning more. If thou wouldst have me live, let me walk humbly with thee all my days." 

I sat and heard her sing the new song, till even my hard heart was melted. She glorified the Saviour of the world, who would have all men to be saved. "I know it, I feel it," said she: "He would not have one sinner lost. Believe, and he will give you all what he hath given me." 

Sun., August 9th. I gave her the sacrament, which she had never received before; but was taught to desire it by the Spirit that was in her, even as soon as she had received him. I asked what difference she found after communicating. She answered, that she saw God and was full of him before; but in the act of receiving, she had the brightness of his presence, and was filled, as it were, with all the fulness of God. 

Fri., August 14th. I went after a stray sheep, who was turned out of the way by the predestinarians; but the good Shepherd had found her himself, and brought her home rejoicing. For some days she had been under the full influence of that narrow opinion, and could not bear any of her brethren and sisters. Then she cried unto the Lord to show her the truth, and he answered her by his own mouth. The true light broke in upon her, and in his light she saw that God is love. She is now humbled in the dust before him, for having "robbed him of his most darling attribute." 

Our Kingswood school was crowded with those that came from all parts to the watchnight. I enforced our Lord's words, "Have faith in God ;" and indeed we had. The spirit of faith was poured out. Many were there who could not keep it in, but out of the abundance of their heart their mouth spake. I triumphed till the morning with the voice of joy and thanksgiving, among such as keep holiday. 

Mon., August 17th. I visited one who was forsaking the fellowship, when God arrested her in her flight by sickness, convinced, condemned, and justified her again. It is good for her to have been in trouble, since thereby He has plucked her as a brand out of the fire. 

Sat., August 22d. While I was declaring, at Sawford, "He shall save his people from their sins," the enemy stirred up his servants to great fierceness of opposition. 

But we defied them in the name of the Lord, who first restrained, and then stilled, the madness of the people. 

Mon., August 24th. I took horse with F. Farley for Wales. In the passage, I read on, while some gentlemen mocked. At last the chief of them asked, ': What are you reading I Let us have a little with you." I read on the words that followed: "And, behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be." This struck a damp upon them, and silenced them in a moment; so that we reached the land without farther molestation. 

The assizes brought many strangers to the Society in Cardiff, before whom I declared, "Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ." Some, I doubt not, were enabled to receive the strange things I brought to their ears. 

Tues., August 26th. I found at five this morning, by the return of the strangers, that the word had not fallen to the ground. 

I found our dear friend and brother at Wenvo, nothing terrified by his adversaries. Their threats, instead of shaking, have more deeply rooted him in the truth. 

They have had the same effect upon Mr. Jones. The poor prodigals who are not yet come to themselves, say of him, that he is beside himself: but he is content that they fools should count his life madness; only, when any of them come in his  way, he speaks such words of truth and soberness as they cannot resist. 

For three hours we sang, rejoiced, and gave thanks; then rode to Porthkerry, where I read prayers, and discoursed near two hours on the pool of Bethesda. The whole congregation were in tears. 

I returned to the castle, and met some hundreds of the poor neighbours in our chapel, the dining-room. I exhorted them to build up one another, from Mal. iii. 16-18: "Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another," &c. At ten we departed. We kept on rejoicing till one in the morning. 

Wed., August 26th. I prayed by a dying woman, who waits for redemption from all iniquity here; otherwise, she knows she cannot see God. About noon I applied, at John Deer's Society, "But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified," &c. Never have I spoke more closely to those who rest in the first gift. Some, who seemed to be pillars, begin to find themselves shaken reeds. 

I preached again in Wenvo church, and at night in Cardiff. 

Thur., August 27th. Great power was among us, while I spake on the walls of Jericho falling down; but much greater at the prison, where I recommended to two condemned malefactors the example of the penitent thief. Both were melted into tears. The congregation sympathized, and joined in fervent prayer, that our Lord would remember them, now he is come into his kingdom. 

I went to a revel at Lanvane, and dissuaded thom from their innocent diversions, in St. Peter's words: "For the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquettugs, and abominable idolatries." An old dancer of threescore fell down under the stroke of the hammer. She could never be convinced before that there was any harm in those innocent pleasures. O that all her fellows might likewise confess, "She that liveth in pleasures is dead while she liveth." 

I prayed by a poor persecutor, who had found mercy at the last hour; then expounded Ezekiel's vision of dry bones. A poor drunkard spoke the whole time, but with-out interrupting me or the congregation; for the hand of the Lord was over us. 

Fri., August 28th. I preached again in Porthkerry church. Many cried after Jesus, with the woman of Canaan. It was a time of great refreshing. I returned in the coach with Mr. and Mrs. Jones, and a little girl of eight years old, who has not outlived the simple life, or that breath of God, which is the first enmity to the seed of the subtle serpent. 

At six I expounded Issi. liii. in the court-yard, and was greatly assisted to purge out the leaven of Calvin. I spent the evening in conference with those who desired to be of the Society, which was now begun in the name of Jesus Christ the Saviour of all men. I sang and prayed with them till ten; with the family till midnight. 

Sat., August 29th. I preached our Lord's seven last cries on the cross, and spoke to the men under sentence of death. God showed my thoughts were not as his thoughts; for the most hardened, whom I had least hopes of, appeared truly justified. He told Mr. Wells and me he was quite easy, had no fear of death, no ill-will to his prosecutors. "But had you never any fear of it" I asked. "Yes," he replied, "till I heard you preach: then it went away, and I have felt no trouble ever since." 

Who knoweth the power of divine love O gather this outcast of men, and show forth in him that thine arm is not shortened at all! 

I took horse with Mr. Wynn and Farley; reached the Passage by seven, the English shore by nine, and Bristol before midnight. 

Mon., August 31st. I met with a sincere woman, who did verily believe my brother to be a Papist, because, when she asked him, he did not deny it. I asked her, "Are you a Turk --Yes; for you do not answer, ' No.'" I showed her from hence the folly of her conclusion. Would a Jesuit scruple to lie However, I assured her now my brother was a true Protestant; and if it would be any farther satisfaction to her, should tell her so himself. 

I met the Kingswood bands, and rejoiced in their steadfastness; none having turned either to the right hand or the left, either to stillness or predestination. 

Wed., September 2d. I was sent for to Miss Gr., who has had no rest in her flesh since she left us Papists to follow Calvin. She often longed to return, and would sometimes come by stealth to hear the word. The first time her mother heard of it, she turned her out of doors, and has ever since treated her with true predestinarian meekness. All her relations joined in the same spirit; so that at last, by their oppression, they have fairly drove her distracted. 

Now they sent for me in all haste. Never did I see a more pitiable spectacle. She was altogether untractable to them, but did just whatever I desired her. I led her to her chamber, and returned to Mr. Hooper's; but at mid-night we were waked by her shrieks, and I was sent for again. She lay in a manner inexpressible. Such outcries and distortions I have never heard or seen. Every breath they thought would be her last. She prayed to the Virgin Mary, Queen of heaven, in words which I am sure the devil taught her; for she had never seen a mass-book. How justly does God suffer this stumbling-block for those who have been continually suggesting to her the lies which they now believe. I rebuked the lying spirit, and prayed the one Mediator, in his time, to bring her out of the furnace. This her relations afterwards represented as "unbewitching her." 

Thur., September 3d. I preached a second time at the prison on the lost sheep, for the sake of a poor woman under condemnation; and the next day, September 4th, on Christ crucified. His dying words came with power to many hearts, being applied by his own Spirit. 

Sat., September 5th. I heard that Justice Cr , and forty more, both the great vulgar and the small, had seized upon Mr. Cenniek's house, and threatened to take ours on Tuesday next. They forget whose bridle is in their jaws. 

Sun., September 6th. I preached morning and afternoon at Kingswood on our Lord's last cries; which sunk into the souls of many. At Baptist-mills I administered that antidote of spiritual pride, 1 Cor. x. 

I was astonished by a letter from my brother, relating his conference with the Apostle of the Moravians.* 

[* The "conference" which is here referred to is given at large by the Rev. John Wesley, in his printed Journal, under the date of September 3d, 1741.--EDIT.] 

If thou art he; but O, how fallen Z--Who would believe it of C. Z., that he should utterly deny all Christian holiness I never could, but for a saying of his, which I heard with my own ears. Speaking of St. James's Epistle, he said, "If it was thrown out of the canon, ego non restituerem!" 

Mon., September 7th. I would have preached at Newgate to the poor penitent thief, but Satan hindered. Thou fool! it is now too late; the prey is plucked out of thy teeth. Jesus hath found his lost sheep, and brought her home rejoicing. She was a sinner; but she is justified. 

I went after another, a backslider, who had returned to folly, and all outward wickedness. Now in her adversity she considered. God, who lifteth up them that are fallen, returned to her in sickness; and she hears the rod, and him that appointeth it. 

Tues., September 8th. Being commended by the church to the grace of God, I took horse at four with W. Hooper, for the Passage. I preached Christ crucified at Caldicut, to an house full of simple souls, though wet through with the hard rain. But I live by the Gospel. What would kill another, shall not hurt a Minister. By six God brought us safe to Cardiff, where we rejoiced with the little flock, in the sure word of life and grace through Christ Jesus. 

Wed., September 9th. I preached to the two condemned malefactors, and found them in the passage from death to life eternal. 

I rode by Wenvo to Fonmon, and rejoiced with that household of faith. I went to fetch our little Society from Aberthaw, and returned, singing, to the castle. I explained the Apostle's answer to the jailer: "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved." God gave me words to awaken some, who were lulled fast asleep by the opiate of final perseverance. 

Thur., September 10th. I read prayers at Porthkerry, and applied our Lord's words, Matt. xi. 5: "The blind receive their sight," &c. 

I preached again, from Acts iii., to the self-righteous predestinarians chiefly. Some of them afterwards complained to me, that I should say, if they fell from grace after justification, they had better never have been justified at all. Hinc illae lachrymae. I cannot allow them Christ's righteousness for a cloak to their sins. 

Fri., September 11th. I besought my guilty brethren at Cardiff, especially those who are to be executed to-morrow, to be reconciled unto God. I set out directly for Llantrissent, eight Welsh miles from Cardiff, and pointed them to the Son of man lifted up, "that whosoever believeth on him might not perish, but have everlasting life." I hasted back, shifted my wet clothes, and attended Mr. Wells and Thomas to the prison. I asked one of the malefactors, "Are you afraid to die" "No," he answered; "I should rejoice to die this moment." Both behaved as believing penitents. We had strong consolation in prayer; the amen and answer of God in our hearts. 

Sat., September 12th. I had only time at the Society to offer up a prayer for the prisoners. At five I went to them; the Sheriff being resolved to hurry them away at six, some hours before the usual time. He would hardly let them stay to receive the sacrament. Then he ordered them out, not allowing time to strike off their fetters. 

They were very calm and composed, nothing afraid of death, or its consequences. One of them assured me, if it was now left to his choice, he would rather die than live. 

I asked the reason, and he answered, "Was I to be any longer in this world, I might sin again." He also acknowledged that his punishment was just, not on account of the theft for which he was condemned, (as to which he persisted in his innocency to the last,) but for another offence of the same sort, for which the justice of man had never taken hold of him. 

Mr. Wells rode by the side of the cart; Mr. Thomas and I with the criminals in it. The Sheriff's hurry often endangered our being overturned, but could not hinder our singing, till we came to the place of execution. I spoke a few minutes to the people from Gal. ill 18:- "Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law," &c. Still I could 

not observe the least sign of fear or trouble on either of the dying men. They confessed their steadfast faith in Christ crucified; and are now, I make no doubt, with Him in paradise. 

I preached at night to a numerous congregation of gentry and others. God gives me favour in their sight. O that I could make them displeased with themselves ! 

Sun., September 13th. I preached at Cardiff, then at Wenvo; the third time at Porthkerry, and the last at Fonmon. The remainder of the night we passed admonishing one another in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs. 

Mon., September 14th. We sang on till two; then I rode to a revel at Dennis-Powis. It was one of the greatest in the country; but is now dwindled down to nothing. I preached Jesus, the Saviour of his people from their sins. We rejoiced in hope of his great salvation. 

Tues., September l5th. I was at another famous revel in Whitchurch, which lasts a week, and is honoured with the presence of the gentry and Clergy, far and near, I put myself in their way, and called, "Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light." I trust there was a great awakening among the dead souls. So again at Cardiff, while I showed the state of modern Christians in the church of Laodicea. 

Wed., September 16th. I exhorted the Society in private. One accursed thing is discovered, and removed,--their abominably wicked custom of selling on Sundays. 

I kept a watchnight at Fonmon, and expounded the ten virgins. We continued singing and rejoicing till two in the morning. O that all the world were partakers with us! 

Fri., September 18th. I rose at six, and took leave of our dear sister, who cheerfully parted with Mr. Jones, to visit our beloved colliers. 

Sat., September 19th. After exhorting and praying with the Society at Cardiff, I set out with Mr. Jones and Williams for Bristol. Thither the Lord brought us by seven in the evening, after a delightful journey. 

S+un., September 20th. Most of the Society were at St. James's sacrament. 

I carried Mr. Jones to Kingswood, where the Lord was mightily present in his own ordinance. At Baptist-mills I expounded the bloody issue. Great disturbance was made behind me, till I turned upon the disturbers, and by the law first, and then the Gospel, entirely silenced them. 

It was a glorious time at the Society, where God called forth his witnesses. Our guest was filled with consolation, and acknowledged that God was with us of a truth. 

I introduced him to the Leaders of the colliers, with whom he had sweet fellowship. I met the bands, and strongly urged them to press toward the mark. I read them a letter full of threatenings to take our house by violence. Immediately the power came down, and we laughed all our enemies to scorn. Faith saw the mountain full of horsemen and chariots of fire. Our brother from Wales was compelled to bear his testimony, and declare before all what God had done for his soul. "At that time, when the power of the Holy Ghost so overshadowed him," he assured them "all bodily sufFerings would have been as nothing. Neither would they feel them, if made partakers of the Holy Ghost, in the same measure." 

He warned us to prepare for the storm, which would surely fall upon us if the work of God went on. His artless words were greatly blessed to us all; and our hearts were bowed and warmed by the Spirit of love, as the heart of one man. 

Tues., September 22d. He would have carried me to some great friends of his in the city; and particularly to a Counsellor, about the threatened seizure. I feared nothing but helping myself, and trusting to an arm of flesh. Our safety is to sit still. However, at his importunity, I went with him a little way; but stopped, and turned him back, and at last agreed to accompany him to Justice Cr____, the most forward of our adversaries. 

He received us courteously. I said, I came to wait upon him in respect to his office, having heard his name mentioned among some who were offended at the good we did to the poor colliers; that I should be sorry to give any just cause of complaint, and willing to know from himself if such had been given; that many idle reports were spread, as if he should countenance the violence of those who had seized Mr.Cennick's house, and now threatened to take away the colliers' school. 

I caught up an expression he dropped, that it would make a good workhouse; and said, "It is a workhouse already." "Ay, but what work is done there" "We work the works of God, which man cannot hinder." "But you occasion the increase of our poor." "Sir, you are misinformed: the reverse of that is true. None of our Society is chargeable to you: even those who were so before they heard us, or who spent all their wages at the alehouse, now never go there at all, but keep their money to maintain their families; and have to give to those that want. Notorious swearers have now only the praises of God in their mouths. The good done among them is indisputable: our worst enemies cannot deny it. None who hears us continues either to swear or drink." "If I thought so," he hastily replied, in eodem luto haesitans, "I would come and hear you myself." I desired he would; said, the grace of God was as sufficient for him as for our colliers; and who knew but he might be converted among us 

I gave him to know, Mr. Jones was in the commission; who then asked him on what pretence they had seized Mr. Cennick's house. He utterly denied his having had any hand in it; (his own servant, by the way, was one of the foremost in pulling up the hedge, &c. ;) said, he should not at all concern himself, "for if what you do, you do for gain, you have your reward; if for the sake of God, he will recompense you. I am of Gamaliel's mind: ' If this counsel or work be of men, it will come to nought.'" "' But if it be of God,'" I proceeded, "' ye cannot overthrow it, lest haply ye be found to fight against God.' Follow therefore Gamaliel's advice: take heed to yourselves; ' refrain from these men, and let them alone.'" 

He seemed determined so to do: and thus, through the blessing of God, we parted friends. 

In our way home, I admired that hand which directs all our paths. I rejoiced at Bristol to hear that God had laid hold on poor William, Mr. Jones's man, who is under strong convictions of sin, and continually in tears. In the evening we found, under the word, that "there is none like unto the God of Jeshurun." It was a time of sweet refreshment. Just when I had concluded, my brother came in from London, as if sent on purpose to be comforted together with us. He exhorted and prayed with the congregation for another half-hour. Then we went to our friend Vigor's, and for an hour or two longer our souls were satisfied as with marrow and fatness, while our mouth praised God with joyful lips. 

 

 To Next Section