Sun., May 3d. I took my leave of the Foundery and fields for a short season; and on 

Mon., May 4th, set out for Bristol. I overtook Charles Perronet at Brentford, and rode on to Hungerford. 

Tues., May 5th. I received fresh strength among our colliers, and brethren in Bristol. 

Wed., May 6th. I took Charles Perronet to see the new Change, and picked up some lost sheep; one on the brink of the pit. 

Sat., May 9th. My namesake and charge was taken ill of a fever, which soon appeared to be the small-pox. 

Sun., May 10th. I stirred up the Society with forcible words, and greatly rejoiced with the faithful at our feast of love. 

Tues., May 12th. I gave the sacrament to my patient, who grows worse and worse. 

Fri., May 15th. I visited a brother, triumphing over death. He had found the door of hope opened the first time I prayed with him, and now is ready to depart in peace. 

Tues., May 19th. Expecting the turn of the distemper, I sat up with Charles. The Lord is pleased to try our faith and patience yet farther. 

Wed., May 20th. At Wick my text was, "In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed;" and surely we were all partakers of the blessing, in that hour. Near two hours we continued in tears of grief and joy. The Justice was as much affected as any of us. 

Fri., May 22d. At our watchnight I asked in faith, that the Lord would give his beloved sleep; and he heard and answered the prayer immediately. Our brother Perronet was then in the utmost danger, through the second fever, and delirious, for want of rest: ready to enter his rest eternal. But the Lord rebuked the fever, and he fell asleep, and waked late the next morning, as one raised from the dead. 

Sun., May 24th. God gave us, under the word, great strength and resolution against sin. 

Wed., May 27th. I preached at the Hall, on, "The good God pardon every one of you," &c.; and surely he showed us his great readiness so to do. 

Thur., May 28th. Ascension-day. We spent from four to seven in triumph with our Lord. 

Fri., May 29th. Having made strict inquiry into the life of each member of the Society, to-day I left out fifty of them, who have not adorned the Gospel. 

Mon., June lst. I rejoiced at Bath with our dear dying brother Yapp. He, blessed me, and blessed God that he had ever seen my face. Soon after we left him he returned to his Lord in paradise. 

Wed., June 3d. I preached at the chapel in West-street, and rejoiced for the abundant consolation which our Lord administered to us all. 

Thur., June 4th. I rode over to our friends at Shoreham, a joyful messenger of their son's recovery. 

Fri., June 12th. At St. Bartholomew's I expounded Isai. xl. 1; and wrapped them up in the promises. 

Sun., June 14th. I heard my brother in the fields, and was adding a word of confirmation, when our old friend Mr. Green began speaking from a table just behind us. I would not strive, but walked quietly away, and all our children with me. 

Sun., June 21st. Great multitudes attended in the fields to His cry front the cross, "Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by" 

Fri., June 26th. I expelled one who had taken a bribe for his vote. I hope there is not another like offender in all our Societies. 

Sat., June 27th. I prayed by our sister Somerset, just ready for the Bridegroom. I read prayers at St. Bartholomew's, and heard a true Gospel sermon from Mr. Perrenet. I preached there myself on Sunday, "Come, for all things are now ready." 

Mon., June 29th. I joined with Howel Harris, &c., in prayer, and groaned under the burden of this guilty nation. 

At Wapping the Lord gave testimony to his own word, "Him that cometh unto me, I will in no wise cast out." A woman cried out, and rushed into the vestry; but her cries continued all the time of preaching. I saw her afterwards, in great agony; for this time she is no dissembler, although she is Sarah Robinson! 

Fri., July 3d. We had our first watchnight at the chapel. I preached on, "Looking for, and hastening toward, him coming of the day of God." His blessing confirmed his word. One who had been slack, but was now returning, heard it, and went home, and died. 

Sun., July 4th. The whole congregation were in tears, or intriumph; crying after God, or rejoicing in his favour. The cloud rested upon us the whole time of communicating. In the evening there was a great shaking among the dry bones; and in the bands the God of all consolation showed himself. 

Wed., July 8th. I assisted Hr. Bateman at St. Bartholomew's; but was quite weighed down with the behaviour of the communicants, so contrary to the apostolical precept, "Let all things be done decently and in order." 

Sun., July 12th. Our sister Hoffman, setting sail for Jamaica, we commended to the grace of God, and felt we could never be separated from that soul, while she and we were united to Christ. 

Fri., July 17th. I gave the sacrament to a grievous backslider, now crying out of the deep for mercy. Soon after she departed in peace. 

Sat., July 18th. One received a fresh seal of pardon under the word this morning, who was before on the brink of destruction. 

Fri., July 24th. I expounded Rev. iv. at the watch-night. I have not lately known a more solemn season. The place was crowded with strangers, emboldened by the night to hear us. It was near one before we could part. 

Sun., July 26th. Many hearts were touched by the history of the returning prodigal. 

Sun., August 2d. My audience in the field seemed to feel the word; and much more those at the chapel, whom I strongly exhorted to continue in the ship. 

Mon., August 3d. In Mr. Riehards's school at Reading, I preached "the Lamb of God who taketh away the sin of the world." 

Wed., August 5th. I met the bands in Bristol; and the power of God broke in upon us wonderfully. 

Thur., August 6th. I found it again in singing with Miss Wells, Miss Burdock, and eight of our Preachers. 

Sun., August 9th. I preached from Luke xiv. 15 at the old orchard; (I think, for the first time;) and we had a great pouring out of the Spirit. It put me in mind of a like season which the first Quakers had at the same place, when many were convinced. 

Sun., August 16th. I preached again in Moorfields, on, "To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses," &c. 

Fri., August 21st. I received a second summons from my brother, hastening me to Ireland. 

Mon., August 24th. We parted at the Foundery in fervent prayer, particularly for the conversion of some Romish Priest. 

Wed., August 26th. I left my old host at Oxford, Mr. Evans, and stretched with Charles Pesonet to Huntley, seven miles beyond Gloucester. 

Thur., August 27th. Before five we renewed our strength and our labour. We overtook an hearer of Howel Harris, who conducted us within ten miles of Builth. For the rest of the way the river was our guide. Between eight and nine we found our brother Philips, and were glad soon after to betake ourselves to rest. 

Fri., August 28th. My brother not being come from Ireland, according to appointment, we concluded he was delayed by cross winds, and had an opportunity thereby of resting ourselves and our weary beasts. 

At nine I preached in the street, repentance and faith. The people behaved with great decency. Mr. Gwynne came to see me at Mr. Philips's, with two of his family. My soul seemed pleased to take acquaintance with them. We rode to Msesmynis church. I preached, and Mr. Williams after me in Welsh. At four I expounded the good Samaritan in the street; and He was present, binding up our wounds. I preached a fourth time at Garth, on, "Comfort ye, comfort ye my people." The whole family received us as messengers of God; and if such we are, they received Him that sent us. 

Sat., August 29th. I rode to Llandrindod-Wells, and called the burdened souls to Jesus. He gave me to speak both searching and comfortable words. Three Ministers were of my audience. I returned to Garth rejoicing. Still no news of my brother. While we were talking of him he came, and brought life and a blessing with him. 

Sun., August 30th. I preached on a tombstone in Builth churchyard; and again; on the prodigal son. Then at Garth, on the marks of the Messias, Matt. xi. 5: "The blind receive their sight," &c. 

Mon., August 31st. After preaching at noon in the churchyard, my brother set out for Bristol. I preached there at three, and invited a great multitude to the Gospel feast; then expounded at Garth Simon the Pharisee, and the woman that was a sinner. 

 

 To Next Section