Mon., January 1st, 1750. At four in the morning our room was excessively crowded, while I proclaimed the Gospel year of jubilee. We did not part without a blessing. 

Fri., January 12th. I preached (with the old power) on, "Said I not unto thee, if thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God " Generally, my hands hang down, and I am so feeble in mind, that I cannot speak. 

Sun., January 14th. The Spirit helped our infirmity at Kingswood sacrament. A daughter of our brother Grimshaw's was just departed in the Lord; being perfected in a short space. 

Wed., January 31st. We were waked at two by a clap of thunder, unusually loud and terrible. My partner was much frightened. 

Thur., February 1st. I walked with her to Dr. Middletows. The rain a little quickened our pace. 

Sat., February 3d. She miscarried. 

Sun., February 4th. I brought my friend Grimshaw home with me, comforted for his happy daughter. I had unlooked-for life in preaching. 

Thur., February 8th. There was an earthquake in London. 

Tues., February 18th. I preached with a little strength at Bearfield; and the next day with more at Freshford. The spirit of the people helped me. An old lady of four-score received me into her house. We spent the time in prayer and singing. Stephen Naylot, a poor backslider, had another call to repentance, and seemed resolved to close with it. I invited, a night, many burdened souls to Christ, and his healing power was greatly present, and refreshed every weary spirit. 

Sun., February 18th. I carried my sister Betsy to Kingswood; where the Lord visited us again, and feasted us at his table. 

Mon., February 19th. My wife had recovered strength for her journey. We set out with our sisters Betsy and Peggy; could not reach Newnham passage till past seven. It was then quite dark: the boat on the other side refused to come over. We were got to the edge of the bank, the usual place of embarking, when Providence sent a man to stop us. He informed us that the rains had choked up the river with two banks of sand, and where we were going was all quicksands. We followed him, with great difficulty, to another part of the river. My horse sunk up to the shoulders; but, with a violent plunge, struggled out. The boatmen at last took pity on us; came over, and with much pains carried us into the boat, and landed us safe on the opposite shore. 

By Wed. noon, February 21st, God conducted us safe to Ludlow. For the five following days I received fresh strength for the work, and rejoiced in some measure that the Gospel had free course. 

Tues., February 27th. I preached in their new room at Evesham; and not without a sensible blessing. I met my brother the next day at Oxford. 

Thur., March 1st. I rode to London. Ned Perronet supplied me with a lodging. 

Sun., March 4th. I visited old Lydia White, on her death-bed. She accosted me, "Thou blessed of the Lord, art thou come I did not expect to see my dear Minister till we met in paradise. You and your brother are the instruments of my salvation. I have known the grace of the Lord Jesus long ago: now I am entering into his glory. He has told me so. I am full of his joy now." Her words strengthened my hands, as I found at the chapel, speaking on those words, "Blessed is the man that endureth temptation." They sunk into many hearts. 

Mon., March 5th. I prayed by my sister Wright, a gracious, tender, trembling soul; a bruised reed, which the Lord will not break. 

Fri., March 9th. Many flocked to the morning word; and were yet more stirred up thereby. I have scarce ever seen so many at intercession. At the chapel I preached on the occasion, from Psalm xlvi., with very great awakening power. 

Sat., March 10th. I expounded Isai. xxiv., a chapter I had not taken much notice of, till this awful providence explained it: "Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof. The foundations of the earth do shake. The earth is utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved exceedingly. The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage; and the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it; and it shall fall, and not rise again." 

I prayed by our sister Lewis, quietly expecting her release. I preached at Snowsfields, and urged them to enter into the Rock, now the Lord is risen to shake terribly the. 

Sun., March 11th. My spirit and many others' seem revived by the late judgment. The word is with the accustomed power, both at London and Deptford, and wherever I minister it. 

Wed., March 14th. I found my sister Wright very near the haven; and again on Sunday the 18th, yet still in darkness, doubts, and fears, against hope believing in hope. I preached to a vast attentive multitude over our brother Hoy's grave. As he lived the life, he died the death, of the righteous. O might my last end be like his! 

Wed., March 21st. At four I called on my brother Wright, a few minutes after her spirit was set at liberty. I had sweet fellowship with her in explaining at the chapel those solemn words, "Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon withdraw itself; for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended." All present seemed partakers both of my sorrow and my joy. 

Mon., March 26th. I followed her to her quiet grave, and wept with them that wept. 

Wed., April 4th. I saw several happy souls, in spite of their feeble, sick, or pained bodies. One I visited yesterday, died in the faith soon after. 

Fear filled our chapel, occasioned by a prophecy of the earthquake's return this night. I preached my written sermon on the subject, with great effect, and gave out several suitable hymns. It was a glorious night for the disciples of Jesus. 

Thur., April 5th. At four I rose after a night of sound sleep, while my neighbours watched. I sent an account to M. G., as follows :-- 

"The late earthquake has found me work. Yesterday I saw the Westminster end of the town full of coaches, and crowds flying out of the reach of divine justice, with astonishing precipitation. Their panic was caused by a poor madman's prophecy: last night they were all to be swallowed up. The vulgar were in almost as great consternation as their betters. Most of them watched all night: multitudes in the fields and open places: several in their. Many removed their goods. London looked like a sacked city. A lady, just stepping into her coach to escape, dropped down dead. Many came all night knocking at the Foundery-door, and begging admittance for God's sake. Our poor people were calm and quiet, as at another time." 

Sat., April 7th. I visited a dying sister, speechless, yet full of earnest love, as her looks and signs confessed. Among the penitents, our Lord visited us in a spirit of prayer and contrition. 

Sun., April 8th. I buried our brother Somerset, who came to the grave as a ripe shock of corn in its season. He has now overtook his companion, and death can no more separate them. 

Mon., April 9th. I visited Mrs. C., at St. Anne's-hill; much delighted with the wood, much more with the company. I did not think there was any such creature upon earth, as a girl of twelve years old without guile and without vanity. 

Another was gathered into the garner. I buried her earthly part, for a short season. 

Sun., April 15th. I met Mr. Salmon's "Foreigner's Companion through the Universities of Cambridge and Oxford," printed 1748, and made the following extract, p. 25 :-- 

"The times of the day the University go to this church, are ten in the morning, and two in the afternoon, on Sundays and holidays, the sermon usually lasting about half an hour. But when I happened to be at Oxford, in 1742, Mr. Wesley, the Methodist, of Christ-Church, entertained his audience two hours, and, having insulted and abused all degrees, from the highest to the lowest, was in a manner hissed out of the pulpit by the lads." 

And high time for them to do so, if the historian said true; but, unfortunately for him, I measured the time by my watch, and it was within the hour: I abused neither high nor low, as my sermon, in print, will prove; neither was I hissed out of the pulpit, or treated with the least incivility, either by young or old. 

What then shall I sayto myold high-Church friend, whom I once so much admired ! I must rank him among the apocryphal writers, such as the judicious Dr. Mather, the wary Bishop Burnet, and the most modest Mr. Oldmixon. 

Fri., April 20th. I found my Sally well among her friends at Ludlow. She rejoiced my heart with her account of M. Leyson, whom she saw triumphant in her last hour. Here is another blessed soul gone to paradise with a good report of us. 

I continued ten or eleven days, mostly preaching every night and morning, here or at Leominster. The latter part of the time a prisoner of pain. 

 

 To Next Section