Sun., September 1st. I ventured to ride to church, where the Minister invited us all to the sacrament next Sunday; and afterwards made proclamation in the church-yard, that  no stranger should be admitted. He might as well have excepted me by name. But though I could not be admitted, a notorious drunkard was, as Mrs. Jones and other eye-witnesses told me next Sunday. He made much disturbance in the time of service, and was actually drunk when the Minister gave him the sacrament. 

Tues., September 3d. Mr. Gwynne and Mr. Philips, of Maesmynis, came to pay us a Christian visit. We had sweet fellowship till the 6th instant; when they departed without me, whom they came to fetch. 

Fri., September 6th. At the hour of intercession we found an extraordinary power of God upon us, and close communion with our absent brethren. Afterwards I found, by letters from London, that it was their solemn fast-day. The night we passed in prayer. I read them my heavy tidings out of the north. 

"The lion is come up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way." 

Sun., September 8th. The spirit of supplication was given us in the Society for His Majesty, King George; and, in strong faith, we asked his deliverance from all his enemies and troubles. 

Mon., September 9th. My three weeks' delightful confinement ended, and I returned to Cardiff:. 

Wed., September 11th. I rose, after a restless night, with a fever upon me; but was forced to take my bed again. How gladly would I have been taken from the evil to come; but, alas I my sufferings are scarce begun. 

Sat., September 14th. My fever left me, and my strength so far returned, that I could sit an horse with one behind me. Almost as soon as we set out, my supporter and I were thrown over the horse's head; but neither hurt. My lameness was much mended by three or four days' rest. 

Sun., September 22d. I met the poor shattered bands; and found the cause of their decay. One of them had drunk into the Quakers' spirit, and got all their form, which he laboured to bring into the Society. I preached at Wenvo, "That ye may be found of him in peace ;" then at Fenmen, on that great and terrible day of the Lord. His fear was mightily upon us; but at the Society his love constrained and quite overpowered us. For two hours we wept before the Lord, and wrestled for our Sodom. We shall hear of these prayers another day. 

Mon., September 28d. Having been often importuned to preach at Cowbridge, this morning I set out with sister Jones and others. The gentleman who had invited and promised me the church, took care to be out of town; but left word that the church-doors were open, and, if I pleased to preach there, no man would forbid me. I did not choose to go in a clandestine manner; but sent to the Church-wardens, who durst neither deny or grant leave. I therefore preached in a large hall, over against the place where my brother had been stoned. Many attended, and, I believe, were pricked at the heart. 

Wed., September 25th. After a tedious and dangerous passage, I got to shore, and soon after to Bristol. I heard the news confirmed, of Edinburgh being taken by the rebels. I saw all around in deep sleep and security. I warned our children with great affection. Our comforts, we expect, will increase with our danger. 

Thur., September 26th. Tidings came that General Cope was cut off with all his army. The room was crowded in the evening. I warned them, with all authority, to flee to the mountains, escape to the strong tower, even the name of Jesus. We seemed to have strong faith, that the Romish Antichrist shall never finally prevail in these kingdoms. 

Sun., September 29th. My subject at Kingswood was, "Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I will also keep thee in the hour of temptation," &c.; at Bristol, "Fear God, and honour the King." 

Tues., October 8th. Having left the Society fully warned, I rode to Bath, and exhorted them also to meet God in the way of his judgments. At noon I preached repentance and faith, at the Cross, to the people of Road. They drank in every word. When I said, "Put away the evil of your doings," several cried out, "We will, we will!" When I said, "Be drunk no more, swear no more," &e., they answered, "I will not swear: I will not be drunk again, as long as I live." The ale-house keepers and profligate young men are the most exemplary in their repentance. I dined at the Squire's, who seemed amazed, and half converted, at their change. 

I preached at four to a barn full of simple, hungry, seeking souls. They sunk under the hammer, and melted before the fire of the word. 

Wed., October 9th. I met them again in the barn, and wept with them that wept. All were stirred up, and made haste to escape into the ark, because of the stormy wind and tempest. 

I preached at Bearfield, after five years' absence, to many of my old hearers. They received the word with all readiness of mind, and will be, I doubt not, a people fearing God, and working righteousness. 

After preaching in Bath, a woman desired to speak with me. She had been in our Society, and in Christ; but lost her grace through the spirit of offence; left the fellowship, and fell by little and little into the depth of vice and misery. I called M. Naylor to hear her mournful account. She had lived some time at a wicked house in Avon-street; confessed it was hell to her, to see our people pass by to the preaching; knew not what to do, or how to escape. We bade her fly for her life, and not once look behind her. M. Naylor kept her with herself till the morning; and then I carried her with us in the coach to London; and delivered her to the care of our sister Davey. Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire 

Sun., October 13th. I warned them earnestly, both at the chapel and the Foundery, of the impending storm. 

Thur., October 17th. We had twenty of our brethren from Flanders to dine with us at the Foundery, and rejoiced in the distinguishing grace of God toward them. 

Fri., October 18th. I expounded Jer. iii. at the chapel. Some endeavored to disturb us, by throwing in a cracker; which many took for a gun discharged. In one minute the people recovered their hurry, and I went on for another half hour with double assistance. 

Sat., October 26th. I dined at Mrs. R's.* The family concealed their fright tolerably well. Mr. R. behaved with great civility. I foresee the storm my visit will bring upon him. 

[*Probably Mrs. Rich, the actress, whose husband was a proprietor of Covent-garden theatre.--EDIT.] 

Sun., November 3d. I found much life and solemn com fort among the bands. 

Mon., November 4th. At M. Sparrow's I waited some days, to renew my strength. 

Fri., November 8th. I preached first in Bexley church, then in the front of the camp near Dartford. Many of the poor soldiers gave diligent heed to the word. One of the most reprobate was pricked at the heart, and entered the Society. 

Sat., November 9th. A regiment passing by our door, I took the opportunity of giving each soldier a book. All, excepting one, received them thankfully. 

Sun., November 10th. I expounded Psalm xlvi., with great enlargement. An officer was present, and by his tears confessed the emotion of his heart. The same power attended the word in the evening. (Zeph. ii.) It was a solemn assembly, while we rejoiced in the release of an happy brother. 

Mon., November 11th. We had some of our brethren of the army at the select Society, and solemnly commended them to the grace of God, before they set out to meet the rebels. They were without fear or disturbance, knowing the hairs of their head are all numbered, and nothing can happen but by the determinate counsel of God. 

Sat., November 16th. I prayed with the penitents, all in tears. 

Sun., November 17th. I brought back (with the extra-ordinary blessing of God) two wandering sheep from the Germans. 

Sat., November 23d. I finished examining the classes with my brother, and rejoiced in their steadfastness. 

Sat., November 30th. I prayed by Bridget Armstead, full of desire to be dissolved. She sent for me some hours after. I found her in a great agony of temptation. We prayed, and God arose, and all his enemies were scattered. 

Sun., December lst. It was a season of love, a time of great refreshing, at the sacrament. 

Fri., December 6th. In reading my brother's last Appeal, I was drawn out into fervent prayer for him, myself, and all the children whom God hath given us. 

Mon., December 23d. I met my old friend J. G.* at my printer's, and appointed to meet him to-morrow at Dr. Newton's. I brought my brother with me. I found the Germans had quite estranged and stole away his heart; which, nevertheless, relented, while we talked over the passages of our former friendship: but he hardened himself against the weakness of gratitude. We could not prevail upon him to meet us again. 

[* Probably the Rev. John Gambold, who renounced his connexion with the Church of England, and became a Bishop in the Moravian Church.--EDIT.] 

Fri., December 27th. While I discoursed on that word, "The Spirit and the Bride say, Come," the whole congregation seemed to hear and answer the divine call. 

Sun., December 29th. I explained my commission, "To open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light," &c. An extraordinary power and blessing sealed the word. One of my audience was the famous Mr. Chambers, the honest Attorney! 

 

 To Next Section