But I cannot find such a treatise as this in any modern, any more than ancient language. And I am certain there is none such in the English tongue. What comes nearest to it, of any thing I have seen, is Mr. Ray’s “ Wisdom of God in the Creation ;“ Dr. Derhani’s “Physico and Astro-Theology ;“ Niewentyt’s “Religious Philosopher;” Mather’s “Christian Philosopher,” and “Nature Delineated.” But none of these, single, answers the design. And who will be at the pains to extract the substance of them all, and add the later discoveries, of which they had little knowledge, and therefore could take but little notice This is a desideratum still; and one that a lover of mankind would rejoice to see even tolerably supplied.

I am thoroughly sensible, there are many who have far more ability, as well as leisure, for such a work, than me. But as none of them undertake it, I have myself made some little attempt in the ensuing volumes. Herein following Mr. Derham’s plan, I divide the work into text and notes. [So it was in the first edition. Many of’ these are now taken into the text.] The text is in great measure translated from the Latin work of John Francis Buddœus, the late celebrated professor of philosophy, in the university of Jena, in Germany. But I have found occasion to retrench, enlarge, or alter every chapter, and almost every section. So that it is now, I believe, not only pure, containing nothing false or uncertain; but as full as any tract can be expected to be, which is comprised in so narrow a compass: and, likewise plain, clear, and intelligible to one of a tolerable understanding. The notes contain the sum of what is most valuable, in the above named writers: to which are added the choisest discoveries both of our own, and of the foreign societies. These likewise, I trust, are as plain and clear, as the nature of the things spoken will allow: although some of them, I know, will not be understood by an unlearned, or inattentive reader.

Mean time I must apprise the reader, that I have sometimes a little digressed, by reciting both uncommon appearances of nature, and uncommon instances of art: and yet this is not properly a digression, from the main design I have in view. For surely in these appearances also, the wisdom of God is displayed : even that manifold wisdom, which is able to answer the same ends by so various means. And those surprising instances of art do likewise reflect glory upon Him, whose spirit in man giveth that wisdom, whose inspiration teacheth understanding.

It will be easily observed, that I endeavr throughout, not to account for things; but only to describe them. I undertake barely to set down what appears in nature; not the cause of those appearances. The facts lie within the reach of our senses and understanding; the causes arc more remote. That things are so, we know with certainty: but why they are so, we know not. In many cases we cannot know; and the more we enquire, the more we are perplexed and entangled. God “ hath so done his works,” that we may admire and adore : but “ we cannot search them out to perfection.”

And does nothing open to us another prospect although one we do not care to dwell upon. Does not the same survey of the creation, which shews us the wisdom of God, shew the astonishing ignorance, and short-sighted-ness of man For when we have finished our survey, what do we know How inconceivably little! Is not every thinking man constrained to cry out, “and is this all Do all the, boasted discoveries of so enlightened an age, amount to no more than this “ Vain man would be wise ! But with how little success does he attempt it How small a part do we know even of the things that encompass us on every side I mean as to the very fact: for as to the reasons of almost every thing which we see, hear, or eel, after all our researches and disquisitions, they are hid in impenetrable darkness.

I trust, therefore, the following sheets may. in some degree, answer both these important purposes. It may be a means, on the one hand, of humbling the pride of man, by shewing that he is surrounded on every side, with things which he can no more account for, than for immensity or eternity: and it may serve on the other, to display the amazing power, wisdom, and goodness of the great Creator; to warm our hearts, and to fill our mouths with wonder, love and praise!

JOHN WESLEY

MARCH 25, 1775

I HAD finished the additions which I designed to make to the System of Natural Philosophy, before I saw Dr. Goldsmith’s “ History of the Earth and Animated Nature.” I had not read over the first volume of this, when I almost repented of having wrote any thing on the head. It seemed to me, that had he published this but a few years sooner, my design would have been quite superseded: since the subject had fallen into the hands of one, who had both greater abilities, and more leisure for the work. It cannot be denied, that he is a fine writer. He was a person of strong judgment, of a lively imagination, and a master of language; both of the beauty and strength of the English tongue.

Yet I could not altogether approve of this, that it seemed the design of the author, to say all he could upon every article; rather than all he should say. Hence arose his numerous and large digressions, making no inconsiderable part of his work. Hence his minute description of cows, horses, dogs; of cocks, hens, and pigeons, and of abundance of animals equally known to every man, woman and child: descriptions that are of little or no use, and no more entertaining than useful: at least useful only t the bookseller, by swelling the bulk, and consequently the price of his book.

Indeed this, the price of it, must ever remain a weighty objection to many readers. They cannot afford to purchase eight volumes, at six or seven shillings a volume. Ten or fifteen shillings they may possibly afford, for five or six smaller volumes;, especially when they contain all that is curious, or useful, in the far more costly work. Nay, I hope considerably more than all; as I have con-suited abundance of authors, and taken abundance of passages from them, whom, I apprehend, the doctor had not seen, I have another objection to this ingenious book: I doubt, some parts of it are not true. The author indeed has corrected many vulgar errors; but has, I fear, adopted others in their place. Many times he exposes the credulity of other writers: but does he not sometimes fall under the same imputation As where he terms presumption, to deny the existence of Bishop Pontopedan’s cracken, and the sea-serpent: the one a mile across, the other raising himself out of the water, higher than the main mast of a man of war! Could one who made the least scruple of rejecting these gross absurdities, accuse other writers of credulity

Mean time the accounts which he has given of many animals, being taken from the best, and latest authorities, are both more accurate, and more to be depended on, than any which had been published before. Many of these I have inserted in their places (only contracting thirty or forty pages into four or five); often in the room of those, which were less accurate, and probably, less authentic: as also several of his beautiful remarks, such as directly tended to illustrate that great truth, “0 Lord, how manifold are thy works! In wisdom hast thou made them all !“