1. As to the number of animals, the species of beasts, including also serpents, are not very numerous. Such as are certainly known and clearly described, are not above a hundred and fifty. And yet probably not many, that are of any considerable bigness, have escaped the notice of the curious. The species of birds, known and described, are near five hundred, and the species of fishes, secluding shell-fish, as many: but if the shell fish are taken in, above six times the number. How many of each genus remain undiscovered, we cannot very nearly conjecture. But we may suppose, the whole sum of beasts and birds to exceed by a third part, and fishes by one half, those that are known.

The insects, taking in the exanguious, both terrestrial and aquatic, may for number vie even with plants themselves. The exanguious alone, by what Dr. Lister has observed and delineated, we may conjecture cannot be less, if not many more, than three thousand species. Indeed this computation seems to be much too low: for if there are a thousand species in this island and the sea near it; and if the same proportion hold between the insects native of England, and those of the rest of the world, (about a tenth.) the species of insects on the whole globe, will amount to ten thousand.

Now if the number of creatures even in this lower world, be so exceeding great: how great, how immense must be the power and wisdom of Him that formed them all! For as- it argues far more’ skill in an artificer, ‘to be able to frame both clocks and watches, and pumps, and many other sorts of machines, than ho could display in making but one of these sort of engines, so the Almighty declares more of his wisdom, in forming such a multi-tilde of different sorts of creatures, and all with admirable and unreprovable art, than if he had created but a few.

2.Again, the same superiority of knowledge would be displayed, by contriving engines for the same purposes after different fashions, as the moving clocks or other engines by springs instead of weights: and he infinitely wise Creator, has shewn by many instances, that he is not confined to one only instrument, for the working one effect, but can perform the same thing by divers means. So, though most flying creatures have feathers, yet hath he enabled several to fly without them, as the bat, one sort of lizard, two sorts of fishes, and numberless sorts of insects. In like manner, although the air bladder in fishes seems necessary for swimming, yet are many so formed as to swim without it: as first, the cartilaginous kind, which nevertheless ascend and descend at pleasure, although by what means we cannot tell. Secondly, the cetaceous kind: the air which they receive into their lungs, in come measure answering the same end.

Yet again, though God has tempered the blood and bodies of most fished to their cold element, yet to shew he can preserve a creature as hot as beasts themselves in the coldest water, he has placed a variety of these cetaceous fishes in the northernmost seas. And the copious fat wherewith their bodies are enclosed, by reflecting the internal heat, and keeping off the external cold, keeps them warm even in the neighbourhood of the pole.

Another proof that God can by different means produce the same effect, is the various ways of extracting the nutritious juice out of the aliment, in various creatures.

in man and beasts, the food first chewed is received into the stomach, where it is concocted and reduced into chyle, and so evacuated into the intestines, where, being mixed with the choler and pancreatic juice, it is farther subtalized, and rendered so fluid, that its finer parts easily enter the mouth of the lacteal veins.

In birds there is no chewing: but in such as are not carnivorous, it is immediately swallowed into the crop, or anti-stomach, which is observed in many, especially piscivorous birds, where it is moistened by some proper juice, and then transferred to the gizzard, by the working of whose muscles, assisted by small pebbles, which they swallow for that purpose, it is ground small, and so transmitted to the intestines. 

-In oviparous reptiles, and all kind of serpents, there is neither chewing nor comminution in the stomach, but as they swallow animals whole, so they void the skins unbroken, having extracted the nutritious juices. Here, by the bye, we may observe the wonderful dilatability- of the throats and gullets of serpents. Two entire adult mice have been taken out of the stomach of an adder whose neck was no bigger than one’s little finger. 

Fishes, which neither chew, nor grind their meat, do, by means of a corrosive juice- in their stomach, reduce skin, bones and all into chyle. And yet this juice shews no acidity to the taste. But how mild soever it tastes, it corrodes all animal substances, as aqua fortis does iron.

3.Several eminent men have been of opinion, that all brutes are mere machines. This many be agreeable enough to the pride of man; but it is not agreeable to daily observation. Do we not continually observe in the brutes which are round about us, a degree of reason Many of their actions cannot be accounted for without it: as that commonly noted of dogs, that running before their masters, they will stop at the parting of the road, till they see which way their masters take. And when they have gotten what they fear will be taken from them, they run away and hide it. Nay, what account can be given, why a dog being to leap on a table, which he sees he cannot reach at once, if a stool or chair stands near it, first mounts that, and thence proceeds to the table If he ‘were mere clock work, and his motion caused by a material spring, that spring being once set to work, would carry the machine in a right line, towards the object that put it in motion.

Were it true, that brutes were mere machines, they could have no perception of pleasure or pain. But how contrary is this, to the doleful significations they give, when beaten or tormented How contrary to the common sense of mankind -For do we not all naturally pity them, apprehending them to feel pain just as we do Whereas no man is troubled to see a plant torn, or cut, or mangled how you please. And how contrary to scripture “ A righteous man regardeth the life of his beast: but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.” Prov. xii. 10. The former clause is usually rendered, a good man is merciful to his beast. And this is the true rendering, as appears by the opposite clause, that the wicked is cruel. Cruelty then may be exercised toward beasts. But this could not be, were they mere machines.

4.The natural instinct of all creatures, and the special provision made for some of the most helpless, do in a particular manner demonstrate the great Creator’s care.

First, what an admirable principle is the natural affection of all creatures toward their young By means of this, with what care do they nurse them up, thinking no pains too great to be taken for them, no danger too great to. be ventured, upon, for their guard and security—-! How will they caress them with- their affectionate notes, put food into their mouths, suckle them, cherish and keep them warm, teach them to pick and eat, and gather food for themselves: and, in a word,- perform -the whole part of So many nurses, deputed by the sovereign Lord of the world, to help- such young and shiftless creatures till they are able to shift for themselves! 

Other animals, insects, in particular, whose offspring is. too numerous for the parent’s provision, are so generated, as to need none of their care-. For they arrive immediately at their perfect state, and so are able to shift for themselves. Yet thus far the paternal instinct, equal to the most rational foresight, extends, that they do not drop their eggs any where, but in commodious places, suitable to their species.- And- some include in their nests, sufficient and agreeable. food, to serve their young till they come to maturity.

And for the young themselves. As the parent is not able to carry them about, to clothe them and dandle them, as man doth: how admirably is it contrived., that they can soon walk about, and begin to shift for themselves! How naturally do they hunt for their teat, suck, pick and take in their proper food!

On the other hand, the young of mane (as their parent’s reason is sufficient, to help, to nurse, feed and clothe them) are born utterly helpless, and are more absolutely than any creature, cast upon their parent’s care. 

Secondly, what admirable- provision is made for some of the most helpless creatures, at a time when they must otherwise utterly perish! The winter is an improper season to afford food-to insects and many other animals. When the fields, trees, and plants are naked,. and the air is chilled with frost; what would become of such animals, whose tender bodies are impatient of cold, and who are nourished only by the produce of the spring or summer To prevent their total destruction, the wise- Preserver of the world has so ordered, that in the first place, those which are impatient of cold, should have such a peculiar structure of body, as during that season, not to suffer any waste, nor consequently need any recruit. Hence many sorts of birds, and almost all insects, pass the whole winter without any food. And most of them without any respiration. It seems all motion of the animal juices is extinct. For though cut’ in pieces they do not awake, nor does any fluid ooze out at the wound. This sleep therefore is little less- than death, and their waking, than a resurrection: when the returning sun revives them and their food together.

The next provision is for such creatures as can bear the cold, but would want food. This is provided against in some, by- a long patience of hunger; in others, by their wonderful instinct, in laying up food before hand, against the approaching winter., By some of these, their little treasuries are at the proper-season well stock-ed with- provisions. Yea, whole fields are here -and there bespread with the fruits- of the neighbouring trees laid carefully up in the earth, and covered safe by provident little animals.

5. And what a prodigious act is it of the Creator a indulgence to the poor, shiftless irrationals, that they are already furnished with such clothing, as is proper to their place and business! With hair, with feathers, with shells, or with firm armature, all nicely accommodated, as well to the element wherein they live, as to their several occasions there. To beasts, hair is a commodious clothing; which together with the apt texture of their skin, fit them in all weathers to lie on the ground, and to do their service to-man. The thick and warm fleeces of others, are a good defence against the cold and wet, and also a soft bed: yea, and to many a comfortable covering for their tender young.

All the animals near Hudson’s Bay, are clothed wit-h a close, soft, warm fur. flut what is still more surprising, and what draws all attentive minds to admire the wisdom and goodness of Providence, is, that the very dogs and cats which are brought thither from England, on the approach of winter change their appearance, and acquire a much longer, softer and thicker coat of hair than they originally had.

And as hair is a commodious dress for beasts, so are feathers for birds. They are not only a good guard against wet and cold, but nicely placed every where on the body, to give them an easy passage through the air, and to waft them through that thin medium. How curious is their texture for lightness, and withal close and firm for strength! And where it is necessary they should be filled, what a light, medullary substance are they filled with So that even the strongest parts, far from being a load to the body, rather help to make it light and buoyant. And how curiously are the vanes of the feathers wrought, with capillary filaments, neatly interwoven together, whereby they are sufficiently close and strong, both to guard the body against the injuries of the weather, and to empower the wings, like so many sails, to make strong impulses on the air in their flight.

No less curious is the clothing of reptiles. How well adapted are the rings of some, and the contortions of the skin of others, not only to fence the body sufficiently, but to enable them to creep, to perforate the earth, and to perform all the offices of their state, better than any other covering

Observe, for instance, the tegument of the earth-worms, made in the completest manner, for making their passage through the earth, wherever their occasions lead them. Their body is made throughout- of small rings, which have a curious apparatus of muscles, that enable them with great strength to dilate, extend, or contract their whole body. Each ring is likewise armed with stiff, sharp prickles, which they can open at pleasure, or shut close to their body. Lastly, under- their skin there is a slimy juice, which they emit as-occasion requires, to lubricate the body, and facilitate their passage into the earth. By all these means they are enabled, with ease and speed, to work themselves into the earth, which they could not do, were they covered- with hair, feathers, sea-lea, or such clothing, like any of the other creatures.

How wisely, likewise, are the inhabitants of the waters clothed! The shells of some fishes, are. a strong guard to their tender bodies, and consistent enough with their slow motion: while the scales and fins of others afford them an easy and swift passage through the waters. 

6. Admirable, likewise, is the sagacity of brute animals in the conveniency -and method of their habitations. Their architectural skill herein, exceeds all the skill of man. With what inimitable art do some of these poor, untaught creatures, lay a parcel of rude, ugly sticks or straws together! with what curiosity do they line them within, yea, wind and place every hair, feather, or lock of wool, to guard and keep warm the tender bodies, both of themselves and their young ! And with what art do they thatch over and coat their nests without, to- deceive the eye of the spectators, as well as to guard and fence them against the injuries of the weather.

Even insects, those little, weak, tender creatures, what artists are they in building their habitations! How does the bee gather its comb from various flowers, the wasp from solid timber With what accuracy do other insects perforate the earth, wood, yea, stone itself! Farther yet, with what care and neatness do most of them line their houses within, and seal them up and fence them without! How artificially do others fold up the leaves of trees; others glue light bodies together, and make floating houses, to transport themselves, to and fro, as their various occasions require

7. Another instance of the wisdom of Him that made and governs the world, we have in the balance of creatures. The whole surface of the terraqueous globe, can afford room and support, to no more than a determinate number of all sorts of creatures. And if they should increase to double or treble the number, they must starve or devour one another. To keep the balance even, the Author of nature has determined the life of all creatures to such a length, and their increase to such a number, proportioned to their use in the world. The life indeed of some hurtful creatures is long; of the lion in particular. But then their increase is exceeding small: and by that means they do not overstock the world. On the other hand, where the—increase is great, the lives of those creatures are generally short. And beside this, they are of great use to man, either for food or on other occasions.

This indeed should be particularly observed, as a signal instance of Divine Providence, that useful creatures are produced in great plenty: others in smaller numbers. The prodigious increase of insects, both in and out of the waters may exemplify the former observation. For innumerable creatures feed upon them, and would perish, were it not for this supply. And the latter is confirmed by what many have- remarked: that creatures of little use, or by their voraciousness pernicious, either seldom bring forth, or have but one or two at a birth.

8. How remarkable is the destruction and reparation of the whole animal creation! The surface of the earth is the inexhaustible source whence both man and beast derive their subsistance. Whatever lives, lives on what vegetates, and vegetables in their turn, live, on whatever has lived or vegetated: it is impossible for any thing to live, without destroying something else. It is thus only that animal can subsist themselves, and propagate their species. 

God, in creating the first individual of each species, animal or vegetable, not only gave a form to the dust of the earth, but a principle of life, enclosing in each, a greater or smaller quantity of original particles, indestructible and common to all organized beings. These pass from body to body, supporting the life, and ministering to the nutrition and growth of each. And when any body is reduced to ashes, these original particles, on which death hath no power, survive and pass into other beings, bringing with them nourishment and life. Thus every production, every renovation, every increase by generation or nutrition, supposes a preceding destruction, a conversion of substance, an accession of these organical particles, which ever subsisting in an equal number, render nature always equally full of life.

The -total quantity of life in the universe is therefore perpetually the same. And whatever death seems to destroy, it destroys no part of that primitive life, which is diffused through all organized beings. Instead of injuring nature, it only causes it to shine with the greater lustre. If death is permitted to cut down individuals, it is only, in order to make of the universe, by the reproduction of beings, a theatre ever crowded, a spectacle ever new. But it is never permitted to destroy the most inconsiderable species.

That beings may succeed each other, it is necessary that there be a destruction among them. Yet, like a provident mother, nature in the midst of her inexhaustible abundance, has prevented any waste, by the few species of carnivorous animals, and the few individuals of each species; multiplying at the same time both the species and individuals of those that feed on herbage. In vegetables she seems to be profuse, both with regard to the number and fertility of the species.

In the sea, indeed, all the species are carnivorous. -But though they ate perpetually preying upon, they never destroy each other, because their fruitfulness iš equal to their depredations.

“Thus, through successive ages stands,

Firm fix’d thy Providential care!

Pleas’d with the works of thine own hands

Thou dost the wastes of the repair.”

9. I add a-few more reflections on the world in general. The same wise Being, who was pleased to make man, prepared for him also an habitation so advantageously placed, that the heavens and the rest of the universe might serve it both as an ornament and a covering. He constructed likewise the air which man- was to breathe, and the fire which was to sustain his life. He prepared also metals, salts, and all terrestrial elements to renew, and maintain throughout all ages, whatever might be on any account necessary for the inhabitants of the earth.

The same Divine Ruler is manifest in all the objects that compose the universe. It is he that caused the dry land- to appear, above the surface of the ocean, that gauged the capacity of that. amazing reservoir,’ and proportioned it to the fluid it contains. He collects the rising vapours, and causes them to distil in gentle showers. At his command the sun darts his enlivening rays, and the winds scatter the noxious effluvia, which if they were collected together might destroy the human race.

He formed those hills and lofty mountains which receive and retain the water within their bowels, in order to distribute it with economy to the inhabitants of the plains, and to give it such an impulse, as might enable it to overcome the unevenness of the lands, and convey it to the remotest habitations.

He spread under the plains, beds of clay, or compact earths, there to stop the waters, which after a great rain, make their way through innumerable little passages. These sheets -of water frequently remain in a level with the neighbouring rivers, and fill our wells with their redundancy, or as those subside, flow into them again.

He proportioned the variety of plants in each country, to the exigencies of the inhabitants, and adapted the variety of the soils, to the nature of those plants.

He endued numerous animals with mild dispositions, to make them the domestics of man: and taught the other animals to govern themselves, with an aversion to dependence, in rder to continue their species without loading man with too many cares.

If we more nearly survey the animal and vegetable world, we find all animals and plants have a certain and determined form, which is invariably the same. So that if a monster ever appear, it cannot propagate its kind, and introduce a new species into the universe. Great indeed is the variety of organized bodies. But their number is limited. Nor i-s it possible to add a new genus either of plants or animals, to those of which God has created the germina, and determined the form.

The same Almighty power has created a precise number of simple elements, essentially different form each other, and invariably the same. By these he varies the scene of the Universe and at the same time prevents its destruction, by the very immutability. of the nature and number of these elements. So that the whole is for ever changed, and yet eternally the same. 

Yet if we would account for the origin of these elements, we are involved in endless uncertainty. We can only say, he who has appointed their different uses in all ages, has rendered those uses infallible, by the impossibility of either destroying or increasing them. 

Herein we read the characters of his power, which is invariably obeyed; of his wisdom, which has abundantly provided for every thing; and of his tender kindness toward man, for whom he has provided services equally various and infallible. It is an additional proof of his continual care of his creatures, that though every thing be composed of simple elements, all placed within our reach, yet no power is able to destroy the least particle of them. Nothing but- the same cause which was able to give them birth, can annihilate them, or change their nature. In truth, the design and will of the- Creator, is the only physical cause of the general economy of the world: the only physical cause of every organized body, every germen that flourishes in it; the only physical cause of every minute, elementary particle, which enters into the composition of all.

We must not then expect ever to have a clear and full concept tion of effects, natures, and causes. For where is the thing which we can fully conceive We can no more comprehend either what body in general is, or any particular body, suppose a mass of clay, or a ball of lead, than what a spirit, or what God is. 

If we turn our eyes to the minutest parts of animal life, we shall be lost in astonishment! And though every thing is alike easy to the Almighty, yet to us it is matter of the highest wonder, that in those specks of life, we -find a greater number of members to be put in motion, more wheels and pullies to be kept going, and a greater variety of machinery, more elegance and workmanship (so to speak) in the composition, more beauty and ornament in the finishing, than are seen in the enormous bulk of the crocodile, the elephant, or the whale. Yea, they seem to be the effects of an art, as much more exquisite as the- movements of a watch are, than those of a coach or waggon.

Hence, we learn, that an atom, to God, is as a world;’ and a world but as an atom: just’ as to him one day is a thousand years; and a thousand years but as one day. Every species likewise of these animalcula may serve to correct our pride, and shew how inadequate our notions are, to the real nature of -things.- How extremely little can we possibly know, either of the largest or smallest part of the creation We are furnished with -organs capable of discerning, to a certain degree, of great or little only. All beyond is-as far beyond the reach of our conceptions, as if it had never existed. 

Proofs of a wise, a good and powerful Being are indeed deducible from every thing around’ us: but the extremely great, and the extremely small, seem to furnish us with those that are most Convincing. And, perhaps, if duly considered, the fabric of a world, and the fabric of a mite, nay be found equally striking and’ conclusive. 

Glasses discover to us numberless kinds of living creatures, quite indiscernable to the naked eye. And how many thousand kinds may there be, gradually decreasing in size, which we -cannot see by any help whatever Yet to all these we must believe God has not only appointed the most wise means for preservation and propagation, but has adorned them with beauty equal at least to any thing our eyes have seen.

In short, the world around us is the mighty volume wherein God hath declared himself. Human languages and characters are different in different nations. And those of one nation are not understood by the rest. But the book of nature is written in an universal character, which every man may read in his own language. It Consists not of words, but things which picture out the Divine perfections. The firmament every where expanded, with all its stary host, declares the immensity and magnificence, the power and wisdom of its Creator. Thunder, lightning, storms, earthquakes and volcanos, shew the terror of his wrath. Seasonable rains, sunshine and harvest, denote his bounty and goodness, and demonstrate how he opens his hand, and fills all living things with plenteousness. The constantly succeeding generations of plants and animals, imply the eternity of their first cause. Life subsisting in millions of different forms, shews the vast diffusion of this animating power, and death the infinite disproportion between him and every living thing.

Even the actions of animals are an eloquent and a pathetic language. Those that want the help of man, have a thousand engaging ways, which, like the voice of God speaking to his heart, command him to preserve and cherish them. In the mean time, the motions or looks of those-which might do him harm, strike him with, terror, and warn him, either to fly from or arm himself against them. Thus it is, that every part of nature directs us to nature’s God.

10. The reader will easily excuse my concluding this chapter, also, with an extract from Mr. Hervey. 

In all the animal world, we find no tribe, no - individual, neglected by its Creator, -Even the ignoble creatures are most wisely circumstanced, and most liberally accommodated.

They all generate in that particular season, which supplies them with a stock of provisions, sufficient not only for them selves, but for their increasing families. The sheep can, when there is herbage to fill their uciders, and create milk for their lambs. The birds batch their young, when new-born insects swarm on every side. So that the caterer, whether it be male or female parent, needs only to alight on the ground, or make a little excursion into the air, and find a feast ready dressed- for the mouths at home. 

Their love to their offspring, while they are helpless, is invincibly strong: whereas the moment they are able to shift for themselves, it vanishes as though it had never been. The hen that marches at the head of her little brood, would fly at a xnastiff in their- defence. Yet, within a few weeks, she -leaves them to the wide world, and does not even know them any more.

If the God of Israel inspired Bezaleel and Aholiah “ with wisdom and knowledge in all manner of workmanship,” the God of nature has not been wanting, in his instructions to the fowls of the air. The skill with which they erect their houses, and adjust their apartments is inimitable. The caution with which they hide their abodes from the searching eye, or intruding hand, is admirable. No general, though fruitful in expedients, could build so commodious a lodgement. Give the most celebrated artificer the same materials, which these weak and unexperienced creatures use; let a Jones or a Demoivre have only some rude stones or ugly sticks, a few bits of dirt or scraps of hair, a lock of wool, or a coarse sprig of moss; and what works could they produce

We extol the commander, who knows how to take advantage of the ground; who by every circumstance embarrasses the forces of his enemy, and advances the success of his own. Does not this praise belong to the feathered leaders, who fix their pensile camp, on the-dangerous branches that wave aloft in the air, or dance over the stream By this means the vernal gales rock their cradle, and the murmuring waters lull the young, while both concur to terrify their enemies, and keep them at a distance. Some hide their little household from view, andst the shelter of entangled furze. Others remove it from discovery, in the centre of a thorny thicket. And by one stratagem or anotimer they are generally as secure as if they intrenched themselves in the earth.

If the swan has large sweeping wings, and a copious stock of feathers, to spread over his callow young, the wren makes up by contrivance what is wanting in her bulk, Small as she is, she will be obliged to nurse up a very numerous issue. Therefore with surprising judgment she designs, and with-wonderful diligence finishes her nest, It is a neat oval, bottomed and vaulted over with a regular concave: within made soft with down, without thatched with moss, only small aperture left for hem’entrance, By this means the enlivening heat of bet body is greatly increased during the time of incubation. And her young no sooner burst the shell, than they find themselves screened from the annoyance of the weather, and comfortably reposed, till they gather strength in warmth of a bagnio.

Perhaps we have been accustomed to look upon insects, as so. many rude scraps of creation. But if we examine them with attention they will appear some of the most polished pieces of divine workmanship. Many of them are decked with the richest finery. Their eyes are an assemblage of microscopes; the common fly, for instance, who surrounded with enemies, has neither strength to resist; nor a place to retreat to secure herself. For this reason she has need to be very vigilant, and always upon her guard. But her head is so fixed that it cannot turn to, see what passes, either behind or around her Piovidence, therefore, has given her, not barely a retinue, but more than a legion of eyes, insomuch that a single fly is supposed to be the mistress of no less than eight thousand. By the help of this truly amazing apparatus, she sees on every side, with the utmost ease and speed, though without any motion of the eye, or flexion of the neck.

The dress of insects is a vesture of resplendant colours, set with an arrangement of the brightest gems. Their wings are the finest expansion imaginable, compared to -which,- lawn is as coarse as sackcloth. The cases which enclose their wings, glitter with the finest varnish, are scooped into ornamental flutings, are studded with radiant spots, or pinked with elegant holes. Not one but is endued with weapons to seize their prey, and dexterity to escape their foe, to dispatch the business of their station, and enjoy the pleasure of their condition.

What if the elephant is distinguished by his huge proboscis The use of this is answered in these his meaner- relations, by the curious feelers, remarkable, if not for their enormous size, yet for their ready flexion and quick sensibility. By these they explore their way in the darkest road: by these they discover and avoid whatever might defile their neat apparel, or endanger their tender lives. 

Every one admires the majestic horse. With what rapid career doe.s lie bound along the plain! Yet the grasshopper springs forward with a bound abundantly more impetuous. The ant tpo, in proportion to its size, excels him both in swiftness and strength: and will climb precipices, which the most courageous courser dares not attempt to scale. If the snail moves more slowly, she has, however,, no need to go the same way twice over: because, whenever she departs, wherever she removes, she is always at home.

The eagle, it is true, is priviledged with pinions that outstrip the wind. Yet neither is that poor outcast, the groveling mole, disregarded by divine Providence. Because she is to dig her cell in the earth, her paws serve for a pick-axe and spade. Her eye is sunk- deep into its socket, that it may not be hurt by her rugged situation. And as it needs very little light, she has no reason to complain of her dark abode. So that her subterranean habitation, which some might call a dungeon, yields her all the safety of a fortified castle, and-all the delights of a decorated grot. 

Even -the spider, though abhorred by man, is the care of all sustaining Heaven. She is to support herself by trepanning the wandering fly. Suitably to her employ, she has bags of glutinous moisture. From this she spins a clammy thread, and weaves it into a tenaceous net. This she spreads in the most opportune place. But knowing her appearance would deter him. from approaching, she then retires out of sight. Yet she’ constantly keeps within distance; so as to receive immediate intelligence when any thing falls into her toils, ready to spring out in the very instant. And it is observable, when winter chills the air, and no more insects rove through it, knowing her labour would be in vain, she leaves her stand, and discontinues her work.

I must not forget the inhabitants of the hive. The bees subsist as a regular community. And their indulgent Creator has given them all implements necessary either for building their combs, or composing their honey. They have each a portable vessel, in which they bring home their collected sweets: and they have the,, most commodious store-houses, wherein they deposite them. They readily distinguish every plant, which affords materials for their business; and- are complete practitioners in the arts of separation and refinement. They are aware that the vernal bloom and summer sun continue but for a season. Therefore, they improve to the utmost every shining hour, and lay up a stock sufficient to supply the whole state, till their flowery harvest returns. 

If the master of this lower creation is ennobled’ with the powers of reason, the meanest classes of sensitive beings, are endued with the faculty of instinct: a sagacity which is neither derived from observation, nor waits the finishing of experience: which without a tutor teaches them all necessary skill, and enables them without a pattern to perform every needful operation. And what is more remarkable, it never misleads them, either into erroneous principles, or pernicious practices: nor ever fails them- in the most nice and difficult of their undertakings.

Let us step into another element, and just visit the watery world. There is not one among the innumerable myriads, that swim the boundless ocean, but is watched over by the Sovereign eye, and is supported by his Almighty hand. He has condescended even to beautify them. He has given the most exact proportion to their shape, the gayest colours to their skin, and a polished surface to their scales. The eyes of some are surrounded with a scarlet circle: the back of others diversified with crimson stains. View them when they glance along the stream, or when they are fresh from their, native brine, the silver is not more bright, nor the rainbow more glowing than their vivid, glossy hues.

But as they have neither hands nor feet, how can they help themselves, or escape their enemies By the beneficial, as well as ornamental furniture of fins. These, when expanded, like masts above, and ballast below, poise their floating bodies, and keep them steadily upright. They are likewise greatly assisted by the flexibility and vigorous activity of their tails; with which they shoot through the paths of the sea, swifter than a vessel with all its sails. But we are lost in wonder at the exquisite contrivance and delicate formation of their gills: by which they are accommodated, even in that dense medium, with the benefits of respiration! A piece. of mechanism this, indulged to the meanest of the fry: yet infinitely surpassing, in the fineness of its structure and operation, whatever is curious in the works of art, or commodious in the palaces of princes.