Upon Parting with His Friends. [Part] I [Part] II
Source: Hymns and Sacred Poems (1740), Part I
Author: Charles Wesley (attributed)
---
When will the dear deliv’rance come?
Period of all my pain and strife!
O that my soul, which gasps for home,
Which struggles in the toils of life,
Ease, and a resting place could find,
And leave this world of woe behind!
O that the bitterness were past,
The pain of life’s long ling’ring hour!
While snatch’d from passion’s furious blast,
And sav’d from sorrow’s baleful pow’r,
I mock the storm, out-ride the wave,
And gain the harbour of the grave.
Bless’d, peaceful state! Where, lull’d to sleep,
The suff’rer’s woes shall all be o’er!
There plaintive grief no more shall weep,
Remembrance there shall vex no more;
Nor fond excess, nor pining care,
Nor loss, nor parting shall be there!
[Part] II.
O holy, holy, holy Lord!
Righteous in all thy ways art thou!
I yield and tremble at thy word,
Beneath thy mighty hand I bow,
I own, while humbled in the dust,
I own the punishment is just.
Joy of my eyes the creature was;
Desired;--but O! Desir’d for thee!
Why feel I then th’ imbitter’d loss?
Late in thy judgment’s light, I see
Whom now thy stroke hath far remov’d,
I lov’d--alas! Too dearly lov’d!
And can I see my comfort gone,
(My all of comfort here below)
And not allow a parting groan,
And not permit my tears to flow?
Can I forbear to mourn and cry?
No--let me rather weep and die.
Dear, lovely, gracious souls, to me
Pleasant your friendliness has been;
So strange your love, from dross so free,
The fountain in the stream was seen;
From heaven the pure affection flow’d,
And led, from whom it sprang, to God.
To him thro’ earth-born cares ye pass,
To him your loosen’d souls aspire:
Glory to God’s victorious grace!
O could I catch the sacred fire,
Your shining steps from far pursue,
And love, and weep, and part like you.
Partners of all my griefs and joys,
Help me to cast on God my care,
To make his will my only choice,
Away the dear right eye to tear,
The wise decree with you t’ adore,
To trust, submit, and grieve no more.
O let your prayers the Saviour move,
In love my spirit to renew!
O could I taste the Saviour’s love,
Gladly I then should part with you;
My all triumphantly resign,
And lodge you in the arms divine.