The 53rd Chapter of Isaiah
Source: Hymns and Sacred Poems (1739), Part I
Author: Charles Wesley (attributed)
---
1 Who hath believ’d the tidings? Who?
Or felt the joys our words impart?
Gladly confess’d our record true,
And found the Saviour in his heart?
Planted in nature’s barren ground,
And cherish’d by Jehovah’s care,
There shall th’ immortal seed be found,
The root divine shall flourish there!
2 See the desire of nations comes;
Nor outward pomp bespeaks him near,
A veil of flesh the God assumes,
A servant’s form he stoops to wear;
He lays his every glory by;
Ignobly low, obscurely mean,
Of beauty void, in reason’s eye,
The source of loveliness is seen.
3 Rejected and despis’d of men,
A Man of Griefs, inur’d to woe;
His only intimate is pain,
And grief is all his life below.
We saw, and from the irksome sight
Disdainfully our faces turn’d;
Hell follow’d him with fierce despight,
And earth the humble abject12 scorn’d.
4 Surely for us he humbled was,
And griev’d with sorrows not his own:
Of all his woes were we the cause,
We fill’d his soul with pangs unknown.
12Ori., “object”; corrected in 2nd edn. (1739) and following.
Yet him th’ offender we esteem’d,
Stricken by heaven’s vindictive rod,
Afflicted for himself we deem’d,
And punish’d by an angry God.
5 But O! With our transgressions stain’d,
For our offence he wounded was;
Ours were the sins that bruis’d and pain’d
And scourg’d, and nail’d him to the cross.
The chastisement that bought our peace,
To sinners due, on him was laid:
Conscience be still! Thy terrors cease!
The debt’s discharg’d, the ransom’s paid.
6 What tho’ we all as wandring sheep
Have left our God, and lov’d to stray,
Refus’d his mild commands to keep,
And madly urg’d the downward way;
Father, on him thy bolt did fall,
The mortal law thy Son fulfill’d,
Thou laid’st on him the guilt of all,
And by his stripes we all are heal’d.
7 Accused his mouth he open’d not,
He answer’d not by wrongs opprest;
Pure tho’ he was from sinful spot
Our13 guilt he silently confest!
Meek as a lamb to slaughter led,
A sheep before his shearers dumb
To suffer in the sinner’s stead
Behold the spotless victim come!
8 Who could his heavenly birth declare
When bound by man he silent stood,
When worms arraign’d him at their bar,
And doom’d to death th’ eternal God!
13Ori., “What”; corrected in 2nd edn. (1739) and following.
Patient the sufferings to sustain
The vengeance to transgressors due,
Guiltless he groan’d and died for man:
Sinners rejoice, he died for you!
9 For your imputed guilt he bled,
Made sin a sinful world to save;
Meekly he sunk among the dead:
The rich supplied an honour’d grave?
For O! Devoid of sin, and free
From actual or intail’d offence,
No sinner in himself was he,
But pure and perfect innocence.
10 11 Yet him th’ Almighty Father’s will
With bruising chastisements pursu’d,
Doom’d him the weight of sin to feel,
And sternly just requir’d his blood.
But lo! The mortal debt is paid,
The costly sacrifice is o’er,
His soul for sin an offering made
Revives, and he shall die no more.
His numerous seed he now shall see,
Scatter’d thro’ all the earth abroad,
Blest with his immortality,
Begot by him, and born of God.
Head to his church o’er all below
Long shall he here his sons sustain;
Their bounding hearts his power shall know,
And bless the lov’d Messiah’s reign.
12 ’Twixt God and them he still shall stand
The children whom his Sire hath given,
13 14 15 Their cause shall prosper in his hand
While RIGHTEOUSNESS looks down from heaven.
While pleas’d he counts the ransom’d race,
And calls and draws them from above;
The travail of his soul surveys,
And rests in his redeeming love.
’Tis done! My justice asks no more,
The satisfaction’s fully made:
Their sins he in his body bore;
Their surety all the debt has paid.
My righteous servant and my son
Shall each believing sinner clear,
And all, who stoop t’ abjure their own,
Shall in his righteousness appear.
Them shall he claim his just desert,
Them his inheritance receive,
And many a contrite humble heart
Will I for his possession give.
Satan he thence shall chase away,
Assert his right, his foes o’ercome;
Stronger than hell, retrieve the prey,
And bear the spoil triumphant home.
For charg’d with all their guilt he stood,
Sinners from suffering to redeem,
For them he pour’d out all his blood,
Their substitute, he died for them.
He died; and rose his death to plead,
To testify their sins forgiven—
And still I hear him interceed,
And still he makes their claim to heaven!
