Christ the Friend of Sinners
Source: Hymns and Sacred Poems (1739), Part II
Author: Charles Wesley (attributed)
---
1 Where shall my wond’ring soul begin?
How shall I all to heaven aspire?
A slave redeem’d from death and sin,
A brand pluck’d from eternal fire,
How shall I equal triumphs raise,
And sing my great Deliverer’s praise!
2 O how shall I the goodness tell,
Father, which thou to me hast show’d,
That I, a child of wrath, and hell,
I should be call’d a child of God!21
Should know, should feel my sins forgiven,
Blest with this antepast of heaven!
20This is likely the “hymn on his conversion” that Charles records writing in MS Journal (May 23, 1738).
21Charles Wesley changes line in All in All (1761) to read: “Should now be called a child of God.”
3 And shall I slight my Father’s love,
Or basely fear his gifts to own?
Unmindful of his favours prove?
Shall I the hallow’d cross to shun
Refuse his righteousness t’ impart
By hiding it within my heart?
4 No—tho’ the antient dragon rage
And call forth all his hosts22 to war,
Tho’ earth’s self-righteous sons engage;
Them, and their god alike I dare:
Jesus the sinner’s friend proclaim,
Jesus, to sinners still the same.
5 Outcasts of men, to you I call,
Harlots and publicans, and thieves!
He spreads his arms t’ embrace you all;
Sinners alone his grace receives:
No need of him the righteous have,
He came the lost to seek and save!
6 Come all ye Magdalens in lust,
Ye ruffians fell in murders old;23
Repent, and live: despair and trust!
Jesus for you to death was sold;
Tho’ hell protest, and earth repine,
He died for crimes like yours—and mine.
7 Come O my guilty brethren come,
Groaning beneath your load of sin!
22“Hosts” changed to “host” in 4th edn. (1743) and 5th edn. (1756).
23This line is borrowed from Samuel Wesley Jr., “Upon Bishop Atterbury’s Birthday,” st. 6, Poems (1863),
433.
His bleeding heart shall make you room,
His open side shall take you in.
He calls you now, invites you home—
Come, O my guilty brethren, come!
8 For you the purple current flow’d
In pardons from his wounded side:
Languish’d for you th’ eternal God,
For you the Prince of Glory dy’d.
Believe; and all your guilt’s24 forgiven,
Only believe—and yours is heaven.
