Justified, But Not Sanctified
Source: Hymns and Sacred Poems (1739), Part II
Author: Charles Wesley (attributed)
---
1 My God (if I may call thee mine
From heav’n and thee remov’d so far)
Draw nigh; thy pitying ear incline,
And cast not out my languid pray’r.
Gently the weak thou lov’st to lead,
Thou lov’st to prop the feeble knee,
O break not then a bruised reed,
Nor quench the smoaking flax in me.
2 Buried in sin, thy voice I hear,
And burst the barriers of my tomb,
In all the marks of death appear,
Forth at thy call, tho’ bound, I come.
Give me, O give me fully, Lord,
Thy resurrection’s pow’r to know;
Free me indeed; repeat48 the word,
And loose my bands, and let me go.
3 Fain would I go to thee my God,
Thy mercies and my wants to tell:
I feel my pardon seal’d in blood;
Saviour, thy love I wait to feel.
47This hymn is retitled “Another” in the 4th edn. (1743) and 5th edn. (1756); perhaps reflecting Wesley’s
distinction between “initial sanctification,” which accompanies justification, and “entire sanctification.”
48“Repeat” changed to “pronounce” in 2nd edn. (1739) only.
Freed from the pow’r of cancel’d sin;
When shall my soul triumphant prove?
Why breaks not out the fire within
In flames of joy and praise and love?
4 When shall my eye affect my heart,
Sweetly dissolv’d in gracious tears?
Ah, Lord, the stone to flesh convert!
And till thy lovely face appears,
Still may I at thy footstool keep,
And watch the smile of op’ning heav’n:
Much would I pray, and love, and weep;
I would; for I have much forgiv’n.
5 Yet O! Ten thousand lusts remain,
And vex my soul absolv’d from sin,
Still rebel nature strives to reign,
Still am I all unclean, unclean!
Assail’d by pride, allur’d by sense,
On earth the creatures court my stay;
False flatt’ring idols get ye hence,
Created good be far away!
6 Jesu, to thee my soul aspires,
Jesu, to thee I plight my vows,
Keep me from earthly base desires,
My God, my Saviour, and my spouse.
Fountain of all-sufficient bliss,
Thou art the good I seek below;
Fulness of joys in thee there is,
Without ’tis mis’ry all and woe.
7 Take this poor wandring, worthless heart,
Its wandrings all to thee are known,
May no false rival claim a part,
Nor sin disseize thee of thine own.
Stir up thy interposing pow’r,
Save me from sin, from idols save,
Snatch me from fierce temptation’s hour,
And hide, O hide me in the grave!
8 I know thou wilt accept me now,
I know my sins are now forgiv’n!
My head to death O let me bow,
Nor keep my life, to lose my heav’n.
Far from this snare my soul remove,
This only cup I would decline,
I deprecate a creature-love,
O take me, to secure me thine.
9 Or if thy wiser will ordain
The trial, I would die to shun,
Welcome the strife, the grief, the pain,
Thy name be prais’d, thy will be done!
I from thy hand the cup receive,
Meekly submit to thy decree,
Gladly for thee consent to live!
Thou, Lord, hast liv’d, hast died for me!
