Last updated: November 16, 2009.
2See copies in the Methodist Archives at the Rylands Library (DDCW 3/5 & 5/112). A version
appears as well in MS Funeral Hymns, 91–92.
Ode on Dr. Boyce (1779)1
[Baker list, #400]
Editorial Introduction:
William Boyce (1711–79) was a well-known organist and composer. Boyce became aware of
the talent of Charles Wesley’s sons and gave Charles Jr. lessons on the organ. When Boyce died in
early 1779, Charles Wesley Sr. wrote an ode in his memory. The ode was published in November
1779 in the Arminian Magazine (2:606), with the note that it had been written on February 7, 1779.
It was likely also in 1779 that the ode was printed as a broadsheet, with a subtitle saying that it
had been “set to music by Charles Wesley.” This would be Charles Jr., adding his gifts to the poetic
gifts of his father in honoring Boyce. The broadsheet was probably a program used when the
musical rendition was performed. Some surviving copies of the broadsheet have musical
descriptions added in manuscript, apparently in the hand of Charles Wesley Jr.2
Edition:
[Charles Wesley.] Ode on the Death of Dr. Boyce. [np, 1779?].

3This line, and all others on this page in red font appears in handscript on broadsheet. The side
comments appear on left hand side of page in original. They are apparently by Charles Wesley Jr.
4Ori., “his”; corrected by a manuscript slash in the broadsheet, and printed as above in Arminian
Magazine.
ODE ON THE DEATH OF DR. BOYCE.
Set to Music by Charles Wesley.
Solemn Symphony.3

Father of harmony, farewel!
Farewel for a few fleeting years!
Chorus
Translated from the mournful vale,
Jehovah’s flaming ministers
Have borne thee to thy place above,
Where all is4 harmony and love.
Da capo

Thy gen’rous, good, and upright heart,
That sigh’d for a celestial lyre,
Was tun’d on earth to bear a part
Symphonious with the warbling quire,
Air
Where Handel strikes the golden strings,
And plausive angels clap their wings.

Handel, and all the tuneful train,
Who well employ’d their art divine
Recitative
T’ announce the great Messiah’s reign,
accompanied
In joyous acclamations join,
And, springing from their azure seat,
With shouts their new-born brother greet.
Chorus

Thy brow a radiant circle wears,
Thy hands a golden harp receives,
And, singing with the morning stars,
Air
Thy soul in endless raptures lives,
       & Grand Chorus
And hymns, on the eternal throne,
Jehovah and his conquering Son.