Last updated: November 24, 2009.
“Primitive Christianity” (1743)1
[cf. Baker list, #74]
Editorial Introduction:
The leading voices in the Church of England in the eighteenth century championed their church
as embodying the faith of the “primitive church.” The Wesley brothers echoed this claim, but they
also contended that the constituency of the Church of England in their day broadly failed to emulate
the spiritual vitality of the primitive church. They viewed the Methodist movement as an attempt to
renew the Church of England along the lines of its most central commitments.
Many of the leaders in the Church of England, and in British culture at large, had questions and
concerns about the Methodist movement, sensing in it the ghost of the puritan emphases that had
led to civil war in the prior century. John Wesley addressed these concerns in 1743 in a tract titled
An Earnest Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion, insisting that the movement was not trying to
undermine the established church. After issuing the tract in Newcastle, John had a second edition
published in Bristol, to which he appended a poem titled “Primitive Christianity.” This poem
articulated the ideal of Christian spirituality that the Methodists were trying to recover. It remained
as an appendix to most subsequent editions of the tract (exceptions noted below).
While there was no indication of the author of “Primitive Christianity” when it appeared in the
Earnest Appeal, it is present in Charles Wesley’s MS Cheshunt, 160–64; and he included it in his
collection HSP (1749), 2:333–36. This makes clear that he was the author.
Editions:
[Charles Wesley.] “Primitive Christianity.” In John Wesley’s An Earnest Appeal to Men of Reason
and Religion, 52–55. 2nd edn. Bristol: Farley, 1743.  
3rd Bristol: Farley, 1744.
4th Dublin: Powell, 1747.
3rd Bristol: Farley, 1749.
5th Dublin: Powell, 1750. [hymn not present]
6th Bristol: William Pine, 1765. [hymn not present]
6th Bristol: William Pine, 1771.
Included in JW’s Works (Bristol: Pine, 1772), vol. 14 [hymn on pp. 172–77].
7th London: Paramore, 1786.

[Page] 52
Primitive Christianity.
     [Part I.]

Happy the souls who first believ’d,
To Jesus, and each other cleav’d,
Join’d by the unction from above,
In mystic fellowship of love.

Meek, simple followers of the Lamb
They liv’d, and spake, and thought the same;
Brake the commemorative bread,
And drank the Spirit of their head.

On God they cast their every care,
Wrestling with God in mighty prayer,
They claim’d the grace, thro’ Jesus given;
By prayer, they shut, and open’d heaven.

To Jesus they perform’d their vows,
A little church in every house;
They joyfully conspir’d to raise
Their ceaseless sacrifice of praise.

Propriety was there unknown,
None call’d what he possess’d his own;
Where all the common blessing share,
No selfish happiness was there.

With grace abundantly endu’d,
A pure, believing multitude;
They all were of one heart and soul,
And only love inspir’d the whole.

O what an age of golden days!
O what a choice, peculiar race!
Wash’d in the Lamb’s all-cleansing blood,
Anointed kings, and priests to God!

[Page] 53
2“Or” changed to “and” in 3rd edn. (1749) only.

Where shall I wander now to find
The successors they left behind?
The faithful, whom I seek in vain,
Are minish’d from the sons of men.

Ye different sects, who all declare,
“Lo! Here is Christ,” or2 “Christ is there;”
Your stronger proofs divinely give,
And shew me where THE CHRISTIANS live.

Your claim, alas! Ye cannot prove,
Ye want the genuine mark of love:
Thou only, Lord, thine own canst shew,
For sure thou hast a church below.

The gates of hell cannot prevail,
The church on earth can never fail:
Ah! Join me to thy secret ones,
Ah! Gather all thy living stones.

Scatter’d o’er all the earth they lie,
’Till thou collect them with thine eye,
Draw by the musick of thy name,
And charm into a beauteous frame.

For this the pleading Spirit groans,
And cries in all thy banish’d ones:
Greatest of gifts, thy love impart,
And make us of one mind and heart.

Join every soul that looks to thee,
In bonds of perfect charity:
Now, Lord, the glorious fulness give,
And all in all forever live.
     Part II.

Jesus, from whom all blessings flow,
Great builder of thy church below,

[Page] 54
3“Thy” changed to “thine” in HSP (1749).
4“Thy” changed to “the” in 7th edn. (1786).
If now thy Spirit moves my breast,
Hear, and fulfil thy3 own request.

The few that truly call thee Lord,
And wait thy4 sanctifying word,
And thee their utmost Saviour own,
Unite, and perfect them in one.

Gather them in on every side,
And in thy tabernacle hide;
Give them a resting-place to find,
A covert from the storm and wind.

O find them out some calm recess,
Some unfrequented wilderness!
Thou, Lord, the secret place prepare,
And hide, and feed the woman there.

Thither collect thy little flock,
Under the shadow of their Rock:
The holy seed, the royal race,
The standing monu’ments of thy grace.

O let them all thy mind express,
Stand forth thy chosen witnesses!
Thy power unto salvation shew,
And perfect holiness below:

The fulness of thy grace receive,
And simply to thy glory live;
Strongly reflect the light divine,
And in a land of darkness shine.

In them let all mankind behold,
How Christians liv’d in days of old;
(Mighty their envious foes to move,
A proverb of reproach—and love.)

[Page] 55
5“Thy changed to “the” in 6th edn. (1771) and Works edn. (1772).
6“The” changed to “his” in 6th edn. (1771) and 7th edn. (1786).

O make them of one soul and heart,
The all-conforming mind impart;
Spirit of peace and unity,
The sinless mind that was in thee.

Call them into thy wond’rous light,
Worthy to walk with thee in white;
Make up thy jewels, Lord, and shew
The glorious, spotless church below.

From every sinful wrinkle free,
Redeem’d from all iniquity;
The fellowship of saints make known:
And O, my God, might I be one!

O might my lot be cast with these,
The least of Jesu’s witnesses!
O that my Lord would count me meet
To wash his dear disciples’ feet!

This only thing do I require,
Thou knowst ’tis all my heart’s desire,
Freely what I receive to give,
The servant of thy church to live.

After my lowly Lord to go,
And wait upon thy5 saints below,
Enjoy the6 grace to angels given,
And serve the royal heirs of heaven.

Lord, if I now thy drawings feel,
And ask according to thy will,
Confirm the prayer, the seal impart,
And speak the answer to my heart.

Tell me (or thou shalt never go)
“Thy prayer is heard, it shall be so.”—
The word hath pass’d thy lips—and I
Shall with thy people live and die.