To Mary Bishop
Date: COLCHESTER, November 4, 1772.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1772)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR SISTER,--I see more and more clearly there is no other way of preserving peace with our contentious brethren but by war--nay, by 'carrying the war into Italy,' into their own quarters. We do nothing, we spend our strength in vain, while we are acting only on the defensive. So long they will never be afraid of us; for they have nothing to lose. But when with gentleness and yet with vigour and firmness we show all the horror of their opinions, while with calmness and yet with all earnestness we paint the whole absurdity and blasphemy of Reprobation, pinning them down, whether they will or no, to that point, they will soon be sick of the war. They will themselves desire peace, and count it a favour when it is granted them. But we must build with one hand while we fight with the other. And this is the great work: not only to bring souls to believe in Christ, but to build them up in our most holy faith. How grievously are they mistaken (as are well-nigh the whole body of modern Calvinists) who imagine that as soon as the children are born they need take no more care of them! We do not find it so. The chief care then begins. And if we see this in a true light, we may well cry out, even the wisest men on earth, 'Who is sufficient for these things' In a thousand circumstances general rules avail little and our natural light is quickly at an end. So that we have nothing to depend upon but the anointing of the Holy One; and this will indeed teach us of all things. The same you need with regard to your little ones, that you may train them up in the way wherein they should go. And herein you have continual need of patience; for you will frequently see little fruit of all your labour. But leave that with Him. The success is His. The work only is yours. Your point is this, --Work your work betimes, and in His time He will give you a full reward.--I am, my dear sister,

Yours affectionately.
