To Mrs. Chapman
Date: SAVANNAH, March 29, 1737.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1737)
Author: John Wesley
---
True friendship is doubtless stronger than death, else yours could never have subsisted still in spite of all opposition, and even after thousands of miles are interposed between us. In the last proof you gave of it there are a few things which I think it lies on me to mention: as for the rest, my brother is the proper person to clear them up, as I suppose he has done long ago.

You seem to apprehend that I believe religion to be inconsistent with cheerfulness and with a sociable, friendly temper. So far from it, that I am convinced, as true religion or holiness cannot be without cheerfulness, so steady cheerfulness, on the other hand, cannot be without holiness or true religion. And I am equally convinced that true religion has nothing sour, austere, unsociable, unfriendly in it; but, on the contrary, implies the most winning sweetness, the most amiable softness and gentleness. Are you for having as much cheerfulness as you can So am I. Do you endeavor to keep alive your taste for all the truly innocent pleasures of life So do I likewise. Do you refuse no pleasure but what is an hindrance to some greater good or has a tendency to some evil It is my very rule; and I know no other by which a sincere, reasonable Christian can be guided. In particular, I pursue this rule in eating, which I seldom do without much pleasure. And this I know is the will of God concerning me: that I should enjoy every pleasure that leads to my taking pleasure in Him, and in such a measure as most leads to it. I know that, as to every action which is naturally pleasing, it is His will that it should be so; therefore, in taking that pleasure so far as it tends to this end (of taking pleasure in God), I do His will. Though, therefore, that pleasure be in some sense distinct from the love of God, yet is the taking of it by no means distinct from His will. No; you say yourself it is His will I should take it. And here, indeed, is the hinge of the question, which I had once occasion to state in a letter to you, and more largely in a sermon on the Love of God. [This was his sermon on Love from 1 Cor. xiii. 3, which he preached at Savannah on Feb. 20, 1736, and in London at St. Andrew's, Holborn, on Feb. 12, 1738 (see Journal, i. 438; Works, vii. 492-9, and also 45-57). The sermon gives a touching account of his father's death-bed.] If you will read over those, I believe you will find you differ from Mr. Law and me in words only. You say the pleasures you plead for are distinct from the love of God, as the cause from the effect. Why, then they tend to it; and those which are only thus distinct from it no one excepts against. The whole of what he affirms, and that not on the authority of men but from the words and example of God incarnate, is: There is one thing needful -- to do the will of God; and His will is our sanctification: our renewal in the image of God, in faith and love, in all holiness and happiness. On this we are to fix. our single eye at all times and in all places; for so did our Lord. This one thing we are to do; for so did our fellow servant, Paul, after His example: ' Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, we are to do all to the glory of God.' In other words, we are to do nothing but what directly or indirectly leads to our holiness, which is His glory; and to do every such thing with this design, and in such a measure as may most promote it.

I am not mad, my dear friend, for asserting these to be the words of truth and soberness; neither are any of those, either in England or here, who have hitherto attempted to follow me. I am, and must be, an example to my flock; not, indeed, in my prudential rules, but in some measure (if, giving God the glory, I may dare to say so) in my spirit and life and conversation. Yet all of them are, in your sense of the word, unlearned, and most of them of low understanding; and still, not one of them has been as yet entangled in any case of conscience which was not solved. And as to the nice distinctions you speak of, it is you, my friend, it is the wise, the learned, the disputers of this world, who are lost in them, and bewildered more and more, the more they strive to extricate themselves. We have no need of nice distinctions; for I exhort all, Dispute with none. I feed my brethren in Christ, as He giveth me power, with the pure, unmixed milk of His Word. And those who are as little children receive it, not as the word of man, but as the word of God. Some grow thereby, and advance apace in peace and holiness: they grieve, it is true, for those who did run well, but are now turned back; and they fear for themselves, lest they also be tempted; yet, through the mercy of God, they despair not, but have still a good hope that they shall endure to the end. Not that this hope has any resemblance to enthusiasm, which is an hope to attain the end without the means: this they know is impossible, and therefore ground their hope on a constant, careful use of all the means. And if they keep in this way, with lowliness, patience, and meekness of resignation, they cannot carry the principle of pressing toward perfection too far. Oh may you and I carry it far enough! Be fervent in spirit. 'Rejoice evermore; pray without ceasing; in everything give thanks.' Do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus. Abound more and more in all holiness, and in zeal for every good word and work.
