To Ebenezer Blackwell
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1748)
Author: John Wesley
---
[18]

NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, August 14, 1748.

DEAR SIR,--I trust you do not grow weary or faint in your mind; although you cannot but find a thousand temptations. Business itself, when it comes in such a flood upon you, must needs be one of the greatest temptations, since it naturally tends to hinder your waiting upon God (as you would desire always to do) without distraction. And when our mind is hurried, it is hardly possible to retain either the spirit of prayer or of thankfulness. But still, with God no word shall be impossible. He has called you by His providence to this way of life; and He is able to preserve you in the midst of the world as well as in a desert. And I cannot doubt but He will, because you appear to be sensible of your danger. Walk, then, through the fire; you shall not be burned, neither shall the flame kindle upon you. Come unto Jesus upon the waves of the sea; the floods shall not run over you.

I have had some thoughts of printing, on a finer paper and with a larger letter, not only all that we have published already, but, it may be, all that is most valuable in the English tongue, in threescore or fourscore volumes, in order to provide a complete library for those that fear God. I should print only an hundred copies of each. Brother Downes [See letter of Nov. 7, 1751.] would give himself up to the work; so that, whenever I can procure a printing-press, types, and some quantity of paper, I can begin immediately. I am inclined to think several would be glad to forward such a design; and if so, the sooner the better, because my life is far spent, and I know not how soon the night cometh wherein no man can work.

I commend you, and dear Mrs. Blackwell, and Mrs. Dewal to the grace of God; and am, dear sir,

Your affectionate brother and servant.

I leave this place on Tuesday, and propose to spend ten or twelve days about Leeds.

To a Friend

[19]

NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, August 14, 1748.

Are you still pressing toward the mark, the prize of your high calling Is your hope full of immortality Do you continue to count all things loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus Some time since, I was in much concern for you, lest you should be swallowed up in the things of earth. But I trust God has wrought a great deliverance for you, and given you to choose Him for your God and your all. O seek Him with an undivided heart, till you see Him as He is.

I have often thought of mentioning to you and a few others a design I have had for some years of printing a little library, perhaps of fourscore or one hundred volumes, for the use of those that fear God. My purpose was to select whatever I had seen most valuable in the English language, and either abridge or take the whole tracts, only a little corrected or explained, as occasion should require. Of these I could print ten or twelve, more or less, every year, on a fine paper, and large letter, which should be cast for the purpose. As soon as I am able to purchase a printing-press and types, I think of entering on this design. I have several books now ready, and a printer who desires nothing more than food and raiment. In three or four weeks I hope to be in London, and, if God permits, to begin without delay.
