To Brian Bury Collins
Date: LONDON, June 14, 1780.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1780)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR SIR,--Your coming to town now and then, if it were only for a day, I believe would be much for the advantage of your health, and I doubt not but that God would make it a blessing to the people, many of whom are truly alive to God, and many others are just emerging into light, being deeply sensible of their wants. If you at any time let me know two or three days beforehand, we will give notice to the congregation.

But I am not half pleased with your being so far from me when you are in town. You may almost as well be at Everton as Flower-de-Lute Street; you are almost as much out of my reach, but there is no manner of necessity for it. We have rooms enough and to spare in my house [Flower-de-Lute Court was a turning off Fetter Lane. Wesley had his house by the side of City Road Chapel.] and you may be as private as you please. You need see no human creature but at meals. Besides, I do not think it has a good appearance; for a preacher to lodge anywhere but in my house seems to show some dislike or prejudice. And I am not assured that there is not a little of this in the case. I doubt you have heard strange things of the preachers; and although you could not cordially receive them, yet they made some impression upon you. But come and see, and that impression will vanish away. You will see as quiet a family as any in England, and a family every individual of which fears God and works righteousness.

A few years ago the people at and around Everton were deeply alive to God and as simple as little children. It is well if you find them so now. Perhaps you may by the help of God make them so now. Mr. Hicks [William Hicks, Vicar of Wrestlingworth, four miles from Everton.] in particular was a burning and a shining light, full of love and zeal for God. I hope you will see him as often as you can, and (if need be) lift up the hands that hang down, and encourage him to set out anew in the great work and to spend and be spent therein.

You have seen very little of the choicest part of London society: I mean the poor. Go with me into their cellars and garrets, and then you will taste their spirits.--I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.
