To Samuel Furly May 21, 1762.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1762)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR SAMMY,--This morning I came hither, and received yours. The post-boys in Ireland do not ride Pegasus.

A sermon of Ab. Sharp's [John Sharp, Archbishop of York sermon on Rom. xiv. I 7, preached on Aug. 23, 1674, before the Lord Mayor in the Guildhall Chapel: 'Another thing that would make for peace is this--never to charge upon men the consequences of their opinions when they expressly disown them.'] fully convinced me about thirty years ago that it is inconsistent with charity to charge any man with those consequences of his doctrine which he disavows. I always did so before, but not since. Otherwise what work should I make with poor George Whitefield.

Another thing I was not so soon nor so easily convinced of, namely, that in spite of all my logic I cannot so prove any one point in the whole compass of Philosophy or Divinity as not to leave room for strong objections, and probably such as I could not answer. But if I could, my answer, however guarded, will give room to equally strong objections. And in this manner, if the person is a man of sense, answers and objections may go on in infinitum. I am therefore weary of altercation. Once or twice I give my reasons. If they do not convince, I have done. My day is far spent, so that I have no hours to spare for what I verily believe will profit nothing.

As to that particular expression, 'Dying at the feet of mercy,' I have only farther to add, I do not care, as it is not a scriptural phrase, whether any one takes or leaves it. It is enough for me if he says from the heart Every moment, Lord, I need, The merit of Thy death; Never shall I want it less When Thou the grace hast given, Filled me with Thy holiness And sealed the heir of heaven. I shall hang upon my God, Till I Thy perfect glory see, Till the sprinkling of Thy blood Shall speak me up to Thee.

I wish Mr. Venn may have more and more success. Has he published his book concerning gospel ministers I still think it is not prudence, but high imprudence, for any of those who preach the essential gospel truths to stand aloof from each other. I cannot but judge there ought to be the most cordial and avowed union between them. But I rejoice that the shyness is not, and never was, on my side. I have done all I could; and with a single eye. For as long as God is pleased to continue with me, I want no man living. I have all things and abound. How happy is the man that trusts in Him!

I expect our Conference will begin at Leeds on Tuesday the 10th of August. Peace be with you and yours!--I am, dear Sammy, Your affectionate friend and brother. To the Rev. Mr. Furly, At Slaithwaite, Near Huddersfield, Yorks.
