To Mrs. Smyth
Date: BANGOR FERRY, October 15, 1777.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1777)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR MRS. SMYTH,--As I believe both you and our friends in Dublin will be pleased to hear of our safe landing, I will first give you a short account of what has befallen us hitherto. We went on board the packet about seven. The wind was full in our teeth and blew high. However, tacking to and fro, by the help of the tide, we got out to sea before noon. When the tide turned against us, we made little way, but beat up and down till night. The wind rising higher and higher, and the sea in proportion, my fellow passengers were all sick: I, by the blessing of God, was not sick at all. How­ever, as I could not read, I lay down about seven, but (which is very uncommon with me) could not sleep till past midnight. In the morning, the wind being still very high and directly contrary, we found ourselves out of our course, having been driven far to the southward. But being under the Carnarvonshire shore, we were in tolerably smooth water. About noon, the wind coming a point to the south, we put out to sea again. But the storm increased, and about four carried away our bolt-sprit and tore one of the sails all to bits. The captain and his men with all quietness and composure quickly repaired the loss. And before six, by the good providence of God, we landed safe at Holyhead,--I believe in answer to many of your prayers, who were not forgetful of us.

I blamed myself for not taking the opportunity of talking with you on Sunday morning. I had desired it many times; but neither you nor I could speak freely before much company. You are in the right not to rest satisfied without the present witness that you are a child of God. The bare remembrance of past things will neither make you holy nor happy. And if you continue to seek it, you will surely find it; for 'every one that seeketh findeth.' When your mouth is opened, you may call upon God with many words out of the abundance of your heart. But if you have few or none, you may ' groan to Him that reads the heart the unutterable prayer."

You certainly did right in casting in your lot among the people of God. But it is no wonder that you are tempted concerning it. However, that matter may be made easy. Agree upon a time when Sister King may meet Mrs. Blachford, Mrs. Shiels, and you by yourselves. I believe you will then find no difficulty in speaking. And it will be a blessing to your soul. You have set your hand to the plough: see that you look not back; neither you nor my dear Mr. Smyth. Go on; run, and never tire, till we meet in our Father's house.--I am, my dear sister,

Yours in tender affection.
