To Howell Harris
Date: LONDON, July 29, 1740.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1740)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BROTHER, --- Is the devil a fool Or has he forgot his old maxim, ‘Divide and conquer’ Beware you forget not the royal law, ‘Love thinketh no evil.’ I have no time myself now, so I have desired our brother Purdy [John Purdy was Wesley's companion when he went to begin his field-preaching in Bristol. Wesley lightened his labor by thus using his friend's help. See letters of Dec. 6, 1739, and Feb. 1, 1784.] to transcribe a paragraph or two of my Journal for you.

‘In the evening (after I had explained, “We wrestle not with flesh and blood, &c.”) Mr. Acourt complained that Mr. Nowers had hindered his going into our Society. Mr. Nowers answered, “It was by Mr. C. Wesley's order.” “What,” said Mr. Acourt, “do you refuse admitting a person into your Society only because he differs from you in opinion” I answered, “No; but what opinion do you mean” He said, “That of Election. I hold a certain number is elected from eternity. And these must and shall be saved. And the rest of mankind must and shall be damned. And many of your Society hold the same.” I replied, “I never asked whether they hold it or no. Only let them not trouble others by disputing about it.” He said, “Nay, but I will dispute about it.” “What, wherever you come” “Yes, wherever I come.” “Why, then, would you come among us, who you know are of another mind” “Because you are all wrong, and I am resolved to set you all right.” “I fear your coming with this view would neither profit you nor us.” He concluded, “Then I will go and tell all the world that you and your brother are false prophets. And I tell you, in one fortnight you will all be in confusion.”’ [From Journal, ii. 353.]

I say, So be it, if we do not preach the truth as it is in Jesus.

You see, my brother, that the reason why Mr. Acourt was not admitted into our Society was not holding Election separate from Reprobation, but openly declaring his fixed purpose to introduce and carry on the dispute concerning Reprobation wherever he came. -- I am, my dear brother,

Ever yours.
