To Samuel Furly ST. IVES, September 15, 1762.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1762)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR SIR,-- Spectatum satis, ac donatum jam rude quaeris, Maecenas, iterum antiquo me includere ludo Non eadem est aetas, non mens. [Horace's Epistles, 1. i. 2-4: 'Wherefore, Maecenas, would you thus engage Your bard, dismissed with honour from the stage Again to venture in the lists of fame, His youth, his genius, now no more the same'] I have entirely lost my taste for controversy. [See previous letter and that of Oct. 13.] I have lost my readiness in disputing; and I take this to be a providential discharge from it. All I can now do with a clear conscience is not to enter into a formal controversy about the new birth or justification by faith any more than Christian perfection, but simply to declare my judgement, and to explain myself as clearly as I can upon any difficulty that may arise concerning it.

So far I can go with you, but no farther. I still say, and without any self-contradiction, I know no persons living who are so deeply conscious of their needing Christ both as Prophet, Priest, and King as those who believe themselves, and whom I believe, to be cleansed from all sin--I mean from all pride, anger, evil desire, idolatry, and unbelief. These very persons feel more than ever their own ignorance, littleness of grace, coming short of the full mind that was in Christ, and walking less accurately than they might have done after their divine Pattern; are more convinced of the insufficiency of all they are, have, or do to bear the eye of God without a Mediator; are more penetrated with the sense of the want of Him than ever they were before.

If Mr. Maxfield or you say that 'coming short is sin,' be it so; I contend not. But still I say: 'There are they whom I believe to be scripturally perfect. And yet these never felt their want of Christ so deeply and strongly as they do now.' If in saying this I have 'fully given up the point,' what would you have more Is it not enough that I leave you to 'boast your superior power against the little, weak shifts of baffled error' 'Canst thou not be content,' as the Quaker said, 'to lay J. W. on his back, but thou must tread his guts out'[See letter of Nov. 4, 1758, sect. 5 (to Potter).]

Here are persons exceeding holy and happy; rejoicing evermore, praying always, and in everything giving thanks; feeling the love of God and man every moment; feeling no pride or other evil temper. If these are not perfect, that scriptural word has no meaning. Stop! you must not cavil at that word: you are not wiser than the Holy Ghost. But if you are not, see that you teach perfection too. 'But are they not sinners' Explain the term one way, and I say, Yes; another, and I say, No. 'Are they cleansed from all sin' I believe they are; meaning from all sinful tempers. 'But have they then need of Christ' I believe they have in the sense and for the reasons above mentioned. Now, be this true or false, it is no contradiction; it is consistent with itself, and I think consistent with right reason and the whole oracles of God.

O let you and I go on to perfection! God grant we may so run as to attain!--I am Your affectionate friend and brother.
