To Joseph Benson
Date: BRISTOL, September 17, 1788.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1788)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR JOSEPH, -- I congratulate you upon the happy increase of your family. [A daughter had been born on Sept. 3.] And I am glad you have determined to correct Mr. Fletcher's Letters. [See letter of June 9.] You will observe that it is dangerous on such subjects to depart from Scripture either as to language or sentiment. I believe that most of the controversies which have disturbed the Church have arisen from people's wanting to be wise above what is written, not contented with what God has plainly revealed there. And, Joseph, do not you yourself immediately forget this; and immediately move out in a curious metaphysical disquisition about what God has not plainly revealed What have you or I to do with that difficulty I dare not, will not, reason about it for a moment. I believe just what is revealed, and no more. But I do not pretend to account for it, or to solve the difficulties that may attend it. Let angels do this, if they can. But I think they cannot. I think even these would find 'no end, in wandering mazes lost.' [Paradise Lost, ii. 561.] Some years since, I read about fifty pages of Dr. Watts's ingenious treatise upon the glorified humanity of Christ. [See letter of June 8, 1780.] But it so confounded my intellects, and plunged me into such unprofitable reasonings, yea dangerous even, that I would not have read it through for five hundred pounds. It led him into Arianism. Take care that similar tracts (all of which I abhor) have not the same effect upon you. [Benson was 'busy reading some chapters on the Godhead of Christ to perfect Mr. Fletcher's MSS. On that subject.' His son says in the manuscript Life, ii. 1644, that while writing 'a material change took place in his mind as to the previous existence of the human soul of Christ.'] Pursue that train of reasoning as far as it will go, and it will surely land you either in Socinianism or Deism. I like your thoughts upon Materialism, as, I doubt not, I should those on the Separate Existence of the Soul. It will be best to print at Hull or York, if you can print almost as cheap and can have as good paper. Should there not be a thousand copies Then you will reserve an hundred of them for yourself.

The matter of Dewsbury you mistake totally. When I met the trustees at Dewsbury they all promised me to settle the house according to the deed then read. They flew off from this, not I; I desired no more from the beginning to the end. The sum of all was, If any one accuses a preacher whom I send, I, not the accuser, will be his judge. And this I cannot give up. [See letter of July 30.] -- I am, with love to Sister Benson, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

But hold! Does not Mrs. Fletcher consider this impression as her property
