To Various Friends
Date: November 19, 1781.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1781)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. For many years I have earnestly advised both in public and in private all in connection with me who have been brought up in the Established Church to continue therein, and of consequence to attend the public service of the Church at all opportunities; and my reasons for so doing I published to all the world more than twenty years ago. [Reasons against a Separation from the Ckurch of England, 1758. See Works, xiii. 224-32; Green’s Bibliography, No. 201; and letter of Jan. 9, 1782.]

2. But a few months ago I was favored with a letter which required me to review my sentiments. It is signed by several members of our Society, men of a loving spirit and of an unblameable conversation; and it is worthy of the greater regard, as they speak not only in their own name but in the name of many who wish to have a conscience void of offense both towards God and towards man.

3. Part of it runs thus: --

Having read many of your books and heard many of your preachers, and being in connection with you, we have from time to time been advised by them and you constantly to attend the church. But we find that neither you nor your preachers have given any countenance to the doctrines of Calvinism. This induces us humbly to ask the following questions:

First. Whether you would have us to go to that church where the doctrines of Calvinism are continually inculcated, and where the doctrines taught by you, Christian Perfection in particular, are continually exploded.

Secondly. Whether you think we shall be profited in any degree by hearing such preaching.

Thirdly. Whether it is not a means of filling our hearts with prejudice either against those preachers or against the truth.

Fourthly. Whether hearing them does not expose us to temptation from those who continually ask, ‘How did you like the sermon to-day’ We cannot dissemble; and if we do not, we offend them.

If you please, you may give us your sentiments in the Arrninian Magazine.

JOHN W-----, JOHN R-----, JOSEPH B-----,

NATHAN O-----, FRANCIS B-----,

BAILDON, NEAR BRADFORTH.

July 24, 1781.

4. It is a delicate as well as important point, on which I hardly know how to answer. I cannot lay down any general rule. All I can say at present is, If it does not hurt you, hear them; if it does, refrain. Be determined by your own conscience. Let every man in particular act ‘as he is fully persuaded in his own mind.’
