To Lady Maxwell
Date: LONDON, February 26, 1771.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1771)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR LADY,--I cannot but think the chief reason of the little good done by our preachers at Edinburgh is the opposition which has been made by the ministers of Edinburgh as well as by the false brethren from England. These steeled the hearts of the people against all the good impressions which might otherwise have been made, so that the same preachers by whom God has constantly wrought, not only in various parts of England but likewise in the northern parts of Scotland, were in Edinburgh only not useless. They felt a damp upon their own spirits; they had not their usual liberty of speech; and the word they spoke seemed to rebound upon them, and not to sink into the hearts of the hearers. At my first coming I usually find something of this myself: but the second or third time of preaching it is gone; and I feel, greater is He that is with us than all the powers of earth and hell.

If any one could show you by plain scripture and reason a more excellent way than that you have received, you certainly would do well to receive it; and I trust I should do the same. But I think it will not be easy for any one to show us either that Christ did not die for all or that He is not willing as well as able to cleanse from all sin even in the present world. If your steady adherence to these great truths be termed bigotry, yet you have no need to be ashamed. You are reproached for Christ's sake, and the Spirit of glory and of Christ shall rest upon you. Perhaps our Lord may use you to soften some of the harsh spirits and to preserve Lady Glenorchy [She gave up all connexion with Wesley's preachers shortly after De Courcy's arrival. See letter of Jan. 24.] or Mr. De Courcy from being hurt by them. I hope to hear from you (on whom I can depend) a frequent account of what is done near you. After you have suffered awhile, may God stablish, strengthen, settle you!--I am, my dear Lady,

Your very affectionate servant.

I expect to be at Chester on Saturday fortnight, and a week or two after in Dublin.

I have laid up your late direction so safe that I cannot find it.
