To his Brother Charles
Date: ISLINOTON, September 21, 1739.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1739)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BROTHER, -- A Scotch gentleman who was present here [Diary: ‘4.45 Islington, within to man.’ ‘Sat. 22--7.3o at Exall's, tea.’ He evidently finished the letter there.] gave us a plain account of Mr. Erskine and his associates, the substance of which was this :-

Some years since, Mr. Ebenezer Erskine, preaching before the Assembly, reproved them for several faults with all simplicity. This was so resented by many that in a following Assembly he was required to make an open recantation; and, persisting in the charge, the Assembly determined that he, with three other ministers who spoke in his behalf, should be deprived and their livings declared vacant. Four messengers were sent for this purpose; but they returned re infecta, fearing the people lest they should stone them. In another Assembly directions were given to the neighbouring ministers to procure informations concerning the doctrine and behavior of Mr. Erskines [Ebenezer and Ralph] and their adherents, Out of these informations an indictment was formed, to which they were summoned to answer in the next Assembly.

Here it was debated whether they should be suffered to come in, and carried by a small majority that they should. The Moderator then spoke to this effect: ‘My reverend brethren, ye are summoned to answer an indictment charging you with erroneous doctrine and irregular practices; but if ye will submit to the Kirk and testify your amendment, we will receive you with open arms.’

Mr. Erskine answered for himself and brethren (they were now increased to eight) to this purpose: ‘Moderator, both you and those that are with you have erred from the faith, and your practices are irregular too; and you have no discipline: therefore you are no Kirk. We are the Kirk, and we alone, who continue in her faith and discipline. And if ye will submit to us and testify your amendment, we will receive ye with open arms.’

None answered a word; so after a short time they withdrew. The Moderator then asked, ‘My reverend brethren, what shall we do’ One replied, ‘Moderator, I must answer you in our proverb —“You have put the cat into the kirn (i.e. churn), and ye must get her out again how you can.”’

Again silence ensued; after which the Moderator asked, ‘Shall these men be excommunicated or only deposed’ Answer was made, ‘The question is not right. Let it be asked, “Shall they be deposed or not”’ This was accordingly done, and it was carried by five votes ‘that they should not be deposed.’ Having received help from God, they continue to this day; declaring to all that their congregation is the Kirk of Scotland; that they (the ministers, now ten in all) are the proper Presbytery, and there is no other; those commonly so called having made shipwreck both of the faith and discipline once delivered to the saints.

Friday, September 14, I expounded again at Islington; but the house being too small for the company, I stood in the garden and showed them how vainly they trusted in baptism for salvation unless they were holy of heart, without which their circumcision was actually become uncircumcision. Afterwards I went to Fetter Lane, where I brought down the high looks of the proud by an exposition of those words, ‘All things are lawful for me, but all things edify not.’

Saturday, September 15, I expounded those words on which the book opened at Lady Hume’s: ‘The cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the desires of other things, choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful.’ At Fetter Lane I was directed to those words, ‘I will pray the Father, and He shall give you another Comforter, that He may abide with you for ever.’ Many were cut to the heart, both here and at Mr. Exall’s, where I enforced those words of our Lord, ‘Except ye be born again, ye cannot see the kingdom of God.’

Sunday, the 16th, I preached at Moorfields to about ten thousand, and at Kennington Common to between twenty and thirty thousand, on those words, ‘We desire to hear of thee what thou thinkest: for as concerning this sect, we know it is everywhere spoken against.’ At both places I described in very plain terms the diffrence between true old Christianity, commonly called by the new name of Methodism, and the Christianity now generally taught.

Thence I went to Lambeth (where I found oar congregation considerably increased), and exhorted them to cry mightily to our Lord that He might say unto them, as unto the sick of the palsy, 'Be of good cheer; thy sins are forgiven thee.' From our lovefeast at Fetter Lane I went to Islington House. Sufficient for this day was the labor thoreof.

Pray my love to Brother Mitchell; and let the leaden cistern be gone about. On Monday se'nnight I intend, God willing, to set out. Tuesday I hope to spend at Oxford. On Wednesday night let James Ellis meet me at Gloucester. Then I will lay out the three or four following days as we ,shall agree, if God permit. I heartily thank our brothers Westall, Oldfield, Cross, Haydon, and Wynne; and our sisters Deftel, Shafto, Oldfield, Thomas, Stephens, Mrs. Thomas, and Mrs. Deschamps. I wish any would write by Wednesday post. Pray for us. Adieu.

Sat. night, Mrs. Exall's.
