To Mrs. Pendarves
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1731)
Author: John Wesley
---
February 19 [1731].

Yes, it is better to assure Aspasia now, though it be but in one line, that I am sensible of her strange goodness in thus preventing me a second time, than to put off still what, could it have been avoided, ought not to have been delayed a moment. But what can I do, thus hemmed in as I am with business over and above my own I am persuaded you would not condemn me, Aspasia, did you know how many days pass over my head in which I have not one poor hour from five to seven but what is engaged long before it comes. Yet never shall any engagement of any kind make me so false both to justice and friendship as to neglect any commands which I may have the pleasure of receiving from Aspasia or Selima. That particular .one which your last gives me leave to expect, I should earnestly have requested myself had not you mentioned it first. O Aspasia, how gladly should I receive into my soul your ignorance of some points in philosophy could ignorance of pride, ingratitude, and passion pass at the same time into (I dare hardly say) Your friend, CYRUS.

When Aspasia or Selima is the theme', I speak the sense of Araspes in my own. Adieu.

Mrs. Pendarves replies:

NEW BOND STREET, April 4, 1731.

In what manner can I make an excuse to Cyrus for being so long without acknowledging the favor of his last letter By this time he certainly repents of the great indulgence he has shown me. When I consider how every hour of your life is employed, either in your own improvement or bestowing part of your knowledge on those who are happily placed under your care; and that, notwithstanding the difficulty it is for you to command any time to yourself, you have always remembered me in the most obliging manner, and have studied not only how to entertain but to improve me, -- when I recollect all this, have I not reason to fear the loss of your good opinion, and that you think me unworthy of your favor and advice that surrounded by vanity and impertinence I are fallen into the snare, and refuse to hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely God forbid my state should be so desperate as to prefer sin and folly to virtue and wisdom! I will sincerely tell you the truth, and trust to your mercy. All the acquaintance I almost have are now in town, and they are continually soliciting us either to come to them or they will come to us; my sister being soon to leave me, all her friends endeavor to give her as much entertainment as they can: by which means our time is so entirely engrossed, that for two months past we have lived in a perpetual hurry, and shall do so for the month to come. I would not have you imagine we have neglected the book. Whatever comes with your recommendation is of too much value to be neglected. But the subject of it is too elevated to be read in a hurry; next week I hope we shall have leisure to read and reflect. I am a little at a loss for some words, not being used to shorthand [By which she means abbreviations.]; but I believe I shall be able to find them out.

Every Sunday evening there is a gentleman in this town has a concert of music. I am invited there to-night, and design to go. I charge you, on the friendship you have professed for me, tell me your sincere opinion about it and all your objections. For if I am in an error by going, you ought to prevent my doing so again.

Dear Varanese I have not heard from a great while; why are we denied the happiness and advantage of conversing with such a friend Araspes may justly claim our service and esteem. Selima joins with Aspasia in being to Cyrus a

Faithful and obliged friend.

I have hardly confidence to expect a return to this.
