To his Brother Charles
Date: MANCHESTER, April 6, 1785.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1786)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR BROTHER, - I am glad you are again able to officiate at the chapels. Let us ' anage wisely the last stake.' [See letter of June 27, 1755.]

For some years John Davis was a mere mule; he would neither lead nor drive. But it is enough that he finished his course well; and we are sure Nancy Sharland did so. [See letter of Nov. 15, 1780.]

Sammy Bradburn thought of going further with me. But the frost and snow drove him back. I believe the loss of his wife will be one of the greatest blessings which he has ever met with in his life. [On March 13 he had taken Bradburn to travel with him. On the 2ist at Gloucester he proposed marriage to Sophia Cooke (who suggested to Raikes his Sunday-School efforts), and they were married on Aug. 10. See letters of Feb. 14 and June 20.]

Mrs. Fletcher will not be in haste to remove from Madeley, though her light is there almost hid under a bushel. Mr. Ireland will give me no help with regard to writing Mr. Fletcher's Life, 'because he intends to publish it himself!' [He was at Madeley on March 26. See letters of Oct. 2 and Dec. 31, 1785.] Let him do it, and I will follow him. Where is your elegy [See letter of Dec. 9 to Mrs. Fletcher.] You may say as my father in his verses on Mr. Nelson [Robert Nelson, the Nonjuror, who did much to promote schools and parochial libraries. See letter of June 13, 1733, n.]

Let friendship's sacred name excuse

The last effort of an expiring muse.

Can you or I ever have such another subject Melville Horne hopes to be ordained on Trinity Sunday.

Indeed, I love the Church as sincerely as ever I did; and I tell our Societies everywhere, 'The Methodists will not leave the Church, at least while I live.' I doubt I shall not half agree with our friends in Scotland; but I shall know more and you will hear more when I see them.

While I live Dr. Coke and I shall go through Ireland by turns. He will have work enough this year with gentle Edward Smyth. [Smyth opened Bethesda Chapel, Dublin, on June 25.] I doubt Edward 'needs a bridle'; but who can put the bit into his mouth I am not sorry your concerts are come to an end. [The concerts given by his sons in their father's house; Wesley attended one on Jan. 25, 1781. Samuel had become a Roman Catholic; his father's dream probably had been on this subject, and the text points to Wesley's hope of a coming restoration. See Journal, vi. 303; and letters of Aug. 19, 1784, and March 18, 1788, to his nephew.] Remember 'your dream concerning Sammy! 'The damsel is not dead, but sleepeth!'

Mr. Pennant's I know, and Dr. Johnson's I know; but I know nothing of Mr. Boswell's Tour to the Hebrides. [Boswell's Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides was published in 1786.] I should imagine it was worth reading. Peace be with all your spirits! Adieu!
