To Ebenezer Blackwell
Date: DUBLIN, July 20, 1752
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1752)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR SIR, -- Finding no ship ready to sail, either at Bristol or Chester, we at length came back to Whitehaven, and embarked on Monday last. [His wife and her younger daughter had come with him. See Journal iv. 37.] It is generally a passage of four-and-twenty hours; but the wind continuing contrary all the way, we did not reach this place till Friday evening. My wife and Jenny were extremely sick, particularly when we had a rolling sea; but a few days, I trust, will restore their strength. They are already much better than when they landed.

Last month a large mob assaulted the new house here and did considerable damage. [See Journal iv. 38.] Several of the rioters were committed to Newgate. The bills were found against them all, and they were tried ten days since; but in spite of the clearest evidence, a packed jury brought them in ‘Not guilty.’ I believe, however, the very apprehension and trial of them has struck a terror into their companions. We now enjoy great quietness, and can even walk unmolested through the principled streets in Dublin.

I apprehend my brother is not at all desirous of having those copies transferred to him. I cannot easily determine, till I have full information concerning the several particulars you touch upon, whether it be expedient to make such an alteration (though it would ease me much, or to let all things remain just as they are. Therefore I believe it will be best to take no farther step till I return to London. [In reply to the letter of May 23 Blackwell had evidently advised that Wesley should be relieved of the management of his book affairs.]

I am fully persuaded, if you had always one or two faithful friends near you who would speak the very truth from their heart and watch over you in love, you would swiftly advance in running the race which is set before you. I am afraid you was not forwarded by one who was in town lately; neither was that journey of any service to his own soul. He has not brought back less indolence and gentle inactivity than he carried to London. [Was this Robert Swindells who was in England in Sept. 1751, and now in Ireland See letter of Dec. 20 1751.] Oh how far from the spirit of a good soldier of Jesus Christ, who desires only ‘to be flead alive and to conquer’ [‘Stand thou firm as an anvil when it is smitten. It is the part of a great athlete to be bruised (or flayed) and conquer.’ (Epistle of St. Ignatius to Polycarp, sec. 3.)] Our best wishes attend both Mrs. Blackwell, Mrs. Dewal, and yourself. -- I am, dear sir,

Your most affectionate servant.
