To George Downing
Date: LIVERPOOL, April 6, 1761.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1761)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR SIR, --Let who will speak, if what is spoken be true, I am ready to subscribe it. If it be not, I accept no man's person. Magis amica veritas. ['I prefer truth to the dearest friend.'] I had an agreeable conversation with Mr. Venn, [On March 25 he breakfasted with Henry Venn, recently appointed Vicar of Huddersfield.] who, I suppose, is now near you. I think he is exactly as regular as he ought to be. I would observe every punctilio of order, except where the salvation of souls is at stake. There I prefer the end before the means.

I think it great pity that the few clergymen in England who preach the three grand scriptural doctrines --Original Sin, Justification by Faith, and Holiness consequent thereon --should have any jealousies or misunderstandings between them. What advantage must this give to the common enemy! What an hindrance is it to the great work wherein they are all engaged! How desirable is it that there should be the most open, avowed intercourse between them! So far, indeed, as they judge it would be for the glory of God, they may openly declare wherein they disagree.

But surely, if they are ashamed to own one another in the faces of all mankind, they are ashamed of Christ, they are ashamed of Him that sends if they dare not avow whom He has sent. Excuses, indeed, will never be wanting. But will these avail before God? For many years I have been labouring after this --labouring to unite, not scatter, the messengers of God. Not that I want anything from them. As God has enabled me to stand almost alone for these twenty years, I doubt not but He will enable me to stand either with them or without them. But I want all to be helpful to each other, and all the world to know we are so. Let them know who is on the Lord's side. You, I trust, will always be of that number. O let us preach and live the whole gospel! The grace of our Lord be with your spirit! --I am, dear sir,
Your ever affectionate brother and servant.
