To John Fletcher
Date: BRECON, August 18, 1775.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1775)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR SIR,--We followed your advice, and were more exact than ever in examining the preachers both as to grace and gifts. A solemn awe was spread through the whole assembly, knowing that God was in the midst of us. And the consequence was far beyond what we could expect--namely, a confidence in each other, and a full conviction that the outcry raised by Mr. Hilton and others was totally without foundation.

I have now received all your papers, and here and there made some small corrections. I suppose you have read Dean Tucker's Letters to Dr. Kippis. I read them in my journey from Gloucester hither, and never before saw so clearly the rise and progress of Predestinarianism. Does not he show beyond all contradiction that it was hatched by Augustine in spite to Pelagius (who very probably held no other heresy than you and I do now); that it spread more and more in the Western Church till the eleventh century; that Peter Lombard then formed it into a complete system; that in the twelfth century Thomas Aquinas bestowed much pains in explaining and confirming it; that in the thirteenth Duns Scotus did the same; that Ignatius Loyola and all the first Jesuits held it, as all the Dominican and Augustine Friars (with the Jansenists) do to this day; that Bellarmine was firm in it, as were the bulk of the Romanists, till the Council of Trent, when, in furious opposition to Luther and Calvin, they disclaimed their ancient tenets.

When you do not write, you must travel. I think the sooner the better. Sit still till I die, and you may sit still for ever.

I do not perceive that you have granted too much, or that there is any difference between us. The Address to the Perfect I approve of most, and think it will have a good effect. But there may be some danger of growing too voluminous, for then the work will come into fewer hands.

The doctrine of Justification and Salvation by Faith are grievously abused by many Methodists. We must guard as many as we can.--I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.
