To Miss March
Date: KINGSWOOD, August 3, 1771.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1771)
Author: John Wesley
---
How wise are all the ways of God! And although in many instances they are past finding out, yet we may even now discern the designs of His providence.

The Appendix to the Philosophy [The third volume of A Compendium of Natural Philosophy forms an Appendix to the several sections of the previous volumes. See Green's Bibliography, No. 265; and for Hymns on the Trinity (1767), No. 246.] and the Trinity Hymns, I hope, will settle you on that important point. It is a striking remark of Bishop Browne's that we are not required to 'believe any mystery' in the matter. The mystery does not lie in the fact 'These Three are One,' but in the manner the accounting how they are one. But with this I have nothing to do. I believe the fact. As to the manner (wherein the whole mystery lies) I believe nothing about it. The quaint device of styling them three offices rather than persons gives up the whole doctrine.

There is scarcely any word of coextensive a sense as 'wisdom.' It frequently means the whole of religion. And, indeed, no one can be termed throughly wise until he is altogether a Christian. To devote all our thoughts and actions to God, this is our highest wisdom; and so far as we inwardly or outwardly swerve from this, we walk as fools, not as wise. In order to be all devoted to the Lord, even those who are renewed in love still need the unction of the Holy One, to teach them in all circumstances the most excellent way, and to enable them so to watch and pray that they may continually walk therein. It seems my time for writing either on this or other subjects is pretty well over; only I am ready to add a word now and then if Providence so require.

Persons are in one sense delivered from unbelief when they are enabled to believe always, when they have 'faith's abiding impression, realizing things to come.' For they can then no longer be termed unbelievers. When this is given in a very glorious manner, so that they are filled with faith and are not able to doubt even for a moment, it is natural for them to say 'they are saved from all unbelief.' The soul that is all light (as Lopez, when he said, 'All is midday now') may affirm, 'I am saved from all darkness.' And is not this the will of the Lord concerning you Undoubtedly it is. Fear not then; reason not: only look up. Is He not nigh, even at the door He is nigh that justifieth; He is nigh that sanctifieth; He is nigh that supplies all your wants! Take more out of His fullness, that you may love Him more, praise Him more, and serve Him better. It is desirable to glorify God, like Mr. De Renty or Haliburton, in death as well as in life. I am sorry for poor Miss H[artly]. [See letters of Jan. 24 and Aug. 14 to Hannah Ball.] It is a mysterious providence.
