To Elizabeth Ritchie
Date: LONDON, February 12, 1779.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1779)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BETSY, - The remark of Luther 'that a revival of religion seldom continues above thirty years' has been verified many times in several countries. But it will not always hold. The present revival of religion in England has already continued fifty years. And, blessed be God, it is at least as likely to continue as it was twenty or thirty years ago. Indeed, it is far more likely; as it not only spreads wider but sinks deeper than ever, more and more persons being able to testify that the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin. We have therefore reason to hope that this revival of religion will continue, and continually increase, till the time when all Israel shall be saved and the fullness of the Gentiles shall come.

I have heard that Mr. [Maxfield] is in London, but have not heard where he is or what he does. [See letter of Feb. 14, 1778, to him.] As far as I can learn, he lives in the utmost privacy and does not preach at all. He seems to think that his present calling is to be an hermit in London.

Surely it is your wisdom to stand fast even in the outward liberty wherewith Christ has made you free. You are now happily disengaged from caring for the things of this world, and need only care for the things of the Lord, how you may be holy in body and spirit, and how you may promote His kingdom upon earth.

I have abundant proof that Baron Swedenborg's fever, which he had thirty years before he died, much affected his understanding. Yet his tract [Probably his Account of Heaven and Hell. See Journal, vi. 230.] is 'majestic, though in ruins.' He has strong and beautiful thoughts, and may be read with profit by a serious and cautious reader.

Some weeks since, I began another Journal, [The Eighteenth Part of the Journal (Jan. 1, 1776-Aug. 8, 1779) was issued in 1785.] and am going on with it when I have any scraps of time; probably it will be finished next month. I expect to visit Yorkshire this spring, when I hope to see you. [See her letter to Wesley in Arminian Mag., 1789, p. 105.] -I am

Yours affectionately.
