To John Furz ()
Date: ATHLONE, June 25, 1769.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1769)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BROTHER,--Brother Langdon and you are not much mistaken concerning Thomas Wride. A great part of the accusation against Thomas Wride is owing to prejudice. But it is only his own zeal and activity and patiently blameless behaviour which can effectually speak for him. He may, if he has an horse, come to the Conference, and I will try him another year.--I am, my dear brethren,

Your affectionate brother.

To an Irish Lady

[13]

TULLAMORE, June 27, 1769.

DEAR MADAM,--When I had the pleasure of conversing with you some years since, you had a regard both for me and the people called Methodists. If I am rightly informed, you are now of another mind. May I ask, When did that change begin Was it at your last journey to Dublin Whenever it was, suffer me to ask, What were the reasons of it I will tell you what I conjecture, and I do it in writing because I may not have an opportunity of talking with you; because I can write more freely than I could speak; because I can now say all I have to say at once; whereas, if we were talking together, I might probably forget some part; and because you may by this means have the better opportunity of calmly considering it.

I conjecture (to tell you just what rises in my heart) that this change was owing to several causes. Some admired and commended you as a person of uncommon sense and uncommon attainments in religion. Others told you at large from time to time all the real or supposed faults of the Methodists, in particular the jars which had lately been in Dublin on account of Mr. Morgan and Olivers. This naturally tended to breed and increase pride on the one hand and prejudice on the other. Riches increased; which not only led you step by step into more conformity to the world, but insensibly instilled self-importance, unwillingness to be contradicted, and an overbearing temper. And hence you was of course disgusted at those who did not yield to this temper and blamed that conformity. Perhaps some of these professed or expected to be perfected in love; they at least believed perfection. Now, this you seemed to hate with a perfect hatred; and on that account disliked them the more.

Permit me to add a few words on each of these heads. And first, would it not be well if you started back from every appearance of admiration (which you know is deadly poison), whether on account of your sense or piety and if you utterly discountenanced all who directly or indirectly commended you to your face yea, and all who told you of the jars or faults of the Methodists, or indeed of any absent person

Should you not earnestly strive and pray against thinking highly of your own understanding or attainments in religion Otherwise this, by grieving the Holy Spirit, would expose you to still more prejudice; especially towards those who might seem to vie with you in religion, if not in understanding.

Can you be too sensible how hardly they that have riches enter into the kingdom of heaven Yea, or into the kingdom of an inward heaven into the whole spirit of the gospel How hard is it for these (whether you do or no) not to conform too much to the world! how hard not to be a little overbearing, especially to inferiors!

Is it right to be disgusted at those who fear you conform too far, who do not sink down before you--nay, perhaps oppose your judgement or blame your practice

And with regard to perfection. Have not they that hold it the same right to be angry with you for denying it as you with them for affirming it

But what is it you are angry at What is it you object to Let us understand the question before we dispute about it.

By Christian Perfection I mean (1) loving God with all our heart. Do you object to this I mean (2) an heart and life all devoted to God. Do you desire less I mean (3) regaining the whole image of God. What objection to this I mean (4) having all the mind that was in Christ. Is this going too far I mean (5) walking uniformly as Christ walked. And this surely no Christian will object to. If any one means anything more or anything else by perfection, I have no concern with it. But if this is wrong, yet what need of this heat about it, this violence--I had almost said fury--of opposition, carried so far as even not to lay out anything with this man or that woman who professes it 'Nay,' says Mrs. --, 'I did not refrain from it for this only, but for their espousing Mr. Olivers's cause against Mr. Morgan.' Worse and worse! What! are people to starve (at least for me), unless they think as I think or like whom I like Alas, what religion, what humanity, what common sense is this

But I have done. I have once for all taken upon myself a most unthankful office. I have spoken with all plainness and simplicity, and now leave the event to God. May He open your heart, that you may discern His holy and acceptable and perfect will, that you may have a right judgement in all things, and evermore rejoice in His holy comfort.--I am, dear madam,

Your affectionate servant.
