To Ann Granville
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1731)
Author: John Wesley
---
June 17 [1731].

In what words can I express my thanks to Selima for the favorable opinion she entertains of myself, of which she has given me so obliging a proof, as I extremely desired but knew not how to ask for

Perhaps you don't know the inconvenience you are bringing upon yourself --- that your generosity will but embolden me to ask more. Yet thus I can assure you it will be: your letters will in one sense never satisfy me. But the oftener you favor me (if you should please to do it again), the more earnestly I shall desire it. You have already effectually convinced me of this--that it may be said with equal justice of every sort of conversation with Aspasia or you, ' It brings to its sweetness no satiety.' That the tearing asunder of such friendships as these should occasion a very sensible pain is surely the effect both of nature and reason, which don't require us to be without passions (no, be it a Roman virtue to be 'without natural affection '), but to proportion them to the occasion. Indeed, we are not required by reason to grieve on the severest occasion 'as those without hope': we have a good hope that, severe as it is, it is no less merciful--nay, more so; since no pain approaches a Christian but to pave the way for more than equal pleasure.

We had so much pleasure in the late hours we spent at Stanton, [On April 19 the Diary shows that he was at Stanton and met Mrs. Granville. Her daughters were in London.] that nothing could have added to it but Selima or Aspasia. All things else conspired to complete our happiness: nor was it a small share of it which we conveyed to Mrs.. Astell. Our dear Sappho showed us her proposal to the ladies, which gave us several agreeable conversations. Surely her plan of female life must have pleased all the thinking part of her sex, had she not prescribed so much of the two dull things, reading and religion. Reading, indeed, would be less dull, as well as more improving, to those who, like her, would use method in it; but then it would not rid them of so much time, because half a dozen books read in course would take up no more of that than one or two read just as they carne to hand.

That you propose and attain another end in reading [See letters of Sept. 27, 1730, and Aug. 14, 1731.] than throwing away a few leisure hours, that one sentence in truth so well expresses the end for which we live, move, and have our being. How glad should I be could I either teach or be taught by any one ' to be above trifles'! how doubly glad to have Selima for my instructor in indifference to the things of this world! Why, that is everything! that is to be happy, to be renewed in the image in which we were created, to have that mind in us which was also in Christ Jesus.

If it be ever in my power to assist any one in renewing their minds in this image, surely the more I conversed with them the more power I should have as well as the more inclination to pursue that glorious work. Do not then think, dear Selima, that anything you can say can possibly hinder me from doing good.

Every line from so friendly an hand, every word that comes from so good an heart, has a real tendency to increase both the desire and the power of being useful in the

Much obliged friend, CYRUS.

The death of one of the best friends I had in the world, [On June 15 his Diary entry is 'Rector dead.' Dr. Morley died on June 12 at Scotton. See next letter.] which happened last week, as it occasioned, will I hope excuse the delay of this, as well as the defects.

Araspes joins with me in sincere thanks to Selima, and begs she would, when it is convenient, present our best respects to good Mrs. Granville.
