To William Dodd
Date: KINGSWOOD, March 12, 1756.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1756)
Author: John Wesley
---
REVERAND, SIR, --You and I the more easily bear with each other, because we are both of us rapid writers, and therefore more the more liable to mistake. I will thank you for showing me any mistake I am in, being not so tenacious of my opinions now as I was twenty or thirty years ago. Indeed, I am not fond of any opinion as such. I read the Bible with what attention I can, and regulate all my opinions thereby to the best of my understanding. But I am always willing to receive more light; particularly with regard to any less common opinions, because the examining and defending them takes up much time, which I can ill spare from other employments. Whoever, therefore, will give me more fight with regard to Christian Perfection will do me a singular favor. The opinion I have concerning it at present I espouse merely because I think it is scriptural; if, therefore, I am convinced it is not scriptural, I shall willingly relinquish it.

2. I have no particular fondness for the term. It seldom occurs either in my preaching or writings. It h my opponents who thrust it upon me continually, and ask me what I mean by it. So did Bishop Gibson, till by his advice I publicly declared what I did not mean by it and what I did. This I supposed might be best done in the form of a sermon, [On Christian Perfection. See Works, vi. 1-19.] having a text prefixed wherein that term occurred. But that text is there used only as an occasion or introduction to the subject. I do not build any doctrine thereon, nor undertake critically to explain it.

3. What is the meaning of the term ‘perfection’ is another question; but that is a scriptural term is undeniable. Therefore none ought to object to the use of the term, whatever they may do to this or that explication of it. I am very willing to consider whatever you have to object to what is advanced under the flint head of that sermon. But I still think that perfection is only another term for holiness or the image of God in man. God made man perfect, I think, is just the same as He made him holy, or in His own image. You are the very first person I ever read of or spoke with who made any doubt of it. Now, this perfection does certainly admit of degrees. Therefore I readily allow the propriety of that distinction, perfection of kinds and perfection of degree. Nor do I remember one writer ancient or modern who excepts against it.

4. In the sermon on Salvation by Faith [See Works, v. 7-16.] I say, ‘He that is born of God sinneth not’ (a proposition explained at large in another sermon, and there everywhere either explicitly or virtually connected with while he keepeth himself.) ‘by any sinful desire; for any unholy desire he stifleth in the birth.’ Assuredly he does while he keepeth himself. ‘Nor doth he sin by infirmities; for his infirmities have no concurrence of his will, and without this they am not properly tins.’ Taking the words as they lie in connexion thus (and taken otherwise they are not my words, but yours), I must still aver they speak both my own experience and that of many hundred children of God whom I personally know. And all this, with abundantly more than this, is contained in that single expression ‘the loving God with all our hearts and serving Him with all our strength.’ Nor did I ever say or mean any more by perfection than thus loving and serving God. But I dare not say less than this; for it might be attended with worse consequences than you seem to be aware of. If there be a mistake, it is far more dangerous on the one ride than on the other. If I set the mark too high, I drive men into needless fears: if you set k too low, you drive them into hell-fire.

5. We agree that true ‘Christianity implies a destruction of the kingdom of sin and a renewal of the soul in righteousness; which even babes in Christ do in a measure experience, though not in so large a measure as young men and fathers.’ But here we divide. I believe even babes in Christ (while they keep themselves) do not commit sin. By sin I mean outward sin; and the word ‘commit’ I take in its plain, literal meaning. And this I think is fully proved by all the texts cited (sect. 3) from the 6th chapter to the Romans. Nor do I conceive there is any material difference between committing sin and continuing therein. I tell my neighbor here, ‘William, you are a child of the devil; for you commit sin: you was drunk yesterday.’ ‘No, sir,’ says the man, ‘I do not live or continue in sin’ (which Mr. Dodd says is the true meaning of the text), ‘I am not drunk continually, but only now and then, once in a fortnight or a month.’ Now, sir how shall I deal with this man Shah I tell him he is in the way to heaven or to hell I think he is in the high road to destruction, and that if I tell~ him otherwise him blood will be upon my head; and all that you say of living, continuing in, serving sin, as different from committing it and of its not reigning, not having domain over him who still frequently commits it, is making so many loop-holes whereby any impenitent sinner may escape from all the terrors of the Lord. I dare not, therefore, give up the plain, literal meaning either of St. Paul’s or St. Peter’s words.

6. As to those of St. John’ (cited sect. 5), I do not think you have proved they are not to be taken literally. In every single act of obedience, as well as in a continued coupe of it, p das; and in eiher an act or a course of sin p ata. Therefore, that I may give no countenance to any kind or degree of sin, I still interpret these words by those in the 5th chapel and believe he that is born of God (while he keepeth himself) sinneth not, doth not commit outward sin.

7. But ‘it is absolutely necessary, as you observe, to add sometimes explanatory words to those of the sacred penmen.’ It is so: to add words explanatory of their sense, but not subversive of it. The words added to that text, ‘Ye know all things,’ are such. And you yourself allow them so to be. But I do not allow the words willfully and habitually to be such. These do not explain but overthrow the text. That the first Fathers thus explained it I deny; as also that I ever spoke lightly of them.

8. You proceed, ‘You allow in another sermon, in evident contradiction to yourself, that the true children of God could and did commit sin.’ This is no contradiction to anything I ever advanced. I everywhere allow that a child of God can and will commit sin, if he does not keep himself. But this, you say, is nothing to the present argument. Yes: it is the whole thing. If they keep themselves they do not, otherwise they can and do commit sin. I say nothing contrary to this in either sermon. But, ‘hence, you say, we conclude, that he who is born of God may possibly commit sin.’ An idle conclusion as ever was formed. For who ever denied it I flatly affirm it in both the sermons and in the very paragraph now before us. The only conclusion which I deny is that all Christians do and must commit sin as long as they live. Now, this you yourself (though you now seem to start at it) maintain from the beginning of your letter to the end viz. that all Christians do, and cannot but sin, more or less to their lives’ end. Therefore I do not ‘artfully put this conclusion’; but it is your own conclusion from your own premises. Indeed, were I artfully to put in anything in expounding the Word of God, I must be an errant knave. But I do not: my conscience bears me witness that I speak the very truth, so far as I know it, in simplicity and godly sincerity.

9. I think that all this time you are directly pleading for looseness of manners, and that everything you advance naturally tends thereto. This is my grand objection to that doctrine of the necessity of sinning; not only that it is false, but that it is directly subversive of all holiness. The doctrine of the Gnostics was not that a child of God does not commit sin, i.e. act the things which are forbidden in Scripture, but that they are not sin in him, that he is a child of God still; so they contended not for sinless but sinful perfection: just as different from what I contend for as heaven is from hell. What the Donatists were I do not know. But I suspect they were the real Christians of that age, and were therefore served by St. Augustine and his warm adherents as the Methodists are now by their zealous adversaries. It is extremely easy to blacken; and could I give myself leave, I could paint the consequences of your doctrine in at least as dark and odious colors as you could paint mine.

10. The passage of St. Peter (mentioned sect. 12) I still think proves all which I brought it to prove. ‘But you allow' (sect. 14) ‘that Paul and Barnabas did commit sin; and these were without all controversy fathers in Christ.’ That is not without controversy -- that either Barnabas when he left Paul or Peter when he dissembled at Antioch was at that time a father in Christ in St. John’s sense; though by office undoubtedly they were. Their example, therefore, only proves what no one denies – viz. that if a believer keep not himself, he may sin. Would the conclusion there drawn ‘be made only by a very weak opponent’ You are the man who makes them all, either from these or other premises: for you believe and maintain (1) that all the other Apostles committed sin sometimes; (2) that all the other Christians of the apostolic age sometimes committed sin; (3) that all other Christians in all ages do and will commit sin as long as they live; and (4) that every man must comitt sin, cannot help it, as long as he is in the body. You cannot deny one of these propositions, if you understand your own doctrine. It is you, therefore, who ‘cast dust in people’s eyes,’ if you dissemble your real sentiments. I declare mine with all the plainness I can; that, if I err, I may the sooner be convinced of it. Neither does it appear that St. Paul was ‘an aged father in Christ’ when he had that thorn in the flesh. I doubt whether he was above thirty years of age, fourteen years before he mentioned it to the Corinthians.’ You conclude’ (these are your words) ‘a Christian is so far perfect as not to commit sin, as to be free from all possibility of sinning. That this is your meaning is evident from your whole discourse.’ Not so. The contrary is glaringly evident from that whole discourse to which you before referred, as weR as from many parts of this. I conclude just this much, -- While he keepeth himself, a Christian doth not commit sin.

11. With regard to fathers in Christ, before you enter on the subject, you say I ‘set aside the experience of the best Christians.’ I did not tell you so: I say nothing about them. In a sermon of a single sheet (such it is, printed single) I had no room for anything but plain arguments from Scripture. I have somewhat to say, if need should be, from the head of Authority likewise -- yea, and abundantly more than you seem to apprehend. Sed nunc non erat his locus. [‘But now there was no room for them.’]

12. I think section 23 very closely and directly concerns the present subject. For if you have sinful thoughts still, then certainly every thought is not brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ. With regard to the 24th, you give one interpretation of those words, Every one that is perfect shall be as his Master; I another. You likewise appeal to the context; so do I. Sed adhuc sub judice lis est. [Horace’s Ars Poetica, 1. 78: ‘But just now the matter is in the judge’s hands.’] But I must observe, whether one interpretation or the other be true, to assert God can or does so renew His children as to save them from all evil tempers has no more alliance with blasphemy than with adultery. You make a little mistake as to section 26. I do not cite ‘is purified’ as St. John’s words; you say (in sect. 27) ‘As He is, so are we,’ refers to our being conformed to His patient longsuffering. It may; but it directly refers to our being made perfect in love. You do not answer or attempt to answer either of the arguments whereby I have proved that the cleansing from all unrighteousness does not mean justification only. Hitherto, therefore, the conclusion stands good -- that it relates chiefly, if not wholly, to sanctification.

13. In your last paragraph you say, ‘You set aside all authority, ancient and modern.’ Sir, who told you so I never did; it never entered my thoughts. Who it was gave you that rule I know not; but my father gave it me thirty years ago (I mean concerning reverence to the ancient Church and our own), and I have endeavored to walk by it to this day. But I try every Church and every doctrine by the Bible. This is the word by which we are to be judged in that day. Oh that we may then give up our account with joy! Whatever farther thoughts you are pleased to communicate will be seriously considered by, reverend dear sir,

Your affectionate brother and fellow laborer.
