To Robert Cart Brackenbury
Date: BRISTOL, March 9, 1782.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1782)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR SIR, -- The letter you refer to as giving me an account of Mrs. Brackenbury’s illness I have never seen. I did not hear anything of it till I received Mr. Collins’s letter from Raithby. What a comfort it is that we know the Lord reigneth, and that He disposes all things in heaven and earth in the very manner which He sees will be most for His own glory and for the good of those that love Him. I am firmly persuaded the present dispensation, severe as it may appear, will be found in the event a means of greater blessings than any you have yet received. Even already you find the consolations of the Holy One are not small with you. And He enables you to make the right use of this providence by devoting yourself more entirely to His service.

I am glad you have such a friend as Mr. Collins [Brian Bury Collins. See letter of June 14, 1780.] with you. I will write to Dr. Coke and desire him to look out for such a family near London as you want. I am not afraid of your speaking too little, but of your speaking too much. Stay! A thought just comes into my mind. On April the 4th I expect to be at Manchester, in order to visit the Societies in Lancashire, Cheshire, Yorkshire; and thence to proceed (if God permit) to Scotland. Perhaps it would be of use if you took part of the journey with me. You may let me know your thoughts by a line directed to Manchester. Let Mr. Collins and you strengthen each other's hands in God.

It is exceeding clear to me, first, that a dispensation of the gospel is committed to you; and, secondly, that you are peculiarly called to publish it in connection with us. It has pleased God to give so many and so strong evidences of this, that I see not how any reasonable person can doubt it. Therefore, what I have often said before I say again, and give it under my hand, that you are welcome to preach in any of our preaching-houses, in Great Britain or Ireland, whenever it is convenient for you. I commend you for preaching less frequently where you find less liberty of spirit (because no necessity is laid upon you with regard to this or that particular place), and for spending most time in those places where you find most probability of doing good. We have need to work while it is day. -- I am, dear sir,

Your ever affectionate friend and brother.
