To his Brother Charles
Date: NOTTINGHAM, April 4, 1783.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1783)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR BROTHER, -- Yesterday my second disorder left me, and I seem now to be recovering strength. [See previous letter.] On Monday next I hope to be at Derby; on Tuesday at Blewcastle-under-Lyme; on Wednesday at Chester; and at Holyhead as soon as God permits. I have no desire to stay above three weeks in Ireland, and hope to be in England again before the end of May.

On the day appointed, March 25, I went from Birmingham to Hilton Park. [See Journal, vi.. 401; W.H.S. v. 170n.; and letter of April 25 to his brother.] A little before we reached the Park gate Miss Freeman met us in Sir Philip Gibbes’s chaise. After staring awhile, she came into my chaise, and she was convinced that I was alive.

That afternoon and the next day I gathered strength apace. The place was agreeable, and much more the company. Lady Gibbes put me in mind of one of Queen Elizabeth's dames of honour. Her daughters are exceeding amiable, but sink under Miss Freeman's superior sense, and begin to feel that they are not Christians. She has been of great service to them, and hies at them day and night to show them what is real religion. On Wednesday night they were much struck; the younger sister could not contain herself, but burst out into a passion of tears. M. F. herself seems to be utterly disconcerted, seeking rest, but finding none. If Sally is not hurt by her, she (Sally [Charles Wesley’s daughter.]) will help her much. She now feels her want of help.

I wish King George (like Louis XIV) would be his own Prime Minister. The nation would soon feel the difference. All these things will work together for good. Let us work while the day is! I take no thought for the morrow.

Peace be with you all. Adieu.

Revd. Mr. C. Wesley, Marybone,

London.

Hester Ann Roe writes in her Journal for 1783: ‘Sunday, April 6. -- I had a letter from dear Mr. Wesley, who tells me he is hastening to Holyhead in his way to Dublin, and he will be at Newcastle on Tuesday.’ She says she met him at Lane End on Tuesday, and heard him preach; then he took her in his chaise to Newcastle-under-Lyme, where he preached from ‘One thing is needful.’ She heard him again next morning at five. See Journal of Mrs. Hester Ann Rogers, pp. 210-11.
