To Various Friends
Date: LONDON, November 20, 1769.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1769)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BROTHER,--Two years ago many of our brethren, who considered the number of the people called Methodists and the circumstances which a great part of them were in, believed we should pay off the debt at once. I myself was fully persuaded that between twenty and thirty thousand people were well able to do this; but I was not at all persuaded that they were willing. However, I said little upon that head, being unwilling to weaken the hands of those who were of another mind.

It was a good step which was made the first year. Upwards of 5,000 were contributed; by which means the most pressing debts were paid, and many of our brethren were firmly persuaded we should make an end of the whole the second year. I well knew the Methodists could do this; but I saw no reason to think they would. And when the collection was brought in, amounting to above 2,000, it was full as much as I expected.

'But what can be done this third year 5,000 remain unpaid. Are the Methodists able to clear this in one year' Yes; as well as they are able to clear 50. But are they willing That I cannot tell: I am sure a few of them are; even of those who have a large measure of worldly goods; yea, and of those who are lately increased in substance, who have twice, perhaps ten or twenty times, as much as when they saw me first. Are you one of them Whether you are or not, whether your substance is less or more, are you willing to give what assistance you can to do what you can without hurting your family

'But if I do so, I cannot lay out so much in such and such things as I intended.' That is true. But will this hurt you What if, instead of enlarging, you should for the present contract your expenses spend less, that you may be able to give more Would there be any harm in this

'But neither can I lay up so much.' This likewise is most true. But is it ill husbandry to lay up treasure in heaven Is that lost which is given to God Whether you go to Him soon, or whether He gives you a few years longer here--in either case is it not wise to lay up for yourself a good foundation, that you may attain eternal life

'But I thought we should have paid the debt in one year, and so need no farther collections.' I never thought so. I knew it might be paid in one year, but never expected it would. There is more likelihood of its being paid this year. It will, if our brethren exert themselves: do you, for one; let nothing be wanting on your part. Yet do not imagine 'we shall need no farther collections.' Indeed we shall, though we owed not one shilling. Do not you remember the original design of the Yearly Subscription [See Works, viii. 335-6.] Paying our debts is but one branch of the design. It answers several other valuable ends equally necessary. It enables us to carry the gospel through the three kingdoms. And as long as we pursue that glorious design, this subscription will be necessary; though it is true, when once this burthen is removed, a far smaller contribution will suffice.

However, let the morrow take thought for the things of itself: to-day do what you can, for the love of God, of your brethren, of the cause of God, and of

Your affectionate brother.

PS.--This is the letter, a copy of which I intend sending this or next post to each of the chief persons in your circuit. You will second it in good earnest. Try what you can do, going on in the cheerfulness of faith. Probably you will take in subscriptions by Christmas, and receive what is subscribed between Easter and Midsummer. Be not weary in well doing; you shall reap if you faint not.
