To Nathanael Price
Date: BRISTOL, December 6, 1739.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1739)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Our sincere thanks attend you for your seasonable assistance. I have writ to our dear brother Howell Harris, and sent him a short account of our design which we are carrying on in Kingswood also: which perhaps may be agreeable to them who are with you too; for which reason I have sent you a copy of it, namely :--

‘Few persons have lived long in the West of England who have not heard of the colliers of Kingswood: a people famous, from the beginning hitherto, for neither fearing God nor regarding man; so ignorant of the things of God that they could only be compared to the beasts that perish; and therefore utterly without desire of instruction, as well as without the means of it.

‘To this people Mr. Whitefield last spring began to preach the gospel of Christ; and as there were thousands of them who went to no place of public worship, he went out into their own wilderness “to seek and to save that which was lost.” When he was called away, others went “into the highways and hedges to compel them to come in.” And by the grace of God their labor was not in vain. The scene was entirely changed. Kingswood does not now, as a year ago, resound with cursing and blasphemy. It is no longer the seat of drunkenness, uncleanness, and all idle diversions that lead thereto. It is no longer filled with wars and rightings, with clamor and bitterness, with strife and envying. Peace and love are now there: the people in general are become mild, gentle, and easy to be entreated; they do not cry, neither strive, and hardly is their voice heard in the streets, or indeed in their own wood, unless when they are at their usual evening diversions, singing praise unto God their Savior.

‘That their children also might know the things that make for their peace, it was proposed some months since to build a school in Kingswood; and after many difficulties, the foundation of it was laid in June last in the middle of the wood, on a place called Two-Mile-Hill, between the London and Bath Roads, about three measured miles from Bristol. A large room was begun there for a school, having four small rooms at each end for the schoolmasters (and hereafter, if it should please God, some poor children) to lodge in it. Two persons are ready to teach, so soon as the house is fit to receive them, the shell of which is nearly finished. It is proposed in the usual hours of the day to teach chiefly the poorer children to read, write, and cast accounts; but more especially, by God's assistance, “to know God, and Jesus Christ whom He hath sent”: the elder people, being not so proper to be mixed with children (for we expect scholars of all ages, some of them gray-headed), will be taught in the inner room, either early in the morning of late at night, so as their work nay not be hindered.

‘It is true, although the masters will not take nay pay (for the love of Christ constrains them, as they freely received, freely to give), yet this undertaking is attended with great expense. But let Him that feedeth the young ravens see to that. If He puts it into your heart, or the hearts of any of your friends, to assist us in bringing this work to perfection, in this world look for no recompense; but it shall be remembered in that day, when our Lord shall say unto you, “Inasmuch as ye did it unto the least of these My brethren, ye did it unto me.”’

My love and service attends all our brethren at Cardiff, especially My. Glascot. [Thomas Glascot, one of the overseers of the poor, entertained Wesley on Oct. 18 1739, and went with him to Newport next morning. Charles Wesley stayed with him on his first visit to Cardiff in Nov. 1740 (W.H.S. iii. 176). On Sept. 1, 1758, many followed Wesley to Mr. Glascot’s house, ‘where two of three were cut to the heart, particularly both his daughters and cried to God with strong cries and tears.’ On May 10, 1781 Wesley is at Cardiff, and refers to him as a member of the old Society now ‘gone hence.’ See letter of May 13, 1764.] – I am, in haste, my dear brother,

Your Affectionately.
