To Mrs. Pendarves
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1731)
Author: John Wesley
---
June 19 [1731].

Is it a proof that I am or that I am not duly sensible of my obligations to dear Aspasia, that I so extremely desire to contract more by more frequently conversing with her Would it were possible for me, once a month at least, to have the pleasure of seeing your thoughts! You shall not doubt but it would give me improvement too: the same freedom that shines through your last, whenever I admired it, could not but make upon me a lasting as well as pleasing impression.

There was no need of Selima's letter to our Varanese, or of that she was since pleased to favor me with, to make either of us wish both her and Aspasia a share in-all our happiest moments. 'Tis but a few days since that I had a little share in your misfortune in parting with a sincere friend. [He refers to Ann Granville's leaving London, and Dr. Morley's dearth.] But I shall go to him again, if he does not return to me; though he is gone a longer journey than Selima, I hope as far as paradise.

If Providence has used me as an instrument of doing any good to Aspasia, I had almost said, ' I have my reward.' Some part of it I have undoubtedly. The thought of having added anything to your ease will make many of my hours the happier. Yet perhaps I ought not to desire you should be easy at the common conversation of the world, which, if once it comes to be indifferent to us, will scarce be long before it be agreeable. We are indeed, as to this, in a great strait: either it displeases -- and who would be in pain, could it be avoided or it pleases, which surely causes, if it does not spring from, an entire depravation of our affections. Which side shall we turn to Oh that there were a middle way! that we could shun this unpleasant or fatally-pleasing impertinence! But it cannot be. All we can do is to be on our guard when we are engaged in it, and to engage no more in it than is plainly necessary.

Do not be surprised, good Aspasia, when I assure you that I exceedingly rejoice at your other affliction. I am extremely glad to find you among those few who are yet concerned for the honor of their Master, and can't but congratulate you upon your wise choice. ' If we suffer with Him, we shall also reign with Him.' I know there are in these last days many seduced by fair speeches 'to deny the Lord that bought them,' to affirm that He and the Father are not one, and that it is robbery to think Him equal with God. Indeed, the first reformers of the Christian Faith in this point (with whom Dr. Clarke [See letters of Dec. 6, 1726, and Sept. 24, 1753.] joins), only modestly asserted that the Church was bought with the blood of Christ, but not of God, i.e. not of 'the God who is over all, who is and was and is to come, the Almighty.' And it was many hundred years after, that Socinus roundly maintained that Christ never purchased any Church at all, nor 'gave His life a ransom for any man, all those phrases being purely metaphorical.' That any one had any hope of. outgoing him I never heard before; but surely those gentlemen who will prove them to be fictitious have a much better courage than even Socinus. Yet there is one step farther for these too -- to affirm the same of all the saints; and then Tindal's [Matthew Tindal (1657 - 1733), LL.D., the chief exponent of Deism, whose Christianity as Old as the Creation appeared in 1730.] arguments are ready to their hands.

That sometimes even a good man falls a prey to the cunning craftiness of these deceivers I can easily believe, having known one (otherwise) strictly virtuous person who was under that infatuation several years. That such an one has nothing to hope for from the terms of the gospel is likewise exceeding plain: seeing exactly equivalent to the words of the Church of England (who did not rashly adopt them in her Liturgy), ' This faith except every man keep whole and undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly,' are those of the very person they thus outrage, ' He that believeth not shall be damned.' Not that we have authority to apply this general sentence to any one particular offender; because, all sin being a voluntary breach of a known law, none but He who seeth the heart, and consequently how far this breach of His law is voluntary in each particular person, can possibly know which infidel shall perish and which be received to mercy.

Whenever you recommend to that all-sufficient mercy any of those that have erred and are deceived, then especially, dear Aspasia, do not forget Your ever obliged CYRUS.

The best wishes of Araspe's are yours. Adieu.
