To Dorothy Furly
Date: BIRSTALL, May 18, 1757.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1757)
Author: John Wesley
---
The great point is to pick out in Bristol (as in all places such acquaintance as have a deep fear of God, a continual consciousness of His presence, and a strong thirst after His whole image. [See letter of June 18.] Such I take most of the leaders of bands to be; and such are many of the poor in the Society, but extremely few of the rich or honorable Methodists are of that number. My dear sister, I have been in pain for you on their account. When I talked with You last, you could relish the simplicity of the gospel, you were athirst for all mankind that was in Christ and wanted to walk just as He walked. O let none persuade you, either by example or advice, to make any, the least, deviation from that good way. Make no abatement; do not soften the plain, rough gospel; do not

Measure back your steps to earth again.

Be not, either inwardly or outwardly, conformed to this world; but be a Christian altogether.

Health you shall have if health be best. And He that gives it will give a blessing with it -- an increase of spiritual as well as of bodily strength, but it is strength to labor not to sit still. And this strength will either increase or decrease in the same proportion with your sense of His love. You may lose this sense either (1) by committing sin; or (2) by omitting duty; or (3) by giving way to pride, anger or any other inward sin; or (4) by not watching unto prayer, by yielding to indolence or spiritual sloth. But it is no more necessary that we should ever lose it than it is necessary we should omit duty or commit sin. Mr. Law, therefore, speaking on this head, betrays deep ignorance both of the Scripture and the inward work of God. You are more liable to receive hurt from his late writings than from any others which I know. I shall write to Sammy [Her brother at Cambridge.] in the morning: it would not have been amiss if you had spoken freely to me concerning him. Why should not you, now you have in some measure broke that natural shyness, speak all that is in your heart to, dear Miss Furly,

Your truly affectionate friend and brother.
