To Ann Bolton
Date: BRISTOL, September 27, 1777.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1777)
Author: John Wesley
---
Shall not I speak to my dear friend all that is in my heart? I know no reason why I should not. I have done so from the time I knew you first, and more especially from the time you was with me in London. Then I took more intimate know­ledge of you: I tasted of your spirit. I observed all your tempers, and marked you down as the ' sister of my choice.' As such I have looked upon you ever since without any inter­mission or variation. And sometimes you have been free and open to me; but at other times you have been more shy and distant. My Nancy, let that time of distance and reserve return no more! Be to me always (if you can) what I am to you, a faithful and tender-hearted friend.

Undoubtedly Satan, who well understands the manner how the mind is influenced by the body, can, by means of those parts in the animal machine which are more immediately subservient to thinking, raise a thousand perceptions and emotions in the mind, so far as God is pleased to permit. I doubt not but he was the chief agent in your late painful exercises. [See letter of Sept. 15 to her.] And you gave him advantage by reasoning with him--that is, fighting him at his own weapons; instead of simply looking up and saying, 'Thou shalt answer for me, O Lord, my God.'

You undoubtedly want more thankfulness. And you want more simplicity; that grace, Cambray says, 'which cuts the soul off from all unnecessary reflections upon itself.' You are encompassed with ten thousand mercies; and the greatest of all is, ' Christ in a pure and spotless heart! ' Beware of ever admitting any doubt or reasoning concerning this! Where­unto you have attained hold fast! And use all the grace you have received. Warn every one, and exhort every one, especially those who groan after full salvation.

I cannot on any account pass an whole day without com­mending you to God in prayer. I thank you for writing to me so soon.

Continue to love and pray for, my dear Nancy,

Yours most affectionately.
