To his Brother Charles
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1755)
Author: John Wesley
---
LONDON, June. 30 1755.

DEAR BROTHER, -- Do not you understand that they all promised by Thomas Walsh not to administer even among themselves I think that an huge point given up -- perhaps more than they could give up with a clear conscience. They ‘showed an excellent spirit’ in this very thing. Likewise when I (not to say you) spoke once, and again spoke, satis pro imperio. [Terence’s Phormio, I. iv. 19: ‘With authority enough.’] When I reflected on their answer I admired their spirit and was ashamed of my own.

The practical conclusion was ‘Not to separate from the Church.’ Did we not all agree in this Surely either you or I must have been asleep or we could not differ so widely in a matter of fact!

Here is Charles Perronet raving ‘because his friends have given up all’ and Charles Wesley ‘because they have given up nothing’; and I in the midst, staring and wondering both at one and the other. I do not want to do anything more, unless I could bring them over to my opinion; and I am not in haste for that.

I have no time to write anything more till I have finished the Notes. [His Notes upon the New Testament were finished this year. See letter of April 9, 1755, and June 18, 1756.] Nor am I in haste. I stand open to the fight. Let it be worded any way. I will give ten pounds between this and Christmas; -- this I think I can do, though I am just now saddled with Suky Hare, [Jackson calls Suky Hare ‘a relation of the Wesleys.’ She was probably the child of the young seamstress whom Hall seduced. See Stevenson’s Wesley Family, p. 370; and letter of April 24, 1776.] to pay for her board as well as learning her trade. Why do not you send for the boy to Bristol I do not object.

If Mr. Lampe’s tunes [John F. Lampe was a musical composer engaged at Covent Garden Theatre. He received much spiritual blessing through the Wesleys, and composed tunes for their hymns.] are in print already, it is enough. I wish you had told me this six months ago, and the rest (which only we want) should have, been printed before now. Pray send them by Michael Fenwick to me hem. He will be in Bristol next week.

Cyprian is a terrible witness of the sense of the then Church. For he speaks it not as his own private sense, but as incontestable, allowed rule. And by Antistes [The passage of Cyprian, cited in the letter of June 23, 1739 is Populus a scelerato antistite separare se debet.] there I really believe he means the minister of a parish. That pinches me; nevertheless I think with you till I see more light, though I should be hard set to defend myself against a skilful adversary. When I am convinced it is my duty, I will follow Cyprian’s advice. The same say you, and no more. I do not fluctuate yet. But I can’t answer the arguments on that side the question. Jos. Cowley says, ‘For such and such reasons I dare not hear a drunkard preach or mad prayers.’ I answer, ‘I dare.’ But I can’t answer his reasons. Adieu!

I can stay here four or five weeks. Then I purpose for Cornwall. Can you come hither when I go Or will you go into Cornwall for me My love to my sister.

What could put it into your head to recommend (if you did recommend) that rude, boisterous clown to Mr. Lloyd [See letter of March 20.]
