To Mrs. Pendarves
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1731)
Author: John Wesley
---
August 12 [1731].

Nothing could have made our journey more prosperous than it was except the seeing Aspasia. We were successful in every other respect far beyond our expectations. Indeed, the chief design we went upon was very unlikely, humanly speaking, to succeed at all. But what is likelihood against any undertaking if He be for it ' whom all things serve'!

I am sensible how good you axe to me, Aspasia; both in writing so soon, engaged as you were, and in permitting me to hope that when you are less engaged you will again bestow some moments upon me. But this is not the only reason why I shall be heartily glad, whenever you are rescued from many of your engagements, whenever it is in your power to burst those chains that hang heavy on your noblest purposes and to move with a full and free course toward the haven where you would be!

I have a good hope that you will continue to disdain all the vanities that surround you, and that those choicest instruments of mischief, 'they that do no harm,' will never be able to undermine your resolution; because you take the true method of defense, the not standing barely on the defensive. Oh may you ever retain this just sense of our state: may you ever remember that we are to resist, not to stand still; that they who would overcome are not barely to repel, but likewise to retort the darts of the enemy; that to be innocent we are to be active, to avoid evil we must do good, and if it be possible in that very particular wherein we are solicited to evil. Hath the fool said aloud, ' There is no God' so much the rather let us prove there is one. Is His Son degraded into an equality with the sons of men the more zealously let us assert His equality with God. Do any blaspheme His Word that is our time to show that not otherwise under heaven can we obtain salvation. Who, indeed, is sufficient to prove these things against an artful, practiced unbeliever If even your address be not sufficient of itself, yet He is with you who is sufficient for all things, who hath often strengthened the weak for this very thing, 'to still the enemy and the 'self-avenger.'

'Tis a great instance of His never failing them that seek Him that the lady you mention has such a friend as Aspasia. Afflicted as she is, I can scarce call her unhappy; nay, I am almost tempted to envy her. Too tender a conscience is a glorious excess! Scarce has any one fallen by fearing to fall. Yet it is an excess; and I wish it be in my power to contribute toward the removing it.

Two things she seems to complain of most, inattention in prayer and uneasiness before the sacrament. The latter probably is owing in good part to the former, which therefore appears to require consideration most.

As to this I would ask first: 'Can you help it If not, do you think God is good If He be, He can't be displeased at what you can't avoid. That would be to be angry at Himself, since 'tis His will, not yours, that you are not more attentive.' Next I would ask: 'Do you expect while upon earth to be "as the angels of God in heaven" If not, you must expect to have a share in that infirmity which no one quite shakes off till he leaves earth behind him.'

As to shaking it off in some degree, if she thinks that worth while, and is resolved to use any probable means of doing it, I could propose one or two that seldom fail to be of service to those that regularly use them: ' Are you inattentive in prayer pray oftener. Do you address to God twice a day already then do so three times. Do you find yourself very uneasy before the sacrament, though you receive it every month your next resolution, with God's leave, should be to receive it every week.'

Your friend's case appears to be this: God, seeing the earnestness of heart with which she chooses virtue, sees that she is a fit object for a large measure of His blessed Spirit. As a preparative for this, He sends this pain {whether the immediate cause of it be in her body or mind) to cleanse her from all remaining sinful affections and to balance all those temptations that might prevent her pressing forward to that degree of holiness which becomes them whom God thus delights to honor. If so, it will continue with her till it has had its perfect work.

I want to say a great deal more on this subject, but am exceedingly straitened for time, being to begin a long journey in a day or two, though not so long an one as Aspasia. I was going to say nor so dangerous. But I know no danger that a lover of God can be in till God is no more, or at least has quitted the reins and left Chance to govern the world. Oh yes, there is one danger; and a great one it is, which nothing less than constant care can prevent--the ceasing to love Him: but that care will never be wanting in Aspasia. She will continually watch over her affections, and be going on from strength to strength; every new scene will be to her a new scene of action, of improving herself and others. This reflection greatly softens the thought of the distance that will be shortly between us; especially when I reflect farther that you will still indulge in a share of that improvement, dear Aspasia,

Your most faithful friend and most obliged servant,

CYRUS.

I intend to stay but a fortnight at my father's. If you don't set out till I return, may I not hear from you You will believe that the gratitude and best wishes of Araspes as well as Cyrus will ever attend Aspasia. Adieu,
