To Arthur Keene
Date: LONDON, February 17, 1785.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1785)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BROTHER, - I thank you for the pains you have taken on behalf of poor Robert Hide, [See letter of July 23, 1784.] and am sincerely glad you have at length succeeded. Now, if he continue honest and industrious, he will not want either employment or food. Want of either of the one or the other must have exposed him to a thousand temptations.

When several disapproved of my sending Mr. Rogers and his wife to Dublin, supposing them unequal to the task, I was determined to overrule, believing myself to be a competent judge both of their gifts and grace. And the event has answered my expectations. I am not disappointed of my hope; and I am persuaded neither they nor you will ever be weary of well-doing.

You have great reason to bless God for the good state of your temporal affairs also. And, indeed, I have always observed whenever the work of God goes on He withholds no manner of thing that is good.

It was impossible to keep the present schoolmaster unless his spirit had been entirely changed. He is extremely unfair. But I am afraid another is recommended to you that is likely to prove no better. I have known him from a child, and give you fair warning. Take care what you do. If you are wise, secure Mr. Fox at any price. That man is sterling gold. [For the school, see letter of March 3, 1784, to Keene. Patrick Fox became master.] But you will have no blessing from God and no praise from wise men if you take that vile sordid measure (especially at this time!) of so reducing the salary. You must give 40 a year at the least.

As soon after the 10th of April as I can I purpose (God willing) to embark for Dublin. I should be glad to accept of your kind invitation. But it is a great way to go, particularly at night. Otherwise I should be more at home with you than anywhere else. [He stayed at the preachers' house. See letters of Feb. 1 and April 11.] I commend you and yours to the divine protection; and am, dear Arthur,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

I abhor the thought of our master's keeping an evening school. It would swallow up the time he ought to have for his own improvement. Give him enough to live comfortably upon without this drudgery.

Feb. 20. - Pray tell Mr. Rogers I hope to see him before the middle of April and to visit the classes. I am glad he has written to Mr. Fox; but I have told you my mind about the salary.
