To George Whitefield
Date: LONDON, March 16, 1739.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1739)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BROTHER, -- On Thursday, the 8th instant, we breakfasted at Mr. Score's, [Oxford,] who, is patiently waiting for the salvation of God. Thence we went to Mrs. Compton's, who has set her face as a flint, and knows she shall not be ashamed. [See Journal, ii. 147.] After we had spent some time in prayer, Mr. Washington came with Mr. Gibs, and read several passages out of Bishop Patrick's [Simon Patrick (1626-1707). ‘A man of eminently shining life,’ says Burnet. As Rector of St. Paul's, Covent Garden, he stayed in his parish to minister to sufferers during the Great Plague. In 1689 he became Bishop of Chichester, and of Ely in 1691. He was one of the five founders of the S. P.C.K. He was much influenced by the ' Cambridge Platonists.' Extracts from his Works appear in Wesley's Christian Library (vols: xxi. and xxxii.); and ‘Bishop Patrick’s Picture of an Antinomian’ was inserted in the Arminian Mag. 1778, PP. 402-7. There are at least five records of Wesley's use of Patrick's devotional manuals in his early Journal and Diary (see Journal Index). The Parable of the Pilgrim, published in 1665, when he was Rector of St. Paul's, was noticed by Southey, who wrote: ‘Though the parable is poorly imagined and ill-sustained, there is a great deal of sound instruction conveyed in a sober, manly, and not unfrequently a felicitous manner.’] Parable of the Pilgrim, to prove that we were all under a delusion, and that we were to be justified by faith and works. Charles Metcalf [Charles Metcalf, of London. See Journal, i. 455d, if. 143d.] withstood him to the face, and declared the simple truth of the gospel. When they were gone, we again besought our Lord that He would maintain His own cause. Meeting with Mr. Gibs soon after, he was almost persuaded to seek salvation only in the blood of Jesus. Meanwhile Mr. Washington and Watson [‘George Watson has not missed reading prayers there [at the Castle] yet. I have accidentally met him and spoke with him hah an hour, and cannot help thinking him a sober man in the main’ (Clayton to Wesley, Journal, viii. 280).] were going about to all parts and confirming the unfaithful. At four we met them (without design), and withstood them again. From five to six we were confirming the brethren. At six I expounded at Mrs. Ford's; as I designed to do at Mrs. Compton's at seven. But Mr. Washington was got thither before me, and just beginning to read Bishop Bull against the Witness of the Spirit. He told me he was authorized by the minister of the parish so to do. I advised all that valued their souls to go away; and, perceiving it to be the less evil of the two, that they who remained might not be. perverted, I entered directly into the controversy, touching both the cause and the fruits of justification. In the midst of the dispute James Mears's wife began to be in pain. I prayed with her a little when Mr. Washington was gone; and then (having comforted the rest as I was enabled) we went down to Sister Thomas's. In the way Mrs. Mears's pains so increased that she could not avoid crying out aloud in the street. With much difficulty we got her to Mrs. Shrieve's (where also Mr. Washington had been before us). We made our request known to God, and He heard us and sent her deliverance in the same hour. There was great power among us, and her husband also was set at liberty. Soon after, I felt such a damp strike into my soul (and so did Mrs. Compton and several others) as I do not remember to have ever found before. I believed the enemy was near us. We immediately cried to our Lord to stir up His power and come and help us. Presently Mrs. Shrieve fell into a strange agony both of body and mind; her teeth gnashed together; her knees smote each other; and her whole body trembled exceedingly. We prayed on, and within an hour the storm ceased. She now enjoys a sweet calm, having remission of sins, and knowing that her Redeemer liveth.

At my return to Mrs. Fox's, I found our dear brother Kin-chin just come from Dummer. We rejoiced, and gave thanks, and prayed, and took sweet counsel together; the result of which was that, instead of setting out for London (as I designed) on Friday morning, I should set for Dummer, there being no person to supply that church on Sunday. On Friday accordingly I set out, and came in the evening to Reading, where I found a young man, Cennick [See letter of April 27, 1741, to Whitefield.] by name, strong in the faith of our Lord Jesus. He had begun a Society there the week before; but the minister of the parish had now wellnigh overturned it. Several of the members of it spent the evening with us, and it pleased God to strengthen and comfort them.

In the morning our brother Cennick rode with me, whom I found willing to suffer, yea' to die, for his Lord. We came to Dummer in the afternoon. Miss Molly [Charles Kinchin's sister, who was an invalid. See Journal, i. 453d.] was very weak in body, but strong in the Lord and in the power of His might. Surely her light ought not thus to be hid under a bushel. She has forgiveness, but not the witness of the Spirit (perhaps for the conviction of our dear brother Hutchings, who seemed to think them inseparable).

On Sunday morning we had a large and attentive congregation. In the evening the room at Basingstoke was full and my mouth was opened. We expected much opposition, but found none at all.

On Monday, Mrs. Cleminger being in pain and fear, we prayed, and our Lord gave her peace. About noon we spent an hour or two in conference and prayer with Miss Molly; and then set out in a glorious storm, but even I had a calm within. We had appointed the little Society at Reading to meet us in the evening; but the enemy was too vigilant. Almost as soon as we went out of town the minister sent or went to each of the members, and, being arguing and threatening, utterly confounded them, so that they were all scattered abroad. Mr. Cennick's own sister did not dare to see us, but was gone out on purpose to avoid it. I trust, however, our God will gather them together again, and that the gates of hell shall not prevail against them.

About one in the afternoon on Tuesday I came to Oxford again, and from Mr. Fox's (where all were in peace) I went to Mrs. Compton's. I-found the minister of the parish had been there before me, to whom she had plainly declared the thing as it was – ‘that she never had a true faith in Christ till two in the afternoon on the Tuesday preceding.’ After some other warm and sharp expressions, ‘he told her upon that word he must repel her from the Holy Communion.’ Finding she was not convinced of her error even by that argument, he left her calmly rejoicing in God her Savior.

At six in the evening we were at Mr. Fox's Society; about seven at Mrs. Compton's: the power of our Lord was present at both, and all our hearts were knit together in love.

The next day we had an opportunity to confirm most, if not all, the souls which had been shaken. In the afternoon I preached at the Castle. We afterwards joined together in prayer, having now Charles Graves added to us, who is rooted and grounded in the faith. We then went to Mr. Gibs's room, where were Mr. Washington and Watson. Here an hour was spent in conference and prayer, but without any disputing. At four in the morning I left Oxford. God hath indeed planted and watered. Oh may He give the increase ! -- I am, &c.
