To Walter Churchey
Date: NEAR LONDON, July 22, 1788.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1788)
Author: John Wesley
---
My DEAR BROTHER, -- I am glad you spoke to Mr. Cowper. What pity is it that such talents as his should be employed in so useless a manner! [The reference is to The Task. See letters of Sept. 20, 1786, and Sept. 27, 1788.]

Mr. Bradburn delivered your papers to me a few days ago. [See letters of June 26 and Aug. 8 to Churchey.] But this is so busy a time that I had not time to go through them till to-day. In the translation of The Art of Painting [This poem, translated from the Latin of Alphonse du Fresnoy, with notes by R. Graham, fills 98 pages. See letter of Aug. 8.] there are many very good lines; but there are some that want a good deal of filing, and many that are obscure. This is the general fault. The sense is so much crowded that it is not easy to be understood. For many years I have not had any bookseller but Mr. Atlay, and my Assistants. I doubt whether any bookseller will buy Fresnoy. Some of the shorter copies are good sense and good poetry. My brother has left a translation of the Book of Psalms, and verses enough to make up at least six volumes in duodecimo. [He left three small 4to volumes of hymns and poems, a poetic version of a considerable part of the Book of Psalms (afterwards inserted with short notes in the Arminian Magazine), and five 4to volumes of hymns on the Four Gospels and the Acts. See Poetical Works of J. and C. Wesley; Jackson's Charles Wesley, ii. 451.] I could but ill spare him now I am myself so far declined into the vale of years. But it is the Lord; let Him do what seemeth Him good. Our time is now short. Let my dear Sister Churchey and you and I make the best of it. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

 

 

 

 

To W. H. Kilburn

LONDON, July 22, 1788.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am glad to receive a letter from you on any account; because I love you, and always did. I think you will have reason to praise God for your preachers [Conference began on July 29. The Norwich appointments were John Poole, Richard Reece, and Thomas Kelk.] the ensuing year. And we shall not be unwilling to help you a little further. By-and-by you will be able to help yourselves. Only love one another and serve God in earnest--I am

Your affectionate brother.
