To the Earl of Shelburne
Date: LONDON, December 1782.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1782)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY LORD, -- If I wrong your Lordship, I am sorry for it; but I really believe your Lordship fears God: and I hope your Lordship has no unfavorable opinion of the Christian revelation. This encourages me to trouble your Lordship with a few lines, which otherwise I should not take upon me to do.

Above thirty years ago a motion was made in Parliament for raising and embodying the militia, and for exercising them (to save time) on Sunday. When the motion was like to pass, an old gentleman stood up and said, ‘Mr. Speaker, I have one objection to this: I believe an old book called the Bible.’ The members looked at one another, and the motion was dropped.

Must not all others who believe the Bible have the very same objection And from what I have seen, I cannot but think these are still three-fourths of the nation. Now, setting religion out of the question, is it expedient to give such a shock to so many millions of people at once And certainly it would shock them extremely, it would wound them in a very tender part. For would not they, would not all England, would not all Europe, consider this as a virtual repeal of the Bible And would not all serious persons say, ‘We have little religion in the land now; but by this step we shall have less still. For, wherever this pretty show is to be seen, the people will flock together, and will lounge away so much time before and after it that the churches will be emptier than they are at present!’

My Lord, I am concerned for this on a double account. First, because I have personal obligations to your Lordship, and would fain, even for this reason, recommend your Lordship to the love and esteem of all over whom I have any influence. Secondly, because I now reverence your Lordship for your office’ sake, and believe it to be my bounden duty to do all that is in my little power to advance your Lordship's influence and reputation.

Will your Lordship permit me to add a word in my old-fashioned way I pray Him that has all power in heaven and earth to prosper all your endeavors for the public good; and am, my Lord,

Your Lordship’s willing servant.
