To William Mondet
Date: CORK STREET, April 16, 1748.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1748)
Author: John Wesley
---
SIR,--A warm letter, subscribed by Mr. Binns and you, was given me the evening before I left Dublin. The most material part of it ran thus: 'Why did you not settle that affair with Mr. Cennick before you preached in the house, which you could not preach in a fortnight ago for conscience' sake' Have patience: I will tell you why. I did not settle that affair with Mr. Cennick before he went away because I heard not one word of his going till he was agone. Otherwise it was my full design to have settled it then, which might have been done in a few hours' time. I did not preach in the house a fortnight before because I was determined not to preach there till I should have made Mr. Cennick one more offer, as I thought brotherly love required; but after I had done this and he appeared to me (comparing his behaviour to me with his words to others) to trifle and put me off, I could not in conscience delay preaching there any longer. The fault lay at his door, and I now conceived myself to be clear in the sight of God and man, even though I should never have made him another offer of the place at all.

You go on: 'How can you venture to take God's name in your mouth, and to call upon God in an house, at which time your own conscience must tell you that you have taken the house over people's heads It is our opinion, if you had the least feeling of God's love in your heart, you could not do it.' I suppose it is your opinion. But I stand before an higher Judge.

You entirely mistake my motive of acting. I never looked upon the taking this house as 'the taking it over people's heads.' For it was advertised; and you positively refused to take it. This was not the ground of my scruple. But I desired to do as I would be done to. And I have done so to the best of my knowledge. Lord, what I know not teach Thou me!

That I added after all, I 'am still ready, if it shall be required, to relinquish it at a month's warning,' you ought to have acknowledged as a fresh and signal proof both of uprightness and brotherly kindness.

Mr. William Mondet.
