To James Hutton
Date: BRISTOL, May 28, 1739.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1739)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BRETHERN,--On Sunday, the 13th, I began expounding the 13th of the First of Corinthians at the Bowling Green. [On Saturdays and Sundays Wesley preached a course of sermons on Charity at the Bowling Green (where All Saints and Wellington Streets now stand). See entries in Diary; and next letter.] About six thousand were present. More than half that number were at Hanharn Mount, to whom I explained ‘the promise by faith of Jesus Christ’; as I did to about six thousand at Rose Green after I came from Clifton, where it pleased our good God to give me a strong mouth in speaking on those words, ‘He that drinketh of this water shall thirst again; but whoso drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water which I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.’

Monday, 14th, about five thousand were at the Brickyard, whom I exhorted to be ‘as little children.’ Three mourners were comforted this evening, as was one the night before.

Mrs. Labbe (educated as an Anabaptist) was baptized the next day and filled with the Holy .Ghost. At three in the afternoon I preached at Two-Mile-Hill on those words of Isaiah (upon which the book opened) [Here a line is left blank in the letter.] ....

Afterwards we went to look out a proper place for the school, and at last pitched on one between the London and Bath Roads. Soon after five I began expounding at the Back Lane on the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees; but, the house being too small, I stood in a little garden at one end of the lane, so that all who were in the lane or at the windows or on the adjoining walls (about a thousand) could hear well. The power of God fell on several of those that heard, one or two of whom were soon comforted; as were three others at the Society in Baldwin Street. About ten, two that had before been comforted, but were in heaviness again, came to Mrs. Grevil. We prayed, and they were again filled with peace and joy in believing.

Wednesday, 16th, the rain prevented many from coming to Baptist Mills; but twelve or fifteen hundred stayed. While I was taking occasion from those words of Isaiah, chap. liii. verses 5 and 6, to call poor sinners to Christ, a young man began beating his breast and strongly crying out for mercy. During our prayer God put a new song in his mouth. Some mocked, and others believed, particularly a maid servant of Baptist Mills, who went home full of anguish, and is now full of peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.

The portion of scripture which came (in turn) to be explained to-day at Newgate was the former part of the 7th of St. John. The words I was led chiefly to insist on were, ‘The world cannot hate you; but Me it hateth, because I testify of it, that its deeds are evil.... And there was murmuring concerning Him among the multitude. For some said, He is a good man: others said, Nay; but He deceiveth the people.’ When I was going out, a message was delivered me ‘that the Sheriffs had ordered I should preach there for the future but once a week.’

I called on Thursday at the house of one [Mr. Godly. See Journal, ii. 200d, 204d.] who said I had driven his daughter mad, and indeed as such they used her, confining her and obliging her to take physic. He would not suffer me to come in. But we went to prayers for him; and in two days God turned his heart, so that he has now set her at liberty.

On Friday I began preaching in a large, convenient room, [Journal ii. 200d: ‘11 preached at the Dial.’] which held near as many as the chapel at Newgate; which I did for three days. And then the Mayor and Aldermen (to whom the tenant was in debt) sent and put a padlock on the door.

We had a sweet day in Baldwin Street on Saturday. In the afternoon about two thousand were at the Bowling Green. I wish you would constantly send me extracts of all your foreign letters, to be read on our Intercession Day. At Weavers’ Hall a young woman first and then a boy (about fourteen years old) were deeply bruised and afterwards comforted.

At the Bowling Green on Sunday we had about seven thousand. To two thousand at Hanham I explained the same scripture (1 Cor. xiii.). Seeing at Clifton Church [Journal, ii. 201. He was assisting the Rev. John Hedges, the incumbent, and preached for him on the Sunday afternoons of April 29, May 6, 13, and 20, and conducted marriages.] many of the great and rich, my heart was enlarged and my mouth opened toward them. My Testament opened on those words, ‘I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.’ The power of the Lord was indeed present to heal them!

His sending forth lightning with the rain did not hinder about fifteen. hundred poor sinners from staying with me at Rose Green. Our scripture was, ‘It is the glorious God that maketh the thunder. The voice of the Lord is mighty in operation; the voice of the Lord is a glorious voice,’ In the evening God spake to the hearts of three that were sore vexed, and there ensued a sweet calm.

Monday, 21st, the minister of Clifton died. Oh what has God done by adding those four weeks to his life! In the afternoon, as I was enforcing those words, ‘Be still, and know that I am God,’ He began to make bare His arm in the eyes of two thousand five hundred witnesses. One, and another, and another were struck to the earth; and in less than an hour seven knew the Lord and gave thanks. I was interrupted in my speaking on the same subject at Nicholas Street by the cries of one that was cut to the heart. I then recapitulated what God had done among us already in proof of His free love to all men. Another dropped down close to one who was a rigid asserter of the opposite doctrine. While he stood astonished at-her cries and groans, a little boy standing by was seized in the same manner. A young man who was near smiled at this, and sunk down as one dead; but soon began to roar out and beat himself against the ground, so that six men could scarce hold him. [‘His name was Thomas Maxfield’ (Journal, ii. 203). See Telford's Wesley, pp. 214-16; and letters of April 21, 1741, and Nov. 2, 1762.] I never saw any one (except John Haydon) so torn by the evil one. Before he was delivered many others began to cry out, so that all the room (and indeed all the street) was in an uproar. And it was near ten before the Spirit of life set some of them free from the law of sin and death.

A Presbyterian (who a little before was much offended) took me home with him to supper; whence I was called in haste to a woman who had run out of the Society for fear she should expose herself; but the power of God went with her, so that she continued in the same agony till we prayed and she found rest in Christ. We then besought our Lord for one that was sick in the same house, and her soul was straightway healed. About twelve we were importuned to visit one more. She had only one struggle after we came, and then was comforted. I think twenty-nine in all were accepted in the Beloved this day. Brethren, pray for us. Adieu.
