To Thomas Rankin
Date: LONDON, December 1, 1768.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1768)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BROTHER,--Last year Mr. H.[See letter Of Nov. 24, 1767.] was much persuaded that by means of the Yearly Subscription our whole debt of above eleven thousand pounds would be paid within two years. Many of our brethren were more sanguine still. They were persuaded that, by generously exerting themselves and giving a large sum at once, it would be paid in one year. I did not expect this; but I would not contradict, because I would not discourage them. The event was as I foresaw. By the noble effort which many of our brethren made most of the pressing debts are already discharged, amounting in the whole to near five thousand pounds.

But a debt of above seven thousand pounds remains upon us still; and what can be done with regard to this

I will tell you what occurs to my mind. Many of our brethren chose to subscribe yearly ten, five, three, two guineas or less. I doubt not but these will cheerfully pay the residue of their subscription, and perhaps some of them will add a little thereto, as they see the great occasion there is for it. A few delayed subscribing or contributing, because they 'wanted to see the event,' supposing the design to be impracticable and that nothing 'would come of it.' As it now appears that great good has come of it, that many burthens are already removed, I cannot but earnestly exhort all these now at least to set their shoulders to the work. Now at least let them exert themselves for my sake, for the gospel's sake, and for the sake of their still afflicted brethren who groan under a load which they cannot well bear and yet cannot remove without our assistance.

Several generously contributed at once in hopes of paying the whole debt; of them nothing more can be required but their prayers that others may be as open-hearted as themselves. Nevertheless, if of their own free goodwill they see good to add a little to their former benefaction, this as well as the former is lent unto the Lord, and what they lay out shall be paid them again.

Ought I not to add that there were some of our brethren who did not answer my expectations I knew they were able to assist me largely; and I flattered myself they were not less willing than able, as they owed me their own souls also, and this was the first favour of the kind which I had requested of them.

Let me be excused from saying any more of what is past. Let them now drop all excuses and objections, and show they love me and their brethren and the work of God not in word only but in deed and in truth.

Let me have joy over you, my brother, in particular. You have a measure of this world's goods. You see your brother hath need. I have need of your help, inasmuch as the burthens of my brethren are my own. Do not pass by on the other side, but come and help as God has enabled you. Do all you can to lighten the labour and--strengthen the hands of

Your affectionate brother.[An identical letter, addressed to Mr. Mark Middleton, was in the hands of Mr. George Stampe, dated Dec. 7, 1768.]
