To Ann Bolton
Date: LONDON, July 18, 1773.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1773)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR SISTER,--Your late conversation was exceeding pleasant to me. I had sometimes been almost inclined to think that your affection was lessened; but now I believe it is not. I trust your love is not grown cold. This gave me much satisfaction, though I could not but be concerned at seeing you so encumbered with worldly business. Surely it will not be so always. But God's time is best!

Two or three of those little things I have sent you :--

With peaceful mind thy race of duty run:

God nothing does, or suffers to be done,

But what thou wouldst thyself, if thou couldst see

Through all events of things as well as He.

Let thy repentance be without delay:

If thou defer it to another day,

Thou must repent for a day more of sin,

While a day less remains to do it in.

Nor steel nor flint alone produces fire,

Nor spark arises till they both conspire:

Nor faith alone, nor works without it right;

Salvation rises when they both unite.

If gold be offered thee, thou does not say,

‘To-morrow I will take it, not to-day’:

Salvation offered, why art thou so cool

To let thyself become to-morrows fool

Prayer and thanksgiving is the vital breath

That keeps the spirit of a man from death:

For prayer attracts into the living soul

The life that fills the universal whole;

And giving thanks is breathing forth again

The praise of Him who is the life of men.

Two different painters, artists in their way,

Have drawn religion in her full display.

To both she sat: one gazed at her all o’er;

The other fixed upon her features more.

Hervey has figured her with every grace

That dress could give; but Law has hit her face.

The specious sermons of a learned man

Are little else than flashes in the pan.

The mere haranguing upon what they call

Morality is powder without ball:

But he who preaches with a Christian grace

Fires at your vices and the shot takes place.

Faith, Hope, and Love were questioned what they thought

Of future glory, which Religion taught.

Now Faith believed it firmly to be true,

And Hope expected so to find it too:

Love answered, smiling with a conscious glow,

Believe! Expect! ! I know it to be so.’

Go on in this humble, gentle love, that you may abound therein more and more. Aim at nothing higher than this. And may the God of love still possess you whole, and guide your every thought and word and work. Continue to pray for Your affectionate brother.
