To his Wife
Date: LIVERPOOL, April 24, 1757. [April 24 was a Sunday, and Wesley heard ‘two very useful sermons at St. Thomas’s Church.’ See Journal, iv. 203.]
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1757)
Author: John Wesley
---
I see plainly, my dear Molly, you are resolved to make me love you better and better. Be as careful as ever you will (only not so as to make yourself sick) and as diligent as ever you can. This is one of the talents which God has given you. O use it to the uttermost! Put forth all your strength in things temporal as well as in things spiritual. Whatsoever your hand findeth to do, do it with your might. What a blessed rule is that of Kempis. ‘Do what is in thee, and God will supply what is lacking’! Only, my love, watch over your own spirit! Take heed that it be not sharpened. Fret not thyself because of the ungodly, but in quietness and patience possess your own soul.

I believe my letter to the Stewards will stir them up. What if you gave it to T. Butts [See letter of March 27, 1751.] and desired him and John Matthews [John Matthews died of consumption on Dec. 28, 1764. During twenty years Wesley did not remember his saying or doing anything he would wish to have been unsaid or undone. See Journal v. 93, 103; and letter of April 24, 1761.] to second it If they speak to William Atkinson [See letter of March 9, 1765.] in good earnest, it will certainly do good, one way or the other. [Mrs. Wesley had evidently made some suggestion for business arrangements.]

Now I have burnt your letter. My health continues to a miracle. Ten days hence I shall probably see John Haime [See letter of March 1744, and June 21, 1748.]; and Joseph Jones [Joseph Jones was for some time one of Wesley’s preachers. He married, and settled in Somersetshire as a farmer. See Atmore’s Memorial pp. 225-6; Journal, iv. 328; and for Bilbrook, Staffordshire, iii. 519 iv. 14.] if he finds his way back from Bilbrook.

It grows late: but I could not persuade myself to lose one post; though I cannot tell you how much I am, dear Molly,

Your affectionate Husband, Lover and Friend.

My dear Sister Hacker was to have a cag [A barrel or wooden vessel containing four or five gallons.] of the elder wine. Has she had it
