To Elizabeth Ritchie
Date: SALISBURY, October 6, 1778.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1778)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BETSY, - Since I saw her I have had the pleasure of receiving two letters from --; and I am more and more convinced that she has sustained no real loss from her late trials. Indeed, the greatness of them proved the greatness of her grace; otherwise she must have utterly fainted. But I am afraid the poor tenement of clay has received such a shock as will not easily be repaired. The wonderful behavior of Mrs. was more than it was well able to bear. But the comfort is, He with whom we have to do is the Physician.

I doubt whether any embodied spirit can feel such entire self-abasement as is felt by those spirits that see the face of our Father which is in heaven. And undoubtedly the nearer they approach the throne the more abused they will be.

The plerophory (or full assurance) of faith is such a divine testimony that we are reconciled to God as excludes all doubt and fear concerning it. This refers only to what is present. The plerophory (or full assurance) of hope is a divine testimony that we shall endure to the end; or, more directly, that we shall enjoy God in glory. This is by no means essential to or inseparable from perfect love. It is sometimes given to those that are not perfected in love, as it was to Mr. Grimshaw. And it is not given (at least not for some time) to many that are perfected in love. I do not say you ought to pray for it; but I think you may, only with absolute resignation. In this, as in all things, ' His manner and His time are best.'

I rejoice to hear of the continuance of your health. [She had written, 'My own health also is better than when you were here. I have been three weeks in the North, chiefly on the edge of a cold moor, which has agreed with me very well.'] But you will still need constant exercise; to which should be added as often as may be change of air. That you may enjoy more and more health, both of soul and body, is the prayer of

Yours affectionately.
