To James Hutton
Date: BRISTOL, April 16, 1739.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1739)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BRETHERN, -- Sunday, April 8, about eight in the evening, Mr. Wathen and his brethren met and received several persons into their little Society. After prayer their leaders were chose and the bands fixed by lot in the order following:

I Band. Richard Leg (haberdasher), leader; Thomas Mitchell, Charles Bonner, William Wynne, Richard Cross.

II Band. Jo. Palmer, leader; James Lewis, John Davis, James Smith, William Waters.

III Band. Henry Crawley (barber), leader; Thomas Harding, John Wiggins, Samuel Wathen, Thomas Westall.

It was farther agreed that a few other persons then mentioned might be admitted into the Society.

Monday, April 9, at two in the afternoon, Mrs. Panou and Mrs. Grevil met together with Esther Deschamps and Mary Anne Page (Mrs. Panou's sisters), whom they then received as sisters, and Esther Deschamps was by lot chose leader of the band, which stood as follows:

Esther Deschamps, J. Panou, M. Page, Eliz. Davis (then proposed and admitted), and Eliz. Grevil.

At five in the evening, Anne Williams, Mary Reynolds, Eliz. Ryan, Esther Highham, Frances Wilds, and Rachel England met together and agreed to meet every Sunday; Anne Williams was chose their leader.

The Assizes prevented my preaching at Newgate this week, except only on Monday and Tuesday. On Monday at four I preached to three or four thousand people at the Brickyard on ‘I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.’ On Tuesday about one, having sent our brethren Easy and Purdy before, I set out for Bath. Soon after I came in, the person who rented the ground, where many people were met, sent me word ‘I should not preach on his ground. If I did, he would arrest me.’ Presently after, a good woman sent to tell me I was welcome to preach on hers. Thither we went at five. It is a meadow on the side of the hill, close to the town, so that they could see us from Lady Cox's [See letter of March 7, 1738.] in the square plainly. Here I offered God's free grace to about two thousand souls. At eight in the evening I preached remission of sins to many casual hearers, from some steps at the end of an house in Gracious Street. Griffith Jones [Griffith Jones, Rector of Llandowror, instituted the circulating Welsh Free Schools, to teach the poor to read Welsh and to give religious instruction. He maintained these schools by subscriptions for twenty-four years, and when he died in 1761 they numbered more than 3,000, and had 158,000 scholars, some of whom were sixty years old. See Tyerman's Whitefield, i. 189-90n.] was one of them, who afterwards refreshed us with his company about an hour at our inn.

On Wednesday morning Mr. Chapman [See heading to letter of March 29, 1737.] stayed with us a while, to whom we spake the truth in love. At ten I preached in the meadow again, to, I judge, about two thousand five hundred. At four I offered Jesus Christ as our wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption to above three thousand. At seven all the women in band met together, and, having received Mary Cutler into fellowship with them, spent the evening in conference and prayer. At eight the bands of men met at the Society room in Baldwin Street, and received into fellowship with them William Lewis, James Robins, Kenelm Chandler, Anthony Williams, and Thomas Robins. The remainder of the evening was spent in singing, conference, and prayer.

Thursday, 12th, we went to pitch on a proper place upon Rose Green, to raise a little place for me to stand on in preaching. At the Societies in the evening there was great power, and many were convinced of sin; but I believe more on Friday evening at both the Societies.

On Saturday I waited on one of the clergy of this city, who had sent me word, ‘I was welcome to preach in his church if I would tell nobody of it’; but he had altered his mind, and told me now ‘he could not let me preach.’ [John Gibbs, Vicar of St. Mary Redcliffe 1704-44. See Journal, ii. 179d.] At four I began preaching on the steps at the door of the Poorhouse; four or five hundred of the richer sort were within, and I believe fifteen hundred or two thousand without. About an hour and half I spent with them in prayer and in explaining and applying those words, ‘When they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both.’

Weavers’ Hall was quite filled in the evening, and many, I trust, were cut off from their confidence in the flesh. On Sunday morning I applied the parable of the Pharisee and the Publican to six or seven thousand attentive hearers in the Bowling Green. It rained, till I began preaching on Han-ham Mount. Therefore I stood near the door of the house (in which we put the women); three thousand (at least) were content to stand without. I preached at Newgate after dinner to a crowded audience. Between four and five we went (notwithstanding the rain) to Rose Green. It rained hard at Bristol; but not a drop fell on us while I preached, from the fullness which was given me, to about five thousand souls, 'Jesus Christ, our wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.’

At six, being with the Lawford’s Gate Society, I did not go up into the room, but stood on a table below; by which means not only all in the room and shop, but those in the yard and entries could hear; to whom I declared that ‘the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin.’

I am still dead and cold, unless while I am speaking. Write often to and pray much for, my dear brethren,

Your poor brother.

PS.--Having a desire to receive an holy woman of deep experience into the female bands, we doubted what to do because she is a Dissenter. The answer we received from Scripture was Galatians iii. 8. This seemed clear. However, having determined to cast lots, we did so, and our direction was, ‘Refer it to the bands (at London), to be decided by lot.’
