To General Oglethorpe
Date: SAVANNAH, February 24, 1737.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1737)
Author: John Wesley
---
SIR, -- You apprehended strong opposition before you went hence; and, unless we are misinformed, you have found it. Yesterday morning I read a letter from London, wherein it was asserted that Sir Robert had turned against you [He sailed for England on Nov. 23, 1736, and evidently found Walpole unfriendly. Oglethorpe's work for Georgia was ' marred by some faults of temper and tact, but it was on the whole able, energetic, and fortunate ' (Lecky's England, ii. 132). Wesley's loyalty to Oglethorpe did not blind him to some blemishes in his behavior in Georgia; but he highly appreciated his work and policy there (Journal, i. 252-3n). Walpole was then First Lord of the Treasury and Chancellor of the Exchequer.] ; that the Parliament was resolved to make a severe scrutiny into all that has been transacted here; that the cry of the nation ran the same way; and that even the Trustees were so far from acknowledging the service you have done, that they had protested your bills, and charged you with misapplying the moneys you had received, and with gross mismanagement of the power wherewith you was entrusted. Whether these things are so or no I know not; for it is ill depending on a single evidence. But this I know, that if your scheme was drawn (which I shall not easily believe) from that first-born of hell, Nicholas Machiavel, as sure as there is a God that governs the earth, He will confound both it and you. If, on the contrary (as I shall hope, till strong proof appear), your heart was right before God, that it was your real design to promote the glory of God, by promoting peace and love among men, let not your heart be troubled; the God whom you serve is able to deliver you. Perhaps in some things you have shown you are but a man; perhaps I myself may have a little to complain of: but oh, what a train of benefits have I received to lay in the balance against it! I bless God that ever you was born. I acknowledge His exceeding mercy in casting me into your hands. I own your generous kindness all the time we were at sea: I am indebted to you for a thousand favors here. Why, then, the least I can say is, -- Though all men should revile you, yet, if God shall strengthen me, will not I: yea, were it not for the poor creatures whom you have as yet but half redeemed from their complicated misery, I could almost wish that you were forsaken of all; that you might clearly see the difference between men of honor and those who are in the very lowest rank the followers of Christ Jesus.

Oh where is the God of Elijah Stir up Thy strength, and come and help him! If the desire of his heart be to Thy name, let all his enemies flee before him! Art Thou not He who hast made him a father to the fatherless, a mighty deliverer to the oppressed Hast Thou not given him to be feet to the lame, hands to the helpless, eyes to the blind Hath he ever withheld his bread from the hungry, or hid his soul from his own flesh Then, whatever Thou withholdest from him, O Thou lover of men, satisfy his soul with Thy likeness; renew his heart in the whole image of Thy Christ; purge his spirit from self-will, pride, vanity, and fill it with faith and love, gentleness and longsuffering. Let no guile ever be found in his mouth, no injustice in his hands! And, among all your labors of love, it becomes me earnestly to entreat Him that He will not forget those you have gone through for, sir,

Your obliged and obedient servant.
