To Ann Granvill,
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1731)
Author: John Wesley
---
July [1731]

Selima will not believe that any other reason could have kept me so long from writing but the having so many things which I must do, as scarce give me any time for what I would do. I can by no means think the acknowledging it once a fit return for your last favor, and have often been upon the point of telling you so, when some fresh business has seized upon me and forced me to deny myself yet longer the pleasure of doing you that justice. And, to say the truth, I am even now as busy as ever, but not quite so patient; and therefore, since there is no end of waiting for this leisure, I must make what I cannot find. I am something the more reconciled to this confinement, because though it hinders my expressing it so often, yet it never hinders me from remembering that regard which on so many accounts I owe Selima. Nay, this very circumstance, that I am so confined, often recalls you to my thoughts, and makes me the more sensible of that hard trial to which you are frequently exposed. If I am compassed with business on every side, yet 'tis business of my own: such especially is that which I engage immediately for the sake of others; since I know to whom I lend that time and pains, and that what I so lay out shall be surely paid me again. But Selima, under as great a multitude of engagements, has not always the same thought to support her. You often are troubled about many things, few of which promise even distant pleasure, and are obliged to converse with many persons, too wise to learn, though not wise enough to teach.

O Selima, teach me to submit to such a trial, if ever it should be my portion: tell me how you let yours down to such capacities, and sustain the insipidness of such conversations, how you do to possess your soul in patience, when the floods of impertinence are around you. I have often wondered how so active a spirit as yours, that was not made for a common share of glory, but to force its way through all impediments to the heights of knowledge and virtue--how such a spirit as yours could bear with calmness to have its flight stopped in the mid-way by those mere children of earth, who will not take pains to be even as the angels of God in heaven; nay, who perhaps would not be angels if they might, since 'tis sure those ancient heirs of salvation are therefore the most happy because they are the most active of all created beings.

I have lately had the pleasure of two letters from Aspasia, [July 21 and 29.] and hoped for a still greater in waiting upon her next week; but her last informed me she is out of town, and does not return this fortnight, before which time I must leave it. I believe Providence is more careful of me than I am of myself, and knowing that, were I to see Aspasia or Selima often, I could not possibly act up to the favorable opinion they are pleased to entertain of us, removes me (for my interest, though against my choice) from the opportunities of betraying my weakness. If I have fewer opportunities, too, of expressing my gratitude in writing than I could wish, let it not deprive me of the pleasure of sometimes hearing from Selima, yet let me steal a few moments from you. I am sure none of them that converse with you (on however so many accounts besides you may give them the preference) are more thankful for that favor than Your most obliged and most obedient CYRUS.
