To Lady Maxwell
Date: LONDON, February 8, 1772.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1772)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR LADY,--I commend you for meddling with points of controversy as little as possible. It is abundantly easier to lose our love in that rough field than to find truth. This consideration has made me exceedingly thankful to God for giving me a respite from polemical labours. I am glad He has given to others both the power and the will to answer them that trouble me; so that I may not always be forced to hold my weapons in one hand while I am building with the other. I rejoice likewise not only in the abilities but in the temper of Mr. Fletcher. He writes as he lives. I cannot say that I know such another clergyman in England or Ireland. He is all fire; but it is the fire of love. His writings, like his constant conversation, breathe nothing else to those who read him with an impartial eye. And although Mr. Shirley scruples not to charge him with using subtilty and metaphysical distinctions, yet he abundantly clears himself of this charge in the Second Check to Antinomianism. ['A Second Check to Antinomianism; occasioned by a Late Narrative, in three letters to the Hon. and Rev. Author (Walter Shirley), was published at the end of 1771.] Such the last letters are styled, and with great propriety; for such they have really been. They have given a considerable check to those who were everywhere making void the law through faith; setting 'the righteousness of Christ' in opposition to the law of Christ, and teaching that 'without holiness any man may see the Lord.'

Notwithstanding both outward and inward trials, I trust you are still on the borders of perfect love. For the Lord is nigh!

See the Lord thy Keeper stand

Omnipotently near!

Lo I He holds thee by thy hand,

And banishes thy fear!

You have no need of fear. Hope unto the end! Are not all things possible to him that believeth Dare to believe! Seize a blessing now! The Lord increase your faith! In this prayer I know you join with, my dear Lady,

Your ever affectionate servant.
