To his Mother
Date: OXON, November 1, 1724.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1724)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR MOTHER,--We are most of us now very healthy at Oxford, as I hope you are, which may be in some measure owing to the frosty weather we have lately had, preceded by a very cool summer. [See letter of Sept. 23, 1723.] All kind of fruit is so very cheap that apples may be had almost for fetching, and other things are both as plentiful and as good as has been known in a long time.

We have, indeed, something bad as well as good; for a great many rogues are about the town, insomuch that it is very unsafe to be out late. A gentleman of my acquaintance, only standing at a coffee-house door about seven in the evening, had no sooner turned about but his cap and wig were snatched off, which he could not recover, though he pursued the thief a great way. However, I am pretty safe from such gentlemen; for unless they carried me away, carcass and all, they would have but a poor purchase.

The chief piece of news with us is concerning the famous Sheppard's [Jack Sheppard was a carpenter and locksmith. He used a nail to loosen his chains and force the locks. He was taken a few days later and was hanged at Tyburn. The public interest in his exploits was extraordinary. His autobiography was published in 1724 with a True Representation of his escape from the Condemned Hold . . . engraved on copper. Sir James Thornhill painted his portrait, which was reproduced in a mezzotint; he finds a place in all the serials and in Old and New London, ii. 460. Harrison Ainsworth in 1839 made him the hero of a novel.] escape from Newgate, which is indeed as surprising as most stories I have heard.. It seems he had broke out twice before, besides once out of the condemned hold, which, together with his having got his chains off again when the keeper came in, made them still more apprehensive of him. However, that he might be secure if art could make him so, he was fettered, manacled, and chained down to the ground, by one chain round his waist and another round his neck in the strongest part of the Castle. Notwithstanding which he found means to force open his chains and fetters, break through the ceiling there, and then, sliding to the leads of an adjoining house, to pass six several locked doors, and get clear off without discovery; all which was done between six and eleven at night.

I suppose you have heard that Brigadier Mackintosh [William Mackintosh (1662-1743). of Borlum, Inverness-shire was Brigadier in the Old Pretender's service took a prominent part in the Jacobite Rising 1714, escaped to France 1716, returned to Scotland probably in 1719, and was imprisoned for life in Edinburgh Castle. See Dic. Nat. Biog.] was once more taken, but made his escape from a messenger and six dragoons after an obstinate fight.

Three gentlemen of our College were in September last walking in the fields near Oxford about half an hour after six, of whom the foremost was named Barnesley, [Two .Barnesleys (or Barnsleys) were at Christ Church. John Barnesley, son of John of St. Luke's, Dublin, matriculated on Oct. 21, 1724, age 16. William Barnesley of London matriculated May 17, I723, age 19. It was probably the latter to whom Wesley refers. See Foster's Alumni Oxonienses.] who, going to cross the path, of a sudden started back and turned as white as ashes, but being asked by the others what ailed him, answered, Nothing. The second man coming up to the same place seemed presently more frighted than he, and bawled that he saw one in white shoot across the path as swift as an arrow. Mr. Barnesley, hearing that, told him he had seen it just before; and both of them describe it to have been like a man or woman in light gray, but of so thin a substance that they could plainly see through it. They had likewise another accident the same evening, though not quite so remarkable, both which made Barnesley so curious as to write down the day of the month, which was the 26th of September. We thought no more of it afterwards till last week, when Barnesley was informed by a letter from his father in Ireland that his mother died the 26th of September between six and seven in the evening.

I suppose you have seen the famous Dr. Cheyne's Book of Health and Long Life, [George Cheyne (1671-1743), M.D. (Edin.), F.R.S. A sixth edition of his Essay of Health and Long Life was published by G. Strahan in 1725. Cheyne was a pioneer of some of the modern theories of dietetics and hygiene. 'This book of Cheyne's produced even sects in the dietetic philosophy,' said Dr. Arbuthnot in his Preface to his On Aliments, 1731. On March 12, 1742, Wesley read part of Cheyne's Natural Method of Curing Diseases, ‘one of the most ingenious books which I ever saw. But what epicure will ever regard it for "the man talks against good eating and drinking" ! ' There are references to it in Boswell's Life of Johnson. It influenced Wesley throughout his career. Cheyne's earlier book on The English Malady, or a Treatise on Nervous Diseases, 1733, has its bearing on some of the psychological as well as the physiological questions raised in recent years and on some curious phenomena of Wesley's century. See Journal, v. 373; and letter of June 11, 1747, sect. 14, to Bishop Gibson.] which is, as he says he expected, very much cried down by the physicians, though he says they need not be afraid of his weak endeavors while the world, the flesh, and the devil are on the other side of the question. He refers almost everything to temperance and exercise, and supports most things he says with physical reasons. He entirely condemns eating anything salt or high-seasoned, as also pork, fish, and stall-fed cattle; and recommends for drink two pints of water and one of wine in twenty-four hours, with eight ounces of animal and twelve of vegetable food in the same time. I shall trouble you no more about him here, since you may have probably seen the book itself, which is chiefly directed to studious and sedentary persons.

I should have writ before now had I not had an unlucky cut across my thumb, which almost jointed it, but is now pretty well cured. I hope you will excuse my writing so ill, which I can't easily help, as being obliged to get done as soon as I can; and that you will remember my love to my sisters and brother, and my services to as many as ask after me. I should be exceeding glad to keep a correspondence with my sister Emly, [Emilia. She was eleven years older than John. She thanks him on April 7, 1725, for 'dispatching so speedily the business I desired you to do' (Stevenson's Memorials of the Wesley Family, p.262).] if she were willing, for I believe I have not heard from her since I was at Oxford. I have writ once or twice to my sister Suky too, but have not had an answer, either from her or my sister Hetty, from whom I have more than once desired the Poem of the Dog. I should be glad to hear how things go at Wroot, which I now reflect on with more pleasure than Epworth; so true it is, at least in me, that the persons not the place make home so pleasant. You said something of it in your last letter, which I wish could come to pass; but I am afraid I flattered myself too soon. It is well my paper will hold no more, or I don't know when I should have. done, but the scantiness of that obliges me to conclude with begging yours and my father's blessing on

Your dutiful Son.
