To Miss March
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1769)
Author: John Wesley
---
May 1769.

By comparing your own outward state with Miss Thornton's [See letter of Aug. 12.] you now see clearly the advantages you enjoy: you have nothing external to hinder your waiting upon God without carefulness and without distraction. None has a right to interrupt you while you are exercised in things divine and labouring to be holy in body and spirit. You may have just so much and no more connexion with any one as experience shows is profitable for you. O stand fast in this liberty, glorifying God with all you have and all you are!

It is remarkable that St. Paul places this the last of all, that 'love endureth all things '; and this is the sum of his wish with regard to the Colossians, 'that they might be strengthened unto all patience and longsuffering with joyfulness.' They who have attained this are ripe for the inheritance and ready to salute their friends in light. There is a time when we grow up towards this, even without any sensible increase; as in the parable, the seed groweth and springs up he knoweth not how. At many times, indeed, we do know how the power of the Highest suddenly overshadows us, while either the first or the pure love is shed abroad in our hearts. But at other times He confirms and increases that love in a gradual and almost insensible manner.

Death has had a large commission this year with regard to our Societies in Ireland as well as England. Just as I left Dublin [He left on April 3.] four or five of our members there were taken away in four or five days; three elder, and two in the bloom of youth, one of whom had been filled with love for some years. They all witnessed a good confession at the last, and died in full assurance of hope. Nancy Rogers, [See Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, i. 223; and for Jane Cooper, letter of Sept. 11, 1765.] whom I saw just before I left the town, breathed the very spirit of Jane Cooper. I think their kindred spirits are now acquainted with each other better than you and I are, but not better than we shall be when we meet together in the paradise of God.
