To Mary Bishop
Date: BRISTOL, September 15, 1777.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1777)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR MISS BISHOP,--There is seldom much heat in the preaching-house at Bradford: at least, it is not caused by the largeness of the congregation; although I think it was larger last week than I have seen it for several years.

We have reason to be thankful that none of our friends at Bristol have been hurt by Mr. Hilton's change. [See letters of Aug. 6 and Oct. 22 (to Miss Bishop).] They seem to be grieved but not hurt, rather the more established in the truth. Of Miss Flower I have heard something not so agree­able. But I can say nothing yet. In a day or two I hope to have an opportunity of talking with her, and then I shall know how to judge. If she will copy after my dear Miss Yerbury, I shall have no more pain about her.

The sea breezes may be of service to you, if you have an opportunity of using constant exercise. This has brought many from the gates of death. It is beyond all medicine whatever.

I am in great hopes this sickness will not be unto death, but that the glory of the Lord may be revealed. Kempis's rule admits of many exceptions. Whatever was the case then, we have now abundant proof that very 'many are made better by sickness'; unless one would rather say ‘in sickness.’ This is one of the grand means which God employs for that purpose. In sickness many are convinced of sin, many converted to God, and still more confirmed in the ways of God and brought onward to perfection.

His gracious design in yours seems to be chiefly this--to wean you yet more from created things, to make and keep you dead to all below. To this end you are in a manner cut off from everything that you may find your all in Him. If He should see good to restore you, you will be an instrument fit for the Master's use.

It seems the best way to profit by that retirement which results from your present weakness is to divide your time between reading, meditation, and prayer, intermixed with serious conversation. And when your strength will permit, you must endeavor to do a little good; only take care at first not to go too far. Some years since, we had a little Society at Southampton; perhaps you may find some frag­ments of it remaining. May the God of all grace, after you have suffered awhile, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, and settle you!--I am, my dear sister,

Your ever affectionate brother.
