To John Fletcher
Date: LEWISHAM, July 21, 1773.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1773)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR SIR,--It was a great satisfaction to me that I had the opportunity which I so long desired of spending a little time with you [Wesley got to Madeley on Friday, the 9th, preached twice in the church on Sunday, and left on Monday. See Journal, v. 517], and I really think it would answer many gracious designs of Providence were we to spend a little more time together. It might be of great advantage both to ourselves and to the people who may otherwise soon be as sheep without a shepherd. You say, indeed, ‘Whenever it pleases God to call me away, you will do all you can to help

them.’[See letter on Jan. 15 to him.] But will it not then be too late You may then expect grievous wolves to break in on every side, and many to arise from among themselves speaking perverse things. Both the one and the other stand in awe of me, and do not care to encounter me. So that I am able, whether they will or no, to deliver the flock into your hands. But no one else is. And it seems this is the very time when it may be done with the least difficulty. Just now the minds of the people in general are on account of the Checks greatly prejudiced in your favor. Should we not discern the providential time Should we stay till this impression is worn away Just now we have an opportunity of breaking the ice, of making a little trial. Mr. Richardson [John Richardson, Wesley’s clerical assistant. Conference met on Aug. 3 in London] is desirous of making an exchange with you and spending two or more weeks at Madeley. This might be done either now or in October, when I hope to return from Bristol. And till something of this kind is done you will not have that * [Affection] for the people which alone can make your labor light in spending and being spent for them. Methinks ‘tis pitty we should lose any time. For what a vapor is life!

Could not you spare a few days to be with us at the Conference Probably it would be a means of strengthening you.--I am, dear sister, Your affectionate friend and brother.
