To the Earl of Dartmouth, Secretary of State for the Colonies
Date: IN THE WAY TO DUBLIN, June 14, 1775.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1775)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY LORD,--I would not speak, as it may seem to be concerning myself with things that lie out of my province. But I dare not refrain from it any longer; I think silence in the present case would be a sin against God, against my country, and against my own soul.

But what hope can I have of doing good, of making the least impression upon your Lordship where so many have spoken in vain, and those far better qualified to speak on so delicate a subject

They were better qualified in some respects; in others they were not. They had not less bias upon their minds; they were not free from worldly hopes and fears. Their passions were engaged; and how easily do these blind the eyes of the understanding! They were not more impartial. Most of them were prejudiced in the highest degree. They neither loved the King nor his Ministers. Rather they hated them with a perfect hatred. And your Lordship knowing this, if you was a man, could not avoid having some prejudice to them; in which case it would be hardly possible to feel the full force of their arguments.

They had not better means of information, of knowing the real tempers and sentiments, either of the Americans on the one hand, or of the English, Irish, and Scots on the other. Above all, they trusted in themselves, in their own power of convincing and persuading. I trust only in the living God, who hath the hearts of all men in His hand.

And whether my writing do any good or no, it need do no harm. For it rests within your Lordship's breast whether any eye but your own shall see it.

All my prejudices are against the Americans. For I am an High Churchman, the son of an High Churchman, bred up from my childhood in the highest notions of passive obedience and non-resistance. And yet, in spite of all my rooted prejudice, I cannot avoid thinking (if I think at all) that an oppressed people asked for nothing more than their legal rights, and that in the most modest and inoffensive manner which the nature of the thing would allow.

But waiving this, waiving all considerations of right and wrong, I ask, Is it common sense to use force toward the Americans

A letter now before me says, 'Four hundred of the Regulars and forty of the Militia were killed in the last skirmish.' What a disproportion! And this is the first essay of raw men against regular troops!

You see, my Lord, whatever has been affirmed, these men will not be frightened. And it seems they will not be conquered so easily as was at first imagined. They will probably dispute every inch of ground, and, if they die, die sword in hand.

Indeed, some of our valiant officers say, 'Two thousand men will clear America of these rebels.' No, nor twenty thousand, nor perhaps treble that number, be they rebels or not. They are as strong men as you; they are as valiant as you, if not abundantly more valiant. For they are one and all enthusiasts --enthusiasts for liberty. They are calm, deliberate enthusiasts. And we know how this principle

Breathes into softest souls stem love of war,

And thirst of vengeance, and contempt of death.

We know men animated with this will leap into a fire or rush upon a cannon's mouth.

'But they have no experience of war.' And how much more have our troops How few of them ever saw a battle! 'But they have no discipline.' That is an entire mistake. Already they have near as much as our army. And they will learn more of it every day. So that in a short time they will understand it as well as their assailants.

'But they are divided, among themselves: so you are informed by various letters and memorials.' So, I doubt not, was poor Rehoboam informed concerning the ten tribes! So (nearer our times) was Philip informed concerning the people of the Netherlands! No, my Lord, they are terribly united; not in the Province of New England only, but down as low as the Jerseys and Pennsylvania the bulk of the people are so united that to speak a word in favor of the present English measures would almost endanger a man's life. Those who inform me of this (one of whom was with me last week, lately come from Philadelphia) are no sycophants; they say nothing to curry favor; they have nothing to gain or lose by me. But they speak with sorrow of heart what they have seen with their eyes and heard with their own ears.

Those men think one and all, be it right or wrong, that they are contending pro aris et focis, for their wives, children, liberty! What advantage have they herein over men that fight only for pay! none of whom care a straw for the cause wherein they are engaged, most of whom strongly disapprove of it.

Have they not another considerable advantage Is there occasion to recruit the troops Their supplies are at hand, all round about them: ours are three thousand miles off.

Are we then able to conquer the Americans, suppose they are left to themselves Suppose all our neighbors stand stock still and leave us and them to fight it out But are we sure of this Are we sure that all our neighbors will stand stock still I doubt they have not promised it. And if they had, could we rely upon those promises

Yet it is not probable they will send ships or men to America. Is there not a shorter way Do they not know where England and Ireland lie And have they not troops as well as ships in readiness All Europe is well apprised of this; only the English know nothing of the matter! What if they find means to land but ten thousand men where are the troops in England or Ireland to oppose them Why, cutting the throats of their brethren in America! Poor England in the meantime!

'But we have our militia, our valiant, disciplined militia; these will effectually oppose them.' Give me leave, my Lord, to relate a little circumstance of which one then on the spot informed me. In 1776 a large body of militia were marching towards Preston against the rebels. In a wood which they were marching by, a boy happened to discharge his fowling-piece. The soldiers gave all for lost, and by common consent threw down their arms and ran for life. So much dependence is to be placed on our valorous militia!

But, my Lord, this is not all. We have thousands of enemies, perhaps more dangerous than French or Spaniards. They are landed already; they fill our cities, our towns, our villages. As I travel four or five thousand miles every year, I have an opportunity of conversing freely with more persons of every denomination than any one else in the three kingdoms. I cannot therefore but know the general disposition of the people, English, Scots, and Irish; and I know an huge majority of them are exasperated almost to madness. Exactly so they were throughout England and Scotland about the year 1640; and in great measure by the same means--by inflammatory papers, which were spread, as they are now, with the utmost diligence in every corner of the land. Hereby the bulk of the people were effectually cured of all love and reverence for the King; so that, first despising, then hating him, they were just ripe for open rebellion. And I assure your Lordship so they are now: they want nothing but a leader.

Two circumstances more deserve to be considered: the one that there was at that time a general decay of trade almost throughout the kingdom; the other that there was an uncommon dearness of provisions. The case is the same in both respects at this day. So that even now there are multitudes of people that, having nothing to do and nothing to eat, are ready for the first bidder; and that, without inquiring into the merits of the cause, would flock to any that would give them bread.

Upon the whole I am really sometimes afraid that 'this evil is of the Lord.' When I consider (to say nothing of ten thousand other vices shocking to human nature) the astonishing luxury of the rich and the profaneness of rich and poor, I doubt whether general dissoluteness of manners does not demand a general visitation. Perhaps the decree is already gone forth from the Governor of the world. Perhaps even now,

As he that buys surveys a ground,

So the destroying angel measures it around.

Calm he surveys the perishing nation,

Ruin behind him stalks and empty desolation.

But we Englishmen are too wise to acknowledge that God has anything to do in the world! Otherwise should we not seek Him by fasting and prayer before He lets the lifted thunder drop O my Lord, if your Lordship can do anything let it not be wanting! For God's sake, for the sake of the King, of the nation, of your lovely family, remember Rehoboam! Remember Philip the Second! Remember King Charles the First!--I am, with true regard, my Lord,

Your Lordship's obedient servant.
