To Lady Maxwell
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1764)
Author: John Wesley
---
[19] BRISTOL, September 22, 1764.

MY DEAR LADY,--You need be under no manner of apprehension of writing too often to me. The more frequent your letters are the more welcome they will be. When I have not heard from you for some time, I begin to be full of fears; I am afraid either that your bodily weakness increases or that your desires after God grow cold. I consider you are at present but a tender, sickly plant, easily hurt by any rough blast. But I trust this will not be so long; for you have a strong Helper. And the Lord, whom you serve, though feebly and imperfectly, will suddenly come to His temple. When, Lord Are all things ready now Here is the sinner; one whose mouth is stopped, who has nothing to pay, who pleads neither her own harmlessness, nor works, nor good desires, nor sincerity, but can adopt that strange word I give up every plea beside, Lord, I am damned; but Thou hast died. He has died; therefore you shall live. O do not reason against Him! Let Him take you now! Let Him take you just as you are and make you what is acceptable in His sight.

It gives me pleasure indeed to hear that God has given you resolution to join the Society. Undoubtedly you will suffer reproach on the account; but it is the reproach of Christ. And you will have large amends when the Spirit of glory and of God shall rest upon you. Yet I foresee a danger: at first you will be inclined to think that all the members of the Society are in earnest. And when you find that some are otherwise (which will always be the case in so large a body of people), then prejudice may easily steal in and exceedingly weaken your soul. O beware of this rock of offence! When you see anything amiss (upon hearsay you will not readily receive it), remember our Lord's word, 'What is that to thee Follow thou Me.' And I entreat you do not regard the half-Methodists--if we must use the name. Do not mind them who endeavour to hold Christ in one hand and the world in the other. I want you to be all a Christian;--such a Christian as the Marquis De Renty or Gregory Lopez was; such an one as that saint of God, Jane Cooper, [See letter of Sept. 11, 1765.] all sweetness, all gentleness, all love. Methinks you are just what she was when I saw her first. I shrink at the thought of seeing you what she was when I saw her last. But why should I What is all the pain of one that is glorifying God in the fires with 'Father, into Thy hands I commend my spirit'

May I not take upon me to give you one advice more Be very wary how you contract new acquaintance. All, even sincere people, will not profit you. I should be pained at your conversing frequently with any but those who are of a deeply serious spirit and who speak closely to the point. You need not condemn them, and yet you may say, 'This will not do for me.'

May He that loves you richly supply all your wants and answer your enlarged desires! So prays, my very dear Lady, Your affectionate servant.
