To Mary Bishop
Date: LONDON, February 11, 1775.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1775)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR SISTER,--To be enabled to relieve those that are in want is one excellent fruit of this self-denial. But you must not imagine this will be the only one. No: you have a message from God to some of those to whom no one dare speak the plain truth; and He will confirm the word of His messenger, especially to those that are in weakness or pain or under any kind of affliction. At such a time greatness stands aloof, and they are as accessible as common persons.

In religion as well as in all things else it is 'use that brings perfectness.' I have long labored under the same infirmity with you; and I find but one way to conquer. Take up your cross; when the occasion offers, break through: speak, though it is pain and grief unto you. And it will be easier and easier, till you resemble an eminent surgeon, who once told my brother, ' Mr. Wesley, you know I would not hurt a fly, I would not give pain to any living thing. But if it was necessary I could scrape all the flesh off of a man's bones and never turn my head aside.'

A clear conviction of the superior advantages of a single life certainly implies a call from God to abide therein, supposing a person has received that gift from God. But we know all cannot receive this saying; and I think none ought to make any vows concerning it, because, although we know what we are and what we can do nova, yet we do not know what we shall be. The spiritual advantages of that state are set down in the little tract on that subject, together with the means which are proper to be used by those who desire to retain those advantages. If at any time Providence should seem to call any person to relinquish these advantages, I would earnestly advise her not to lean to her own understanding (less in this case than any other), but to consult one or more spiritual friends, and resolutely stand to their award.

There is much good in Miss Bosanquet; and you may do her good, for she loves and will bear plain dealing.--I am, my dear Miss Bishop,

Yours affectionately.
