To Freeborn Garrettson
Date: DUBLIN, June 26, 1785.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1785)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BROTHER, - Dr. Coke gives some account of you in one of his Journals; so that, although I have not seen you, I am not a stranger to your character. By all means send me, when you have opportunity, a more particular account of your experiences and travels. It is, though, not improbable that God may find out a way for you to visit England; and it might be a means of your receiving more strength as well as more light. It is a very desirable thing that the children of God should communicate their experience to each other; and it is generally most profitable when they can do it face to face. Till Providence opens a way for you to see Europe do all you can for a good Master in America.

I am glad Brother Cromwell and you have undertaken that labor of love, the visiting Nova Scotia, and doubt not but you act in full concert with the little handful who were almost alone till you came. It will be the wisest way to make all those that desire to join together, thoroughly acquainted with the whole Methodist plan, and to accustom them from the very beginning to the accurate observance of all our rules. Let none of them rest in being half Christian. Whatever they do, let them do it with their might; and it will be best, as soon as any of them find peace with God, to exhort them to go on to perfection. The more strongly and vigilantly you press all believers to aspire after full sanctification as attainable now by simple faith the more the whole work of God will prosper.

I do not expect any great matters from the Bishop. I doubt his eye is not single; and if it be not, he will do little good either to you or anyone else. It may be a comfort to you that you have no need of him. You want nothing what he can give.

It is a noble proposal of Mr. Marchington's; but I doubt it will not take place. You do not know the state of the English Methodists. They do not roll in money, like many of the American Methodists. It is with the utmost difficulty that we can raise five or six hundred pounds a year to supply our own contingent expenses. So that it is utterly impracticable to raise five hundred pounds among them to build houses in America. It is true they might do much; but it is a sad observation that they that have most money have usually least grace.

The peace of God be with all your spirits! - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.
