To Dorothy Furly
Date: ST. AUSTELL CORNWALL, September 25, 1757.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1757)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR SISTER, -- It is a rule with me to take noting ill that is well meant; therefore you have no need ever to be afraid of my putting an ill construction on anything you say, for I know you mean only to save your soul. In most genteel religious people there is so strange a mixture that I have seldom much confidence in them. I love the poor; in many of them I find pure, genuine grace, unmixed with paint, folly, and affection. But I think Mrs. Gaussen is upright of heart; and perhaps you may find one or two gentlewomen like her. [See letters of June 18, 1757 and March 26, 1770.]

It is plain God sees it best for you frequently to walk in a thorny path. By this means He aims at destroying your pride of heart and breaking your stubborn will. You have had large experience that there is no substantial or lasting happiness but in Him. O be true to yourself and to your own experience! Do not seek it where it cannot be found. Hew out to yourself no more broken cisterns, but let all the springs of your happiness be in Him.

You cannot be too careful to keep out of the way of anything that has been the occasion of sin. And it is very possible to show civility and moderate respect to any person without coming in the way of danger. All private conversation may be avoided and ought to be, at all hazards. Do not run yourself into temptation; and God will deliver you from evil.

Nature and the devil will always oppose private prayer; But it is worth while to break through. That it is a cross will not hinder its being a blessing -- nay, often the more reluctance the greater blessing.

I think it was not you who advised poor Sam to be a mere regular clergyman [Her brother. See letter of April 8, 1758.] unconnected with the Methodists. Certainly this is the best way to preferment; but it is not the best way to heaven or to do good upon each. When it is too late, the awakened clergy will probably see this. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.
