To William Black
Date: LONDON, July 13, 1783.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1783)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BROTHER, -- It is a rule with me to answer all the letters which I receive. If, therefore, you have not received an answer to every letter which you have written, it must be either that your letter or my answer has been intercepted.

I do not wonder at all that, after that great and extraordinary work of God, there should be a remarkable decay. So we have found it in almost all places. A swift increase is generally followed by a decrease equally swift. All we can do to prevent it is continually to exhort all who have tasted that the Lord is gracious to remember our Lord's words, ‘Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation.’

Mr. Alline may have wit enough to do hurt; but I fear he will never have wit enough to do good. He is very far from being a man of sound understanding; but he has been dabbling in Mystical writers, in matters which are too high for him, far above his comprehension. I dare not waste my time in answering such miserable jargon. I have better work. But I have sent you (with other books) two volumes of Mr. Law’s works, which contain all that Mr. Alline would teach if he could: only it is the gold purged from the dross; whereas he would give you the gold and dross shuffled together. I do not advise you ever to name his name in public (although in private you must warn our brethren), but go on your way exactly as if there were no such person in the world.

The school at Kingswood is exceeding full; nevertheless there shall be room for you. And it is very probable, if you should live to return to Halifax, you may carry one or more preachers with you.

I will order Mr. Atlay to send the books you sent for to our German brethren. I hope you will live as brethren, and have a free and open intercourse with each other. I commend you to Him who is able to make you perfect, stablish, settle you; and am, my dear brother,

Your affectionate brother.
