To Dorothy Furly
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1757)
Author: John Wesley
---
NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, June 18, 1757.

I am the more jealous over you, because I know you are liable to be much influenced by fair words, especially when they are spoken by persons of sense and in an agreeable manner. And flesh and blood are powerful advocates for conformity to the world, particularly in little things. But, blessed be God, we have an unction from the Holy One ready to teach us of all things. O let us attend to this inward teaching, which indeed is always consonant with the word. Then the word, applied by the Spirit, shall be a light in all our ways and a lamp in all our paths.

Fight on and conquer I Change of place, as you observe, is but a little thing. But God has in some measure changed your heart, wherein you have great reason to rejoice. And, having received the first fruits of the Spirit, righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, patiently and earnestly war for the great change, whereby every root of bitterness may be torn up.

You may profitably converse with even those honorable Christians, if you watch and pray that they do not infect you (1) with Mystical notions, which stand in full opposition to plain old Bible divinity; or (2) with their odd, senseless jargon of a catholic spirit, whereby they have themselves suffered great loss. The spirit of the world I think you are aware of already, and indeed there is danger in every approach to it.

I have heard from both Mrs. Gaussen [Charles Wesley writes from the Foundry to his wife on Sept. 21, 1755, ‘Why do you leave Mrs. Gaussen out of your “kind remembrance” You have no friend loves you better.’ See letter of Sept. 25.] and Miss Bosanquet.

There is a poor, queer old woman in Bristol (if she is not gone to paradise) with whom it might do you good to talk. John Jones [See letter of April 16 1748.] knows her. Her name is Elizabeth Edgecomb. Peace be with your spirit. -- I am, dear Miss Furly,

Your affectionate brother and servant.
