To Mrs. Hutton
Date: OXON, August 22, 1744
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1744)
Author: John Wesley
---
MADAM,--Had I no other motive to speak than gratitude for past favors, I ought not to be wholly silent.

1. Dreams and visions were never allowed by us to be certain marks of adoption; no, not though they were supposed to be from God. Therefore this mistake, whosesoever it is, is none of mine.

2. Neither did we ever allow the falling into fits (whether natural or preternatural) to be a certain mark; yet we believe the Spirit of God, sharply convincing the soul of sin, may occasion the bodily strength to fail. And what outward effects may possibly follow I believe no man living has skill enough to determine.

3. The power which God may sometimes permit the devil to have either over the soul or body is of quite another consideration. Yet even at those times He can constrain the father of lies to speak some truth, if it be for His own glory. But let those facts plead for themselves. Those persons are now alive; and not one of them is a member of our Society.

4. Fits (as you term them) are not left off. They are frequent now, both in Europe and America, among persons newly convinced of sin. I neither forward nor hinder them.

5. I love Calvin a little, Luther more; the Moravians, Mr. Law, and Mr. Whitefield far more than either. I have many reasons likewise to esteem and love Mr. Hutton. But I love truth more than all. Nor does it appear to me yet that he has dealt near so tenderly with me (since our opinions differed) as I have done with him.

6. In every congregation in England which I remember to have observed there was undeniably a faulty respect of persons. In our chapel there is a place kept for Lady Huntingdon [Lady Huntingdon was a regular worshipper at West Street Chapel.] till the Creed; if she does not come before then, any one takes it that is next, as also when she is out of town. I doubt whether this respect to her be not too great; but I yield in this point to my brother’s judgment.

7. We have no 5s. or 2s. 6d. places at the Foundry, nor ever had, nor ever will. If any one asks me for a place in the gallery (we make no distinction but between men and women), he has it; I refuse none. And some hundreds have places there who pay nothing at all. First come also is first served, at every time of preaching. And the poorest have frequently the best places, because they come first.

I am glad you mentioned the volume of Bishop Bull, [The Huttons had evidently lent Bishop Bull's Teachings of the Spirit to Wesley. See letter of Jan. 1739, and his reference (Journal, ii. 144d) on Feb. 22 – ‘10.30 at James Hutton’s read Bishop Bull upon the teachings of the Spirit.’] for I had quite forgot whose it was. I will look for it, and send it.

I desire the continuance of yours and Mr. Hutton’s prayers.

Your obliged and affectionate servant.
