To Lady Maxwell LONDON, August 17, 1764.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1764)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR LADY,--Since I had the pleasure of yours, I have hardly had an hour that I could call my own; otherwise I should not have delayed writing so long, as I have a very tender regard for you and an earnest desire that you should be altogether a Christian. I cannot be content with your being ever so harmless or regular in your behaviour, or even exemplary in all externals; nay, more than all this you have received already, for you have the fear of God. But shall you stop here God forbid! This is only the beginning of wisdom. You are not to end here: fear shall ripen into love. You shall know (perhaps very soon) that love of God which passeth knowledge. You shall witness the kingdom of God within you, even righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

It is no small instance of the goodness of God towards you that you are conscious of your want, your 'want of living faith divine.' And His goodness herein is more remarkable, because almost all your neighbours would set you down for a right good believer. O beware of those flatterers! Hold fast the conviction which God hath given you! Faith, living, conquering, loving faith, is undoubtedly the thing you want. And of this you have frequently a taste to encourage you in pressing forward: such is the tender mercy of Him that loves you; such His desire that you should receive all His precious promises! Do not think they are afar off. Do not imagine you must stay long (years or months) before you receive them. Do not put them off a day, an hour! Why not now Why should you not look up this instant, and see, as it were, Jesus Christ set forth, evidently set forth, crucified before your eyes O hear His voice!--'Daughter, be of good cheer; thy sins are forgiven thee!' 'Say not in thy heart, Who shall go up into heaven, or who shall go down into the deep ' No; 'the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in thy heart.' 'Lord, I believe; help my unbelief.'

Joy in the Holy Ghost is a precious gift of God, but yet tenderness of conscience is a still greater gift; and all this is for you. Just ready, The speechless awe which dares not move, And all the silent heaven of love. I am no great friend to solitary Christianity; nevertheless, in so peculiar a case as yours, I think an exception may be admitted. It does seem most expedient for you to retire from Edinburgh, at least for a season, till God has increased your strength. For the company of those who know not God, who are strangers to the religion of the heart, especially if they are sensible, agreeable persons, might quite damp the grace of God in your soul.

You cannot oblige me more than by telling me all that is in your heart; there is no danger of your tiring me. I do not often write so long letters myself; but when I write to you, I am full of matter. I seem to see you just before me, a poor, feeble, helpless creature, but just upon the point of salvation; upright of heart (in a measure), full of real desires for God, and emerging into light. The Lord take you whole! So prays, my dear Lady, Your affectionate servant.
