* 1
EARNYEÄTr

%

By ZOHAN WESLEY, M. A.
Late Fellow of LIN cOLIXx-Cor tze, OxrorD,
WL PPE Rs

Jonn vü. 51,
Doth our Law judge any Man before it hear him,
and know what he doth ? |

--------

riated for G. WH1TF1ELD, New-Chapel, City-Road
and sold at the Methodist Preaching-Houses,
in Town and Country,

1796.

| Ws 5

N it is with us a © very small thing to
| be judged of you, or of man's judgment,” feeing we know God will “ make our 1NNOCENCY as
clear as the light, and our jusT DEALING as the noonday; yet are we ready to give any that are willing to
hear, a plain account both of our principles and actions: * as having renounced the hidden things of
shame,” and desiring nothing more, * than by manifestation of the truth to commend ourselves to every man's
conscience in the fight of Gop.” N |
2. We see (and who does not ?) the numberless follies and miseries of our fellow creatures. We see on
every side, either men of no religion at all, or men of
a lifeless, formal religion. We are grieved at the sight,
and should greatly rejoice, if by any means we might
convince some, that there is a better religion to be attained, a religion worthy of God that gave it. And
this we conceive to be no other than love; the love of
God and of all mankind ; the loving God with all our
heart, and soul, and strength, as having brit loved us,
as the fountain of all the good we have received, and
of all we ever hope to enjoy; and. the loving every
foul which God hath made, every man on earth, as our
own soul. | |

3. This love we believe to be the medicine of life,
the never-failing remedy, for all the evils of a disordered
world, for all the miseries and vices of men. Whereever this is, there are virtue and happiness, going hand

A A 2 in

4 An EAR NEAT APPEAL

in hand. There is humbleness of mind, gentleness,
long-suffermg, the whole image of God, and at Te
same time a _--_ that passeth all understanding, and
joy unspeakable and full "= glory.

& Eternal sunshine of the spotless mind; ;
Each prayer accepted, and each wish refign'd :
Desires compos'd, affettions ever even,

Tears that delight, and sighs that waft to heaven.“

4. This religion we long to see established in the
world, a religion of love, and joy, and peace, having
its font | in the heart, in the inmost soul, but ever shewing itself, by its fruits, continually springing forth not
only in all innocence, (for love worketh no ill to his
neighbour) but likewise in every kind of beneficence,
spreading virtue and happinels all around it.

5. This religion have we been following after for
many years, as many know if they would testify : but
all this time, seeking wisdom we found it not ; we were
{pending our strength in vain. And being now under

Ul conviftion of this, we declare it to all marikind :
for we desire not that others should wander out of the

Way as we have done before them; but rather that they

may profit by our loss, that they may go (tho* we did
not, having then no man to guide us) the streight way
to the religion of love, even Dy faith.

6. Now faith (suppoling the Scripture to be of God)
is Tpaypuaruy Hiyx®- & Pamopirur, the demonstrative evidence of things unseen, the supernatural evidence of
things invisible, not perceivable by eyes of flesh, or by
any of our natural senses or faculties. Faith is that divine evidence, whereby the spiritual man discerneth
God and the things of God. It is with regard to the
{piritual world, what sense is with regard to the natural.
It is the spiritual sensation of every soul that is born of

God.

7. Perhaps you have not confidered it in this view
I will then explain it a little further, /
Faith, according to the scriptural account, is the eye
of the new-born soul. Hereby every true believer in
God « seeth him who is invisible.” Hereby (in a
more particular manner since life and immortality have

been

To Men of Reason and Religion. 6

been brought to light by the gospel) he “ seeth the
light of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ ;”
and, 4 beholdeth what manner of love it is, which the
Father hath bestowed =-- us, that we“ (who are
born of the Spirit) © should be called the sons of
God.“

It is the ear of the soul, whereby a sinner “ hears
the voice of the Son of God and lives;” even that
voice which alone wakes the dead, © son, thy sins are
forgiven thee.“ |

It is if I may be allowed the expression) the palate
of the soul : for hereby a believer “ tastes the good
word, and the powers of the world to come; and
hereby he both tastes and sees that God is gracious, yea
and merciful to him a-sfinner,” ,

It is the feeling of the soul, whereby a believer perceives, through the power of the Highest overshadowing
him, both the existence and the presence of Him, in
whom he lives, moves, and has his being; and indeed
the whole invisible world, the entire system of things
eternal. And hereby, in particular, he feels the love of
God fhed abroad in his heart. | BY

8. By this Faith we are saved from all uneasiness of |
mind, from the anguish of a wounded'spirit, from dicontent, from fear, and sorrow of heart, and from
that inexpressible listlessness and weariness, both of the

world and of ourselves, which we had fo helple{ily
laboured under for many years; especially when we
were out of the hurry of the world, and sunk mto
calm reflection. In this we find that love of God, and
of all mankind, which we had elsewhere sought in
Vain. This we know. and feel, and therefore cannot
but declare, faves every one that partakes of it, both
from sin and misery, from every unhappy and every
, ynholy temper. | |
6 Soft peace she brings, wherever she arrives,
She builds our quiet, as she forms our lives
| Lays the rough paths of peevish nature even,
And opens in each breast a little heaven.”
„ 9 If you ask, © Why then have not all men this
faith? All at least who conceive it to he so happy. a
thing? Why do they not believe immediately ???
| . A 3 | We

\

8 ber APPEAL

We answer, son the Scripture hypothesis), It is the
gift of, God. No man is able to --_-- it in himself, It
15 a work of omnipotence. It requires no less power
thus to. quicken a dead soul, than to raise a body that
lies in the grave. It is a new creation ; and none can
create a {oul anew but he who at first created the hegvens and the earth.

10. May not your own experience teach you this P
Can you give yourself this Faith r Is it now in your
power to see, or hear, or taste, or feel God ? Have
you already, or can you raise in yourself any perception of God, or of an invisible world: I suppose you
do not deny, that there is an invisible world: you will
not charge i in poor old Hesiod, to Christian prejudice of education, when. he fays, in those well known
words, |

Millions of spiritual creatures walk. the earth

Unseen, whether we wake, or if we sleep.

Now, is there any power in your soul, whereby you
discern either these, or him that created them ? Or,
gan all your wisdom and strength open an intercourse
between yourself and the world of spirits? Is it in
our power to burst the veil that is on your heart, and
et in the light of eternity? You know it is not, You
not only do not, but cannot (by your own strength)
thus believe. The more you labour so to do, the more
you will be convinced, it is the gift of God. |
11. It is the free gift of God, which he bestows not
on those who are worthy of his fayour, not on such
as are previoussy holy, and fo fit to be crowned with all
the blessings of his goodness : but on the ungodly and
unholy : on those who till that hour were fit only for
everlasting destruction; those in whom was no good
thing, and whose only plea was, God, be merciful to
me a finner. No merit, no goodness in man precedes
the forgiving love of God. His pardoning mercy supposes nothing in us but a sense of mere fin and misery :
and to all who see, and feel, and own their wants,
and their utter inability to remove them, God freely
gives Faith, for the fake of him in whom he is atways
well pleased, 3
8 12. Thie
To Men of Reasan and Religion. 7

12. This is a short rude sketch of the doftrine we
teach, These are our fundamental principles ; and we
spend our lives in confixming others herein, and in «
-- suitable to them.

Now, if you are a reasonable man, although you do
not believe the Christian system to be of God, lay
your hand upon your breast, and calmly confider,
what is it that you can here condemn.? What evil
have we done to you, that you shoula join the common
cry against us ?. Why should you fay, © away with
such fellows from the earth : it 15 not fit that they
mould live?“

13. Tis true, your judgment does not fall in with
ours, We believe the Scripture to be of God. This
you do not believe. And how do you defend yourselves against them who urge you with the guilt of unbelief? Do you not say, Every man mit judge according to the light he has, and that if he be true to
this he ought not to be condemned? Keep then to
this, and turn the tables. Muft not we also judge according to the light we have? You can in no wise
condemn us, without involving yourfelues in the same
condemnation. According to the light we have, we
cannot but believe the Scripture is of God; and, chile
we believe this, we dare not turn aside from it, to the
right hand or to the left.

14. Let us consider this point a little farther. You
yourself believe there is a God. You have the witness of this in your own breast, Perhaps sometimes
you tremble before him, You believe there is fuch a
thing as right and that there is a difference
between moral good and evil, Of consequence, you
must allow, there is fuch a thing as conscience; I
mean, that every person capable of reflection, is con-
{cious to himself, when he looks back on any thing he
has done, whether it be good or evil, You must likewise allow, that every man 3s to be guided by his own
conscience, not another's. Thus far, doubtless, you
may go, without any danger of being a volunteer .
Faith. 2
15. Now then, be confistent with vobrtelt. 17 thers*
be a God, who being just and good, (attributes insepa-

\

8 | An rtaxnesT APPIML

rable from the very idea of God) is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek him, "ought we not to do whatever
we believe will be acceptable to so good a master ?
Observe : if we believe, if we are fully persuaded of this
in our own mind, ought we not thus to seek him ? and

Ta FTE that with all diligence ? Else, how should we expet᷑t

- any reward at his hands ? |
16. Again: ought we not to do what we believe is
morally good, and to abstain from what we judge is
evil? By good I mean, conducive to the good of
mankind, tending to advance peace, and good-will
among men, promotive of the happiness of our fellow-creatures ; and by evil, what 1s contrary thereto,
Then surely you cannot condemn our endeavouring
. after our power, to make mankind happy ; (I now
speak only with regard to the present world) our striving, as we can, to lessen their sorrows, and to teach
them in whatsoever state they are, therewith to be
content. |

17. Yet again, Are we to be guided by our own
conscience, or by that of other men? You surely will
not say,” that any man's conscience can preclude mine.
You, at least, will not plead -- us, of what
you strongly claim for yourselves. I mean, the right
of private judgment, which is indeed unalienable from
realonable creatures. You well know, that unless we
faithfully follow the dictates of our own mind, we cannot have a conscience void of offence toward God and
towards man. N .

18. Upon your own principles therefore you must.
allow us to be, at least, innocent. Do you find any
difficulty in this? You speak much of prepossession
and prejudice, beware you are not entangled therein
vyourselves. Are you not prejudiced against us, because
ve believe and strenuously defend that system of doc-
-trines which you oppole? Are you not enemies to us,
because you take it for granted we are so to you ? Nay,
God forbid! I once saw one, who, from a plentiful '
fortune, was reduced to the lowest extremity. He was
lying on a sick bed, in violent pain, without even convetierit food, or one friend to comfort him; so that
when his merciful landlord, to complete all, sent one

Wa le > | . o

*

To Men of Reason and Religion. 9

to take his bed from under him, I was not surprised at
his attempt to put an end to so miserable a life. Now,

when 1 saw that poor man, weltering in his blood,

could I be angry at him? Surely no. No more can

I at you. I can no more hate than I can envy you. 1

can only lift up my heart to God for you (as I did then

for him) and, with silent tears, beseech the Father of
mercies, that he would look on you in your blood, and
say unto you, Live.

19. © Sir, (said that unhappy man, at my first interview with him) I scorn to deceive you or any man.
You mult not tell me of your Bible; for I don't believe one word of it. I know there is a God, and believe he is all and in all, the Anima Mundi, the

| % vastam

Mens agitans molem, & magno fe corpore miscens.
© But farther than this, I believe not; all is dark; my
thought is lost, But I hear (added he) you preach to
a great number of people every night and morning.
Pray, what would you do with them? Whither would
you lead them? What religion do you preach ? What
15 it good for ? I replied, © I do preach to as many
as desite to heax, every night and morning. You ask,
++ What I would do with them?” I would make
them virtuous and happy, easy in themselves, and useful to others. Whither would I lead them ? To
heaven; to God the judge, the lover of all, and to
1 the mediator of the new covenant. What re-

igion do I preach? The religion of love; the law of
kindness brought to light by the gospel. What is
this good for ?” To make all who receive it enjoy
God and themselves: To make them like God ; lovers
of all ; contented in their lives; and crying out at their
death, in calm assurance, O grave where is thy victory |
Thanks be unto God, who giveth me the victory, thro!
my Lord Jesus Christ.”

20. Will you object to such a religion as this; that
it is not reasonable ? Is it not reasonable then to love
God? Hath he not given you life, and breath, and
all things? Does he not still continue his love to
ou, filling your heart with food and gladness ?
hat have you which you have not _--_--_-- of

him

10 An EARNEST APPEAL
him ? And does not love demand a return of love ?
Whether, therefore, you do love God or no, you
cannot but own it is reasonable so to do; nay, seeing
- is the parent of all good, to love him with all your

eart, | 1

21. Is it not reasonable also to love our neighbour p
Every man whom God hath made? Are we not brethren? The children of one Father? Ought we not
then to love one another? And, should we only love
them that love us? Is that acting like our Father which
3 in heaven? He causeth his {un to shine on the evil
and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on
the unjust. And can there be a more equitable rule of
our love, than © thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself ? You will plead for the reasonableness of this;
as also for that golden rule, (the only adequate measure
of brotherly love, in all our words and actions) Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so
do unto them.“

22. Is it not reasonable then, that as we have opportunity, we should do good unto all men? Not only
friends but enemies, not only to the deserving, but likewise to the evil and unthankful. Is it not right that all

our life should be one continued labour of love? If

a day passes without doing good, may one not well say,
With Titus, * Amici, diem perdidi / And is it enough,
to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to visit those
ho are fick or in prison? Should we have no pity
for those

* Who sigh beneath guilt's horrid stain,

« The worst confinement and the heaviest chain?“
Should we shut up our compaslion toward those who
are of all men most miserable, because they are miserable
by their own#fault ? If we have found a medicine to
heal even that sickness, should we not, as we have
freely received it, freely give ? Should we not pluck
them as brands out of the fire? The fire of Wi an-

ger, malice, revenge? Your inmost soul answers, It
{hould be done; it is reasonable in the highest degree.
Well, this is the sum of our preaching, and of our lives,

our enemies themselves being the judges. If therefore
| vou

* My friends, I have lost a day!

22 4

To Men of Reason and Religion. 11

you allow, that it is reasonable. to love God, to love
mankind, and to do good to all men, you cannot but
allow, that religion which we preach and live, to be
agreeable to the highest reason.

23. Perhaps all this you can bear, It is tolerable.
enough: and if we spoke only of being saved by love,
you should have no great objection: bi you not
comprehend what we say of being f/aved by faith.” I
know you do not. Vou do not in any degree comprehend what we mean by that expression; have patience
then, and I will tell you yet again. By those words,
we are saved by faith, we mean, that the moment a man
receives that faith which is above described, he is
faved from doubt and fear, and sorrow of heart, by a
peace that passes all understanding ; from the heaviness of a wounded spirit, by joy unspeakable ; and
from his sins, of whatsoever kind they were ; from his
vicious defires, as. well as words and actions, by the
love of God and of all mankind, then shed abroad in
his heart.

24. We grant nothing is more unreasonable, than to
imagine that such mighty effects as these can be wrought:
by that poor, empty, insignificant thing which theworld calls faith, and you among them. But supposing:
there be such a faith on the earth, as that which the
apostle speaks of, such an intercourse between God and:
E soul, what is too hard for such a faith? You yourselves may conceive, that “all things are possible to
him that thus believeth: to him that thus walks with:
God, that is now a citizen of heaven, an inhabitant of
eternity, If therefore you will contend with us, you
must change the ground of your attack. You must:
flatly deny, there 1s any faith upon earth : but perhaps
this you might think too large a step. You cannot do
this, without a secret condemnation in your own breast,
O that you would at length cry to God for that
heavenly gift ! whereby alone this truly reasonable religion, this beneficent love of God and man can be
planted in your heart. |
25. If you say, © But those that profess this faith,
are the most unreasonable of all men; I ask, © Who
are thole that profess this faith 7 Perhaps you do not

+. | pa lonally

142 An AAN APPEAL

$ersonally know such a man in the world. Who are
they that so much as profess to have this evidence of
. not seen ? That profels to see him that is mvifible? To hear the voice of God; and to have hrs S *
ever witneffng with their spirits, that they are the chi
= ? I fear you will find few that even profess this

th, among the large numbers of those Who are called

ievers.

26. However, there are enough that profess themselves Christians.” Yea, too many, God knoweth;
too many that confute their vain professions, by the
whole tenor of their lives. I wilt allow all you can
say on this head, and perhaps more than all. It'is now
some: years since I was engaged unawares in a conver-
| sation with a strong] reasoner, Who at firft urged the
= . wickednels of -- American Indians, as a bar to our,
* hope of converting them to Christiarity. But when 1
mentioned their temperanee, justice, and veracity, (ac-

cording! to the accounts I Jad ther received) it way

asked, * Why, if those heathens are such men as these,
what will they gain by being made Christians ? What
$1 would they gain by being fuck Chrifttans as we lee every
. where round about us? 1 could not deny, they
would lose, not gain, By such a Christianity as this.
Upon which she added, Why, what else do you mean
by Christianity ? My plain answer was, What do you
apprehend to be more valuable than good sense, good
nature, and good manners? All thete are contained,
and that in- the highest degree, in what I mean by
Christianity. Good sense, (so called) is but a poor, dim
shadow of what Christians call faith, Good nature is
only a-faint, distant resemblance of Christian” charity,
| And good manners, if of the most finished: kind that
nature assisted by art can attain to, is but a dead picture
| of that holiness of conversation, which is the image of
1 God visibly expressed. All these put together by the
art of God, I call Christianity. © Sir, if this be Chris1 tianity, (faid my opponent in amaze) I never faw a
| Christian in my life.”
| 27. Perhaps, it is the same case with you, If fo, I
1 am grieved for you, and can only wish, till you do
| | lee a n proof of this, that you would not say, yoit

| |} fee
To Men of Reason and Religion. 1 3
fee 4 christian, For this is scriptural christianity, and
this alone. Whenever therefore you see an unreasonable man, you foe one who 3 calls himself by
that name, but ig no more a christzan than he is an an-

4. So far as he departs from true genuine reason, so
Far he departs from christianity, Do not say, this. is
only asserted, not proved. It is undeniably proved by
the original charter of christianity, We appeal to this,
to the written word, If any man's temper, or Words,
or actions, are eee to right reason; it 15 evident to a demonstration, they are contradiftory to this.
Produce any possible or conceivable instance, and you
will find the fact is so. The lives therefore of those.
who are called christians, is no just objection to christianity. | | |

28. We join with you then in desiring a religion
founded on reason, and every way agreeable thereto. .
But one question still remains to 45 asked, What do
you mean by reason ? I suppols you mean the eternal,
reason, or, the nature of things: The nature of God,
and the nature of man, with the relations necessarily
subsisting between them. Why, this is the very religion we preach : a religion 1 Me founded on, and'
every way agreeable to eternal . to the essential
nature of things. Its foundation stands on the nature
of God and the nature of man, together with their
mutual relations. And it is every way suitable there;
to: to the nature of God; for it begins in knowing,
him, and where but in the true knowledge of God.
can you conceive true religion to begin? It goes on
in loving him, and all mankind, (for you cannot but
imitate whom you love :) It ends in 2 him; in
doing his will; in obeying him whom we know and
love. | Bo
29. It is every way suited to the nature of man; for

it begins in man's knowing himself; knowing himself
to be what he really is, foolish, vicious, miserable. It
goes on to point out the remedy for this, to make him
truly wise, virtuous, and happy; as every thinking
mind (perhaps from some implicit remembrance of What
it originally was) longs 5
BY | It

14 An zarxesT APPEAL

It finishes all, by restoring the due zation between
God and man; by uniting for ever the tender Father,

and the grateful, obedient son; the great Lord of all,
and the Fiithful servant, doing not his own will, but
the will of him that sent him. | .
go. But perhaps by reason you mean, the faculty of
reasoning, of inferring one thing from another.
There are many, it is confessed, (particularly those
who are stiled mystic divines) that utterly decry the use

of reason, thus understood, in religion: nay, that condemn all reasoning concerning the things of God, as

utterly destructive of true religion.

But we can in no wise agree with this. We find.
no authority for it in holy writ. So far from it, that

we find there both our Lord and his 1 continually reasoning with their opposers. either do. we

know, in all the productions of ancient and modern.

times, such a chain of reasoning or argumentation, so

close, fo solid, so regularly connected, as the epistle to
the Hebrews. And the strongest reasoner whom we

have ever observed {excepting only Jesus of Nazareth)
was that Paul of Tarsus; the same who has left that

Plain direction for all christians, . In malice, or wickedness, be ye children.; but in understanding, or reason, be

ye men.

1. We therefore not only allow, but earnestly exHort all who seek after true religion, to use all the rea-

son which God hath given them, in searching out the
things of God. But your reasoning justly, not only on
this, but on any subject whatsoever, pre- supposes true
Judgments already formed, whereon to ground your argumentation, Else, you know, you will stumble at
every step: because ex falso non sequitur verum. It is
impossible, if your premises are false, to infer from them
true conclusions. ;

32. You know likewise, that before it is poslible

for you to form a true judgment of them, it is absolute-

ty necessary, that you have a clear apprehension of the
things of God, and that your' ideas thereof be all
fixed, distinct, and determinate, And seeing our ideas
are not innate, but must all originally come from our

fenfes, it is certainly necesfary that you have fenses ca-

pable
\.; . *

To Men of Reason and Religion. 13
pable of discerning objects of this kind. Not those
only which are called natural senses, which in this
respect profit nothing, as being altogether incapable
of discerning objects of a spiritual kind, but spiritual
senses, exercised to discern spiritual good and evil.
It is necessary that you have the hearing ear, and the
sceing eye, emphatically so called; that you have a
new class of senses opened in your Soul, not depending on organs of flesh and blood, to be the evidence
of things not scen, as your bodily senses are of visible
things; to de the avenues to the invisible world, to
discern spiritual objects, and to furnish you with ideas
of what the outward eye hath not seen, neither the ear
heard,

33. And till you have these internal senses, till the
eyes of your understanding are opened, you can have
no apprehension of divine things, no idea of them at all.
Nor consequently, till then, can you either judge truly,
or reason justly concerning them : seeing your Reason
Has no ground whereon to stand, no materials to work
upon. 225

2 To use the trite instance. As you cannot reason
concerning colours, if you have no natural fight, because all the ideas received by your other senses are of
a different kind ; so that neither your hearing, nor an
other sense, can supply your want of fight, or furni
your reason in this respe& with matter to work upon:
so you cannot reason concerning spiritual things, if you
have no spiritual fight ; becaule all your ideas received
by your outward senses are of a different kind. Vea,
far more different from those received by faith or internal sensation, than the idea of colour from that of sound,
These are only different species of one genus, namely,
sensible ideas, received by external sensation: whercas
the ideas of faith differ toto genere from thole of external
sensation. So that it is not conceiveable that external
sensation should supply the want of internal senses ; or
furnish your reason in this respect with matter to work
upon, |
35. What then will your reason do here? How
will it pass from things natural to spiritual ? From the
things that are seen to _-- that are not seen? From

ee ; < the

r ---- --

16 An ran „akt APPEAL

tlie visible to the invisible world? What a gulph is
here? By. what art will reason get over the immense

chasm ? is cannot be till the Almighty come in to

succour, and give you that Faith you have hitherto de-

spised. Then upborn as it were upon cagles' wings,

you shall soar away into the regions of eternity; and
your enlightened reason shall explore even the dee

| things of God, God himself revealing them to you by his

Spurtt,
36. I expetted to have received much light on this

Head, from a treatise lately published, and earnestly

recommended to me, I mean, Christtanity not founded

on Argument. But on a careful perusal of that piece,

notwithstanding my prejudice in its favour, I could
not but perceive, that the great delign uniformly pursued throughout the work, was to render the whole of
the Christian institution both odious and contemptible.
In order to this the author gleans up with great care
and diligence, the most lausible of those many obI Aions that have been rd against it by late writers,
and proposes them with the utmost strength of which
he was capable, To do this with the more effect, he
personates a Christian : he makes a fhew of defending
an avowed doctrine of Christianity, namely, the supernatural influence of the Spirit of God; and often, for
several sentences together, (indeed in the beginning of
almost every paragraph) speaks so like a Christian, that
not a few have received him according to his wish,
Mean while, with all possible art and fhow of reason,
and in the mo!! LOOT language, he pursues his point
throughout, which is to prove, © that Christianity is
“ contrary to reason ;*” or, © that no man acting ac-
& cording to the principles of reason, can polkbly be a
« Christian,” 3

37. It is a wonderful proof of the power that smooth
words may have even on serious minds, that so many
have mistook such a writer as this for a friend of Christianity : since almost every Page of his tract is filled
with gross falsehood and broad blasphemy : and these
supported by fuch exploded fallacies, and common place
sophistry, that a person of two or thiee years standing
in the university, might give them a sufficient ens

an
To Men of Reason and Religion. 17

and make the author appear as irrational and contemptible as he labours to make Christ and his apostles.
38. I have hitherto spoken to those, chiefly, who do
not receive the Christian system as of God. I would
add a few words to another fort of men; (the ughi not
so much with regard to our princip'es or practice, as
with regard to their own e) to you who do receive it,
who believe the scripture, but yet do not take upon you
the character of religious men, I am therefore obliged to
address myself to you likewise, under the character of
men of reason. | 8
39. I would only ask, Are you such indeed ? Do
you answer the character under which you appear? If
{o, you are consistent with yourselves. Your principles
and pratt.ce agree together.
Let us try whether this 15 so or not. Do you not
take the name of God in vain? Do you remember the
Sabbath-day to keep it holy? Do you not speak evil
of the ruler of your people? Are you not 2 drunkard,
or a glutton, faring as sumptuously as you can every

day? Making a God of your belly? Do you not
avenge yourself? Are yon not a whoremonger or adulterer? Answer plainly to your own heart, before God
the judge of all. f

| Why then do you say, you truly believe the scripture ?
If the scripture is true you are lost. You are in the broad
way that leadeth to destruftion. Your damnation slumbereth not. You are heaping up to yourself wrath
against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Doubtless, if the scripture is
true, (and you-remain thus) it had been good for you
if you had never been born.
40. How is it that you call yourselves men of reaJon P ls reason inconsistent with itself ? You are the
farthest of all men under the sun from any pretence to
that character. A common {wearer, a sabbath breaker,
a whoremonger, a drunkard, who says he believes the
scripture is of God, is a monster upon earth, the greateft
contradittion to his own, as well as to the reason of all
mankind. In the name of God, (that worthy name
whereby you are called) and which you gdaily cause to
be blasphemed) turn either to the right hand or to the

B 3 left,

ccc
4 - ms av-- ame LEO ꝗ] md -- =

13 An EARNEST APPEAL
left. Either profess you, are an infidel, or be a Chris-

tian, Halt no longer thus between two opinions. Either cast off the Bible, or your fins. And in the mean
time, if you have any spark of your boasted reason left,
do not count us your enemies (as I fear you have done
hitherto, and as thousands do wherever we have declared, © they who do sifch things shall not inherit eternal
life, „) because we tell you the truth Seeing these are
not, our words, but the words of him that sent us, Yea,
though in doing this, we use” great Len of speech,
as becomes the ministry we have recei + For we
are not as many who corrupt (cauponize, soften, and

thereby adultcrate) © the word of God, But as of sin-

cerity, but as of God, in the sight cf God, speak we
m Christ.”

41. But it may be, you are none of these, You *
stain from all such things. You have an unspotted reputation. You are a man of honour, or a woman of
virtue. You scorn to do an unhandsome thing, and
are of an unblameable life and conversation. You are
harmless (if I understand you right) and useless from
morning to night. You do no hurt, --and no good te
any one, no more than a straw floating upon the
water. Your life glides smoothly on from year to year;
and from one season to another, having no occasion to
work,

% You waste away
In gentle inactivity the day.“

42. I will not now shock the easiness of your temPer, by talking about a future state, - But suffer me to
-- you 2 -- about present things. Are you now

apPY
"8 seen a large company of reasonable creatures
called Indians, sitting in a _ on the side of a river,
looking sometimes at one her, sometimes at the sky,
and sometimes at the bub oy the water, And fo
they fat, (unless in the time-of Jpn for a great part of
the year, from morning to night.
These were doubtless. much at ease. But can you

think they were happy And how little A eee are
D * they ?

.
.*%
"22
be
=

=
=
4%
i”
1 4

N ö
£ 18

To Men of Resson and Religion. 19

43. You eat, and drink, and sleep, and dress, and
dance, and fit down to play. You are carried abroad,
You are at the masquerade, the theatre, the opera-house,
the park, the levee, the drawing-room. What do you
do -- ? Why sometimes you talk ; sometimes you
look at one another. And what are you to do to-morrow ? The next day ? The next week ? The next
year? You are to eat, and drink, and sleep, and dance,
and dress, and play again. And you are to be carried
abroad again, that you may again look at one another !
And is this all? Alas, how little more happiness have
you ba this, than the Indians in looking at the sky or
water. |

Ah poor, dull round! I do not wonder that Col.
M--, 25 any man of reflection) should prefer death
nself, even in the midst of his years, to such a life as
this! and should frankly declare, that he chose to go
out of the world, bccause he found nothing in it worth
living for.“ | ;

44. Yet it is certain there is business to be done:
and many we find in all places (not to speak of the vulgar, the drudges of the earth) who are continually employed therem. Are you of that number? Are you
engaged in trade, or some other reputable employment ?
I {uppose, profitable too ; for you would not spend
your time, and labour, and thought, for nothing.
You are then making your fortune ; you are getting
money. True : but money is not your ultimate end.

e trealuring up gold and filver, for its own fake,
all men own, is as foolish and absurd, as grossly unreasonable, as the treasuring up spiders, or the wings of
butterflies. You consider this but as a means to some
further end. And what is that? Why, the enjoying
yourlelf, the being at ease, the taking your pleasure,
the living like a gentleman, That is plainly, either

the whole, or some part of, the happiness above de-

scribed.

Supposing then your end to be actually attained, suppole you have your wish, before you drop inte eternity : go and fit down with Thleeanowhee and his com-

panions on the river side.-- After you have toiled for

fifty years, you are just as happy as they.

20 An ARN EST APPEAL

43. Are you, can you, or any reasonable man, be
Satisfied with this? You are not. It is not possible
you should. But what else can you do? You would
have something better to employ your time; but you
know not where to find it upon earth,

And indeed it is obvious, that the Earth, as it is now
constituted, even with the help of all European arts,
does not find suffictent employment, to take up half the
waking hours of half its inhabitants.

What then can you do ? How can you employ the
time that lies so heavy upon your wa ? This very

thing which you seek, declare we unto you. The
thing you want, is the religion we preach. That alone

leaves no time upon our hands, It fills up all the A
blank spaces of life. It exactly takes up all the time by
WE have to spare, be it more or less : so that he that 4
hath much, hath nothing over, and he that has little, has 1

no lack, | NH
4356. Once more. Can you (or any man of reason) A
think, you was made for the life you now lead ? You 1
cannot possibly think so; at least, not till you tread the I
Bible under foot. The oracles of God bear thee wit-

nels in every page, (and thine own heart agreeth there-

to) that thou wast made in the image of God, an incorruptible picture of the God of glory. And what
art thou even in thy present state? An everlasting

spirit, going to God, For what end then did he create

thee, but to dwell with him, above this perishable
world, to know him, to love him, to do his will, to

enjoy him for ever and ever! O look more deeply in-

to thyself! and into that Scripture, which thou prefessest to receive as the word of God, as right concerning E.
all things. There thou wilt find a nobler, happier state MR
described, than it ever yet entered mto thy heart to =
conceive, But God hath now revealed it to all those
-who - rejoice evermore, and pray without ceasing, and in
every thing give thanks, and do his will on earth as it us
- done in heaven, For this thou wast made. Hereunto
also thou art called. O be not disobedient unto the
-heavenly calling! At least, be not angry with those
who would fain bring thee to be a living witness of that

To Men of 'Reaton and Religion. 21

religion, whose ways are indeed ways of pleafantness, and
all her paths, peace. |

47- Do you say in your heart, © I know all this al-

eady. I am not barely a man of reason, I am a religious man: for 1 not only avoid evil and do good,
but use all the means of grace. I am constantly at
church, and at the sacrament too. I say my prayers
every day. I read many good books. I fast--every
Thirticth of January, and Good - Friday.” Do you. in-
= deed? Do you do all this? This you may do: You

may go thus far, and yet have no religion at all; no fuch
= religion as avails before God. Nay, much farther than
this, than you have ever gone yet, or so much as
thought of going. For you may give all your ' goods to
feed the. poor, yea, your body to be burned, and yet very
Possibly, if St, Paul be a judge, have no charity, no
true religion.

48. This religion, which alone is of value before
God, is the very thing you want. You want (and
in wanting this, you want all) the religion of love.
You do not love neighbour as yourself, no more
than you love God with all your heart. Ask your
own heart now, if it be not o? It is plain you do
not love God. If you did you would be happy in
him. But you know you arc not happy. Your formal religion no more makes you happy, than your |
nerghbour's gay religion does him. O how much have
5 suffered for want of plain dealing! Can you now

ar to hear the naked truth? You have the form
Godlinest, but not the power, You are a mere whit
wall. Before the Lord your God I atk you, Are you
not? Too sure, For your © inward parts are very
wickedness.” You love © the creature more than the
Creator.” You are “ a lover of pleasure more than a
lover of God.” A lover of God! You do not love
God at all, no more than you love a ftone. You
love the world; therefore the love of the Father is not
in you.

49. Lou are on the brink of the pit, ready to be
plunged into everlasting perdition. Indegd you have
2-zeal for God; but not according to kndwledge, O
how terribly have you been deceived ! Posting to hell,

and

22 An xAANEST APPEAL.

and fancying it was heaven. See at length that outward
religion without inward, is nothing; is far worle than
nothing, being indeed no other than a folemn mockery
of God. And inward religion you have not, You
have not the faith that worketh by love. Your faith
(so called) is no living, saving principle. It is not
the Apostle's faith, the substance (or subsistence) of
things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. So
far from it, that this faith is the very thing which you
Call enthufiasm, You are not content with being
without it, unless you blaspheme it too. You even
revile that life which 25 hid with Christ in Cod; all
seeing, tasting, hearing, fecling God, 'These things are
foolishness unto you, No marvel ; “ sor they are spiritually discerned.” ;
50. Oh! no longer shut your eyes against the light,
Know you have a name that you live, but are dead.
Your soul is utterly dead in fin ; dead in pride, in vanity, in self-will, in sensuality, in love of the world,
You are utterly dead to God, There is no intercourse
tween your soul and God. You have neither feen
him, (by faith, as our Lord witnessed against them of
old time) nor heard his voice at any time. You have
no spiritual senses exercised to discern spiritual good and
evil, You are angry at infidels, and are all the while as
mere an infidel before God as they. You have eyes
that fee not, and ears that hear not. You have a callous
unfeeling heart.
51. Bear with me a little longer: My soul is distrest
for you. The god of this world hath blinded your eyes,
and you are seeking death in the error of your life. Because you do not commit gross sin, because you give

alms, and go to the Church and Sacrament, you ima«

gine that you are serving God ; yet in very deed you
are serving the devil. For you are doing still your own

will, not the will of God your Saviour. You are

pleasing yourself in all you do. Pride, vanity, and

If-will (the genuine fruits of an earthly, sensual, devilish heart) pollute all your words and actions. You
are in darkness, in the shadow of death. Oh! that
God would fay to you in thunder, Awake, thou that

©

+
"=
=
* *

7 *
* *
"x
nd *

_
- 2 % -
st, « |
%
.
AF iN

*

To Men of Reason and Religion. 29
fleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give
| 2 blessed be God ! He hath not yet left him -
self without witness!
% All are not lost ! There be, who faith prefer,

«© Though few, and piety to God!”
Who know the power of faith, and are no strangers to
that inward vital religion, the mind. that was in Christ,
« righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.”
Of you who have * tasted the good word of God, and
the power of the world to come,” we would be glad to
learn, if we have erred from the faith, or walked contrary to the truth as it is in esus. Let the righteous
{mite me friendly, and reprove me; if haply that
which is amiss may be done away, and what is wanting
supplied, till we all come to the measure of the stature
of the fulness of Christ. | l ates |
53. Perhaps the first thing that now occurs to your
mind, relates to the doctrine which we teach. You
have heard, that we say, Men may live without sin.“
And have you not heard, that the Scripture says the
same ? (we mean without committing fin.) Does not
St. Paul fay plainly, that those who believe, do not
continue in sin ?--That they cannot live any longer
therein ?” Rom. vi. 1, 2. Dees not St. Peter say,
6 He that suffereth in the flesh, hath ceased from sin ?
that he no longer should live--to the desires of men,
but to the will of God,“ 1 Pet. iv. 1, 2. And does
not St. John say most expressly, He that committeth
sin is of the devil: For this purpose the Son of God
was manifest, that he might destroy the works of the
devil? Whosoever is born of God, doth not commit
fin : for his seed remaineth in him, and he cannot commit fin, because he is born of God,” 1 John iii. 8, &c.
And again, We know that whosoever is born of God
sinneth not.“ ch. v. 18. |
54. You see then, it is not we that say this, but the
Lord. These are not our words but his. And who is
he that replieth against God ? Who is able to make
God a liar ? Surely he will be justified in his laying,
and clear when he is judged! Can you deny it? Have
you not often felt a secret check, when you was contra-

dicting

- -

24 An An NEST APPEAL

dicting this great truth? And how often have yo
wished what you was taught to deny? Nay, can yo
help wishing for it at this moment ? Do you not now

earnestly desire to cease from fin ? To commit it no

more? Does not your soul pant after this glorious li-

berty of the sons of God? And what strong reason

have you to expett it? Have you not had a foretaste
of it already? Do you not remember the tame when.
God first lifted up the light of his countenance upon

you? Can it ever be forgotten? The day when the
candle of the Lord first shone upon your head ?

% Butter and honey did you eat,

And lifted up on high, 5
You saw the clouds beneath your feet,
And rode upon the {ky,
&« Far, far above all earthly things,
Triumphantly you rode;

You soar d to heaven on eagles“ win
And found, and talk'd with God,”

You then had power not to commit sin. You found
the Apostle's words strictly true, he that is begotten of
God keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth

him not. But those whom you took to be experienced,

Christians, telling you, „ This was only the time of
your espousals; this could not last always; you must
come down from the mount,“ and the like, shook your

faith, You looked at men more than God, and io

became weak, and like another man, Whereas, had

you then had any to guide you according to the truth

of God, had you then heard the dottrine which now

*

ings of God are without repentance.

55. Have you not another objection nearly allied to 2»

this, namely, that we preach perfection? True; but

what perf wn? The term you cannot object to; be- 4
cause it is scriptural. All the difficulty is, to fix the
meaning of it according to the word of God, Ard
this we have done again and again, declaring to all the

world, that Christian Perfection docs not imply an ex» i

emption

ou blame, you had never fallen from your stedfastness ; :
Gt had found, that in this sense also, the gifts and call-

nm
--_

ww es ext 5

--

To Men of Reason and Religion. 25
emption, from ignorance or mistake, or infirmities, or.
temptations : but that it does imply, the-being so crucified with Christ, as to able to testify, J live not, but
Christ liveth in me, (Gal. ü. 23:) and hath purified my,
heart by faith, (Acts xv. g.) It does imply the of th

down every hagh thing that exalteth itself against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought
to the obedrence'of Christ, It does imply, the being holy,
as he that hath called us is holy, in all manner of. tonversation, (2 Cor. x. 5. 1 Pet. i. 15.) And, in a word,
the loving the Lord our God with all our heart, and seruing him with all our strength.
56, Now, is it possible for any who believe the

scripture, to deny one tittle of this? Lou cannot.
You, dare not. You would not for the world. You.
know it is the pure word of God. And this is the
whole of what we preach ; this is the height and -- n
of What we (with bt. Paul) call perfection: a state of

soul devoutly to be wished, by all who have tasted of
the love of God. O pray for it without ceasing. It
is the one thing you want. Come with boldness to the
throne of grace, and be assured that when you ask this
of God, you shall have the petition you ask of him.
We know indeed that to man, to the natural man, this
is imposhble. But we know also, that as no work is
impossible with God, so all things are possible to him

that believeth, . .
57. For we are saved by faith. But have you not
heard this urged as another objection against us, that
we preach salvation by faith alone ? And dom not St.
Paul do the same thing? By grace, faith he, ye are
saved through faith. Can any words be more express?
And elsewhere, Believe in the Lord Fesus, and thou
shalt be saved, Acts xvi. g1. 1

expluned already) is, that we are saved from our fins,
only by a confidence in the love of God. As soon ag
we behold what manner of love it is which the Father
hath bestowed ushon us, we love him (as the Apostle observes) because he first loved us. And then is that commandment written in our heart, that he who loveth

Cod loveth his brother also : from which love of God
C and

-- * | . "0 _ \ p
5 N e 1 3 * 5 * "
. 9 « 4 1 TED " : - by bf 1 4 L 7 1 7 mt 2 0 ,
1 2 IS I Wax 8 -. 4s + _-- F- 9 . » ag. "0 $ * 4 _ 4 4 * 2 * PETS, l of N 8 TRACES.” Pa of P Fr 4 S * 1 wb 7 -- 1 ds 4 a
: > a 2 SI 2 K - WY 2 1 n 228888 x r * re. ade.» < - of 3 e 2 pt bx P p _
. v rs? -» ts : 3 1 . 8 a K * my -- 64 2 -- 2 wah Ay” 1 Nun -- : a 2 . A, 1 % Lo * N 8 2 - - - 2 -- a -- "I 7 K : | * II SY _-- 2
5 Fa p --_ : * Ty 8 x _ , K 5 3 5 k * S4 8 .
n TTY 3 © ON BIEN 4 Go ed dd ES ERNEST EC IRIS Ode CE TE . N «
PE W S ta a RR 3 WE. og =
4 4 * 2 ” * 1 > J 7 "a . 3 : » -
| > DOR . p 1 3 . : * 8 **

What we mean by this (if it has not been sufficiently ©

26 An ANN APPEAL

and man, meekness, humbleness of mind, and all holy
tempers, spring. Now these are the very essence of
falvation, of Christian falvation, salvation from fin.
And from these, ' outward sal vation fl ws, that is, holiness of life and conversation, Well, and are not these
things so? If you know in whom you have believed,
you need no further witnesses. |

58, But perhaps you doubt, whether that faith
whereby we are thus saved, implies such a trust and
confidence in God as we describe, * You cannot
think faith implies assurance: an assurance of the love
of God to our souls, of his being now reconciled to us,
and having forgiven all our sins.” And this we freely
confess, that if number of voices is to decide the question, we must give it up at once; for you have on
your side, not only some who desire to be Christians
indeed, but all nominal Christians in every place, and
the Romish church, one and all. Nay, these last are
so vehement in your defence, that in the famed council
of Trent, they have decreed, If any man hold
{fduicam) trust, confidence, or assurance of pardon to
be essential to faith, let him be accursed.”

59. Thus does that council anathematize the church
of England. For she is convicted hereof, by her own
confession. The very words in the Homily on Salvation are, Even the devils believe, that Christ was
born of a virgin ; that he wrought all kind of miracles,
declaring himself very God; that for our sakes he suffered a most painful death, to redeem us from death
everlasting. These articles of our faith the devils beheve ; and so they believe all that was written in the
old and new Testament. And yet for all this faith,
they be but devils, They remain still in their damnable
estate, lacking the very true, Christian faith.“

“ The right and true Christian faith is, not only to
believe the Holy Scriptures and the articles of our
faith are true, but also to have a sure trust and confidence to be saved from everlasting damnation through
Christ.” Or, (as it is exprest a little after.) A sure
trust and confidence which a man hath in God, that by the
merits of Christ his fins are forgiven, aud he reconciled to
the favour of God. 4
60. Indeed

To Men of Reason and Religion. 5 27

60. Indeed the bishop of Rome saith, If any man
hold this, let him be an Anathema Maran-atha.” But

7 it is to be hoped, Papal Anathemas do not move you.
= You are a member of the church of England. Are

you? Then the controversy is at an end. Then hear
the church. Faith is a sure trust which a man hath
in God, that his fins are forgiven, Or if you are not,
whether you hear our church or no, at least, hear the
scriptures, Hear believing Job, declaring his faith,

XF 7 know, that my Redeemer livetk. Hear Thomas, (when

having seen, he believed) crying out, My Lord and my
God. Hear St. Paul clearly describing the nature of
his faith, the life I now live, I live by faith in the Son of
God, who loved me, and gave himself for me, Here (to
mention no more) all the believers who were with
Paul when he wrote to the Colossians, bearing witnels,
e give thanks unto the Father, who hath delivered us
from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the
kingdom of his dear Son: in whom we have redemption
through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, ch. i. ver.
12, 13, 14. :

61, Bur what need have we of distant witnesses ?
You have a witness in your own breast, For am I not

= speaking to one that loves Cod? How came you then

to love him at first? Was it not, because you knew
that he loved you? Did you, could you love God at
all, till you tasted and saw that he was gracious * That
he was merciful to you a sinner ? What avails then
controverly or strife of words? Out of thy own mouth!
You own, you had no love to God, till you was sensible of his love to you. And whatever expressions
any sinner who loves God uses, to denote God's love
to him, you will always upon examination, find, that
they directly or indirectly imply forgiveness. Pardoning love is still at the root of all, He who was offended
is now reconciled, The new song which God puts in
every mouth, is always to that effect, O Lord, T will

WV Praise thee : though thou wast angry with me, thine anger

is turned away. Behold, God is my salvation. I will
trust and not be afraid; for the Lord Jehovah is my
firength and my song : he is also become my salvation,

Ila, X11, 1, 2,

28 | An ARNTST APPEAL *
:

62. A confidence then in a pardoning God, is. efsential to true faith. The forgiveness of fins is one of
the first. of those unseen things, whereof faith is the
evidence. And if you are sensible of this, will you
quarrel with us concerning an indifferent circumstance
of it? Will you think it an important objeftion that
we aflert, that this faith is usually given in a moment ?P
First, let me intreat you to read over that authentic
account of God's dealings with men, the Acts of the
Apostles, In this treatise you will find, how he wrought
from the beginning on those who received remiflion of
ins by faith. And can you find one of these, (except
perhaps St. Paul) who did not receive it in a moment?
But abundance you find of those who did, besifles
Cornelius and the three thousand, and to this alto
agrees, the experience of those who now receive the
heavenly gift, Three or four. exceptions only have I
found in the courle of several years, (perhaps you
yourself may be added to that number, and one or two
more whom you have known.) But all the rest of
those, who from time to time among us have beheved
in the Lord Jesus Christ, were in a moment brought
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
unto God. 5 |
63. And why should it seem a thing incredible to
vou, who have known the power of God unto falvation; (whether he hath wrought thus in your soul or
no; for there are diversities of operations hut the same
Jpirit) that the dead jhould hear the voice of the Son
of God, and in that moment live? Thus he useth to
act, to shew that when he willeth, to do is present with
him. Let there be light, said God, and there was light.
He spate the word, and it was done. Thus the heavens
and the earth were created, and all the hosts of them.
And this manner of acting in the present case, highly
tuits both his power and love, There is therefore no
hindrance on God's part; since as his Majesty is, fo is
his mercy, And whatever hindrance there 1s on the
part of man, when God speaketh, it is not. Only fk
then, O finner, and it shall be given thee, even the faith
that brings salvation : and that, without any merit or

good work of thine ; for it is not of works, left any man

-

Nou

*
4 *
_----
_--
-
- + xY
*
4 a\
+ 8
. 7
1 7
wy
a.
_
oy
* 7
-
*
: a
=
_”
K -- -- m
* wy LA 3 2 * . * 7 * N ö * 9 *
* 4 r Err $i non A, * - _--_ 8 FE 0 a
=: IHE 2 - FINS. 8 33 N -- > ene? we Te. "on" | n
1 3 by Gb er Ms he "aL * 4 9 -- . - Clo CY =& We Fn
« "i -- - 1 N 7 1 4 * 6 -- 0 -- p. 7 rn -- 82 2 _-- f 7 ES : . p
A N - . 7 4 3 - 8 u be 4 *

To Men of Reason and Religion. 29

fhou'd boast, No; it is of grace, of grace ale ne. For
unto him that worketh not, but belteveth on him that
Justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted to him for
righteousness.

64. But by talking thus you encourage sinners.””
I do encourage them to repent: And do not you p
Do not you know, how many heap sin upon fin, purely
for want of such encouragement ? Because they think,
te they can never be forgiven ; there is no place for repentance left? Does not your heart also bleed for

them? What would you think too dear to part

with ? What would you not do? What would you
not suffer, to bring one such sinner to repentance ?
Could not your love endure all things for them ?
© Yes ---- if you believed it would do them good; if
you had any hope, they would ever be better.” Why
do you not believe it would do them good? Why have
you not a hope that they will be better? Plainly, because you do not love them enough : because you have
not that charity, which not only endureth, but at the

# fame time believeth and hopeth all things.

65. But that you may lee the whole {trength of this
objection, I will shew you without any disguise or reserve, how I encourage the very chief of sinners, my
usual language to them runs thus : |

O ye that deny the Lord that bought you, yet hear

© the word of the Lord. You seek rest, but find none.

Even in laughter your heart is in heaviness. How
long spend ye your labour for that which is not bread,
and your strength for that which satisfieth not? You
know your foul is not satisfied. It is still an aking
void. Sometimes you find. (in spite of your principles)
a sense of guilt, an awakened conscience. That grifl
phantom, religion (so you describe her) will now and
then haunt you still, Righteousness looking down
from heaven, is indeed to us no unpleasing fight,
But how does it appear to you. |

Horribili super aspectu mortalibus aftans ?

How often are you in fear of the very things you

deny ? How often in racking suspence ? © What if

there be an hereafter ? A judgment to eome? An
C3 unhappy

30 An RARNESH APPEAL

unhappy eternity ? Do you not start at the thoughts?

Can you te content to be always thus? Shall it be said
of you also,

Here lies a dicer, long in doubt
If death could kill the soul, or not ?
Here ends his doubtfulness ; at last
Convinc'd. But, O the die is cast ! ”?

Or, are you already convinced, there is no hereafter ?
What a poor state then are you in now? Taking a
few more dull turns upon earth, and then dropping
into nothing! What kind of spirit must you be of,
if you can sustain yourself under the thought! Under
the expectation of being in a few months swept away
by the stream of time, and then for ever F

e swallow'd up, and lost,
In the wide womb of uncreated night!“

But neither indeed are you certain of this ; nor of any
thing else. ** It may be so; it may not. A vast scene
is behind. But clouds and darkness rest upon it.“
All is doubt and uncertainty. You are continually
tossed to and fro, and have no firm ground for the sole
of your foot. O let not the poor wisdom of man any .

longer exalt itself against the wisdom of God. You
have fled from him long enough: at length suffer your
eyes to be opened by him that made them, You want
rest to your soul. Ask it of him, who giveth to all
men liberally, and -- not! You are now a
mere riddle to yourself, and your condition full of
darkness and perplexity. You are one among many
restless inhabitants, of a miserable, disordered world,
walking in a vain shadow, and disquieting yourself in
vain, But the light of God will speedily disperse the
anxiety of your vain conjeftures. By adding heaven
to earth, and eternity to time; it will open fuch a
glorious view of things, as will lead you, even in the.
2 world, to a peace which passeth all under-

nding. 4

66. O ye gross, vile, scandalous sinners, bear ye the 3
word of the Lord. Turn ye, turn ye from your evi!
| ways;

q b PL -- 4 4

” 732
8 1 » 0

To Men of Reason and Religion.

gt
ways ; fo iniquity shall not be your ruin. As I live,
faith the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of a finmer, but rather that he should turn and live. O make
haste ; delay not the time. Come, and let us reason to-

gether. Though your fins be as scarlet, they all be
zohite as snow : though they be red as crimson, they shall
be as wool, --Who ts this that cometh from Edom, with
dyed garments, red in his apparel ? It is he on whom
the Lord hath laid the iniguities of us all ! Behold, behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away thy fins! See

the only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and

truth | He loveth thee. He gave himself for thee.
Now, his bowels of compassion yearn over thee! O
believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved! C

in peace, fin no more!

67. Now cannot you join in all this? Is it not the
very language of your heart? O when will you take
knowledge, that our whole concern, our constant labour 1s, to bring all the world to the religion which
you feel, to solid, inward, vital religion! What power
is it then that keeps us asunder? I thine heart right,
as my heart is with thy heart? If it be, give me thy
hand. Come with me and fee, and rejoice in my 2eat.

for the Lord. No difference between us (if thou art

a child of God) can be so. considerable as our agreement is. If we differ in smaller things, we agree in
that which is greatest of all. How is it possible then
that you should be induced, to think or speak evil of

us? How could it ever come into your mind, to op-

pole us or weaken. our hands? How long shall we
complain of the wounds which we receive in tne house
of our friends? Surely the children of this world are

{till wiser in their generation than the children of light.

Satan is not divided against himself : Why are they,
who are on the Lord's fide? How is it that wisdom is
not justified of her own children ?:

68. Is it, because you have heard, © That we only
make religion a cloak for covetousnels? And because
you have heard abundance of particulars alleged in
support of that general charge ? It is probable, you
may allo have heard, © How much we have gained by
preaching already: and, to crown all, * That we

- 5 are

32 An zanxesr APPEAL

are only papists in disguise, who are undermining and
destroying the church?“

69. * You have heard this,” Well: and can you
believe it ? Have you then never heard the 5th chapter of St. Matthew? I would to God you could believe this! what is written there? How readest thou ?
Blessed are ye when men fhall revile you and persecute
you, and fay all manner of evil against you falsely for
my name's fake, * Rejoice and be exceeding glad ; for
great is your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the
prophets that were before you namely, by reviling them,
and saying all manner of evil of them falsely, Do not
you know that this (as well as all other scriptures) must
needs be fulfilled? If fo, take knowledes that this
day also it is fulfilled in your ears. For our Lord's fake,
and for the sake of his gospel which we preach, men do
revile us and ßpersecute us, and (blessed be God who

iveth us to rejoice therein) jay all manner of evil of us
faljely. And how can it be otherwise ? The disciple is
not above his master, It is enough for the disciple, that
he be as his master, and the servant as his Lord, If
they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how
much more fhall they call them of his household ?

70. This only we confess, that, we preach inward
salvation, now attainable by faith.” And for preaching
this, (for no other crime was then so much as pretended)
we were forbid to preach. any more in any of those
churches, were, till then, we. were gladly received.
This is a notorious fact. Being thus hindered from
preaching in the places we should first have chosen,
we now declare the grace of God which bringeth salvation, in all places of his dominion : as well know.
ing that God dwelleth not m temples made with
hands. This is the real, and it is the only real ground
of complaint againit us. And this we avow before all
mankind, we do preach this salvation by faith. And
not being suffered to preach it in the usual places, we
declare it wherever a door is opened, either on a mountain or a plain, or by a river side, (for all which we
conceive we have sufficient precedent) or in a prison,
or, as it were, in the house, of Justus, or the school of

one Tyrannus, Nor dare we refrain. A ä
| ©

o
£3

To Men of Reason and Religion. 33

a „
*, =. 8 ©

of the gospel is committed to me; and “ woe is me if I
preach not the gospel.” _ 28
| 71, Here we allow the fact, but deny the guilt.

But in every other point alledged,. we deny the fact,
and call upon the world to prove it, if they can.
More especially we call upon those who for many
years saw our manner of life at Oxford. "These well
know, that after the most straitest sect of our religion,
we lived Pharisees : and that the grand objettion to us
for all those years, was the being righteous overmuch :
the reading, falling, Praying, denying ourselves ; the
going to church, to the Lord's table ; the relieving the
poor, visiting those that were sick and in prison ; instructing the ignorant, and labouring to reclaim the
wicked more than was necessary for salvation.
These were our open, flagrant crimes, from the year
1729 to the year 1737; touching which our Lord
XX shall judge in that day.

172. But waving the things that are past : which of
vou now convinceth us of fin ? Which of you (I here
more especially appeal to my brethren the clergy) can
= personally convict us of any ungodliness or unholiness
of conversation? Ye know in your own hearts, (all
that are candid men, all that are not uiterly blinded
with prejudice) that we labour to have a conscience void
e, offence toward God and toward man. Brethren, I
would to God that in this ye were even as we. But
indeed (with grief I speak it) ye are not. There are
among 7 ungodly and unholy men; openly,
undeniably such : drunkards, gluttons, returners of evil
for evil, lars, swearers, prophaners of the day of the
XZ Lord. Proof hereof is not wanting if ye require it.
Xx Were then is your zeal against these? A clergyman,
so drunk he can scarce stand or speak, may, in the
IX presence of a thousand people, * set upon another
IF clergyman of the same chureh, both with abusive words
and open violence. And what follows? Why, the
one is {till allowed to dispense the sacred signs of the
body and blood of Christ, But the other is not
allowed to receive them. Because he is a field

- „
y jp .
„„
3 6

, . 9
> +, 5 hd 24 ET $f, Woo Be oP -- LE 81 . 8 2 l
vl * d 2 2 ng » 4 ti -- - = -- « £% 8 3 a
2 8 Ph : _ OO . . :

+ At Epworth, in Lincolnshire. dion
73 O ye

|
'|
4s

n
bh a

| 34 An EAN EST APPEAL

173. O ye pillars and fathers of the church, are
these things well-pleasing to him, who hath made you
overseers over that flock which he hath purchased with
his own blood? O that ye would suffer me to boast

myself a little! Is there not a cause? Have not ye

compelled me? Which of your clergy are more unfpotted in their lives, which more unwearied in their
labours, than thole whose names ye caft out as evil,
whom ye count as the filth and off-fcouring of the world?
Which of them is more zealous to spend and be spent,
for the lost sheep of the houle of Israel? Or, who
amongst them is more ready to be ofered up for their
flock upon the sacrifice and service of their faith ?

74. Will ye say, (as the historian of Cataline) Si fic
pro patria ! If this were done in defence of the
church, and not in order to undermine and destroy
it! That is the very proposition I undertake to prove.
That „we are now defending the church, even the
church of England, in opposition to all those who
either secretly undermine, or more openly attempt to
destroy it.“
73. That we are Papists, (we, who are daily and
hourly preaching that very doftrine, which is so solemnly anathematized by the whole church of Rome)
is such a charge, that I dare not waste my time in industriously confuting it. Let any man of common
sense only look on the title pages of the sermons we
have lately preached at Oxford, and he will need
nothing more to shew him the weight of this senseless
shameless accusation ; unless he can suppose the governors both of Christ-church and Lincoln college,
nay, and all the university to be Papr/ts too.

76. You yourself can eafily acquit us of this: but
not of the other part of the charge. You still think
we are secretly undermining, if not openly destroying

* the church.

What do you mean by the church ? A visible church
fas our article defines it) is, A company of faithful (or
believing) people > cetus credentium, This is the essence
of a church: and the properties thereof are (as they
are described in the words that follow) That the pure
word of God be preached therein, and the sacraments duly

ve 18 admanistered,

To Men of Reason and Religion. 35
administered. Now then [according to this authentic
account) what is The church of England? What is it
indeed, but the faithful people, the true believers of
England ? It is true, if these are scattered abroad they
come under another consideration. But when they are
visibly joined, by assembling together to hear the pure
word of God preached, and to eat of one bread, and
drink of one cup, they are then properly the visible
church of England. |

77. It were well if this were a little more considered

by Gabe who so vehemently cry out, The church, the
church, (as those of old, The temple of the Lord ! the
| temple of the Lord 1) not knowing what they speak, nor
whereof they affirm. A provincial or national church,
according to our article, is, the true believers of that
province or nation, If these are dispersed up and
down, they are only a part of the invisible church of
= Christ. But if they are visibly joined by assembling
together to hear his word and 2 of his supper,
they are then a visible church, such as the church of
England, France, or any other.
78. This being premised, I ask, How do we undermine or destroy the church? The provincial, visible
church of England? The article mentions three
things as essential to a visible church: 1st, Living
faith, without which indeed there can be no church at
all, neither visible nor invisible; 2dly, Preaching (and
consequently hearing) the pure Nat of God, else the
faith would languish and die; and gdly, A due administration of the sacraments, the ordinary means
whereby God increaseth faith. Now come close to
the question : in which of these points do we undermine, or destroy the church ?

Do we shut the door of faith ? Do we lefsen the
number of believing people in England ? Only remember what faith is, according to our homilies, (viz.
A sure trust and confidence in God, that through
the merits of Christ my fins are forgiven, and I reconciled to the favour of God.“) And we appeal to all
mankind, do we destroy this faith, which 1s the life
and soul of the church ? Is there, in fact, less of this
faith in England, than there was before we went forth!

| I think

© I ". l TT.
* ”
q ” _ --
bd . 8 8 "+ --
r „. 3 ap. = ----_-- 4 * . -- 4 -
Za - & Mu d 0 4 a Y *
_ . a - 4 * „ = 1 b f d 1 4
ws Cam, I . 2 3 ++ -- R

8 os a EA
OI rn LEI 2” n

i 1 8 a =D Fg
* 8 1
* =_ «4 *
* 4

- 6. ht

g6 An ranwvent APPEAL
1 think this is an assertion which the father of lies
himself will scarce dare to utter or maintain.

With regard then to this first point it is undeniable,
we neither undermine nor destroy the church. The
second thing 1s, the preaching and hearing the pure
word of God. And do we hinder this? Do we hinder any minister from preaching the pure word of

God? If any preach not at all, or not the pure word |

of God,. is the hindrance in us or in themfelves? Or,

do we leflen the number of those that hear the pure 1
word of God ? Are then the hearers thereof (whether

read or preached) fewer than they were in times past ?

Are the usual places of public Worship less frequented i
by means of our preaching ? Wheresoever our lot has

been cast for any time, are the churches emptier than
they were before? Surely, none that has any regard

left either for truth or modesty, will say, that in this |

oint we are enemies to, or destroyers of, the church.
The third thing requisite (if not to the being, at
least) to the well-being of a church, is the due administration of the sacraments, particularly that of the Lord's
supper. And are we, in this respect, underminers or
destroyers of the church ? Do we either by our exam-

le or advice, draw men away from the Lord's table? l ,

here we have laboured most, are there the fewest
communicants? How does the fact stand in London,
Bristol, Newcastle? O that you would no longer shut
your eyes against the broad light which encompasses
you-on every fide ! |

79. I believe you are sensible by this time, not only

how weak this objection is, but. likewise how. easy it 2

-

would be, terribly to retort, every branch of it upon | x

most of those that make it: Whether we speak of true
living faith, of preaching the pure word of God, or

of the due administration of the facraments, both of
baptism and the Lord's supper. But I spare you. It

fafficeth that our God knoweth, and will make manifest
in that day, whether it be by reason ous or you, that
men abhor the offering of the Lord. --*

80. Others biel, „That we do not observe the
laws of the Church, and thereby undermine it.“ What
laws? 'Thg rubricks or canons? In every parish

where

: 1 8 4 -
* 5 -- > A 8 8 2 9 ” 2 * TY To » w 8 oP
-- < N - -- nd HS Fa 3 -- err 2
r 1 Wo RE I a ES 1 e 8 «

as,”

k
- a Vs

It nts. Wc K*

a * ö 4
8 l r *
8 *. FED . wy * by *
* PRC n * 1 Genes
erer a
my ET ik

.

To To hes oft bees and Kere, F 87
here 1 ba e curate y I have oblervad che tu ·
brieks 9 55 e not for Wrath, butt
for e 2 -- And this, Ig far as belong te an
unbenehced minister,. or Tall a. Private member ofthe
church, I do now. ust. mention · a Jew; ofithemy
and leave. Juv. mA conse, which of us has obleryed
or does ob em most, % 24 01 Hu
1. Days of fasting on abstinence to be oblaryeds (17
he forty:days of. Len, .,-., - 113 do ad
Tho:Einber days ot the four (nts: do 8H 1
The three Rogation days, 1 Ls ven
An Fridays in the Year, except, Christ beg Day
* So many as intend to be partalgers of ther holy
communion, Hall. signify. their Names) > AQ curate
A some time the day before: (1 15 tts
k if any of these be an open and, nocorieuaant
© liver, --the, curate shall advertise him, tha im any
© wise he presume not to come tothe Lord's tahle watt
he hath openly declared himself to have Nye cc
ented. 20 1
1 £ g. Then (after 8 exced), the, eu
Hb declare unto the Fuer What e eee
= are in the week- een tor be ob ser ved. vd n def»
4. The mittister shall first receive the. cu 108
of both kinds himself, and then proceed to deliytiethe
same to the bishops, priests, and deacons, in like manner, if any be present, and after that, to the people,
8. « In cathedral and collegiate ehurches, -- 6
es, where there are many priests and deacons; they

2 -- all receive the communion with: . priest, efery
2 Sunday -at the least. . £2 809
3 6. The children to be ba Rn} of be
the font, immediately aster the last lesson.
7+ The qurates of every sball warn the People, that without great nece i they procure not their
e to be baptized at home in their houses, -
8. © The curate of every parish shall diligenthiupon
Sundays and dns after the second Lesson at den1 Ing prayer, openly in the church, instruct and exanane
so many chi en as, | (he sball- think convenient, mhsbude
part . the Catechism,
D 9. 66 When-

1 -- * 22 * _ * 3 .
* 4 1 ow *
r
* 1 4 , opt x > Þ-

_
--

< % -- -
4. We I 5
e -- 4 --
»* -- , 4 ry b
-- ;

4 -4
--

n 8 8 n ns
N , 0 \ , Ix td ENG * _ 3

de a ve ever dhe bishop shall give notice for
children to be brought unto him fot their confirmation,
the curate of every parish shall" either bring or send in
writing, with His hand fubscribed thereunto, the names
of all such persons within his -- as he : shall t think
fit:to be ted to the bi
8H Now the question is not, whether ee rubricks
ought to be observed, (you take this for granted in
making the obsection) but whether in fact they have
been observed, by you or me, most * Many can witness Wl
I have observed them 4 yea, sometimes at the
hazard of my life : as many, I fear, that you have
not observed them * all, ea th that several of them you
never pretended to observe. And is it vou that are
accusing me, for not observing the rubricks of the
-- ? What grimace is this! O tell it not in Gath !
Publish it not in the streets of Astelon
82. With 4 5070 65 hon 1 Wed in the first |
-- Lelre you to consider, two or three N que M

7 "Mp

it. He you ever read For over? | 2
- 2dly. How can these be be x % The eas of the
church of England? they were never legally
established by the church ? (7 Never We confirmed
many full convocation?
J34dly. By what right am I required to observe such
canons as were never legally establinedꝯ
And then 1 will join issue with you on one question
2 „vis. Whether you or 1 have observed them
wolt ? |
Jo instance Gl in a few.
Can. 29. No 3 snall be Aue | godfather or
r to any child, -- before the laid person hath i
ern he holy communion. _
Can. 59. Every Parson, Vicar, or Curate, upon
Sunday and Holiday, before Evening Prayer,
wall, for half an hour, or more, examine instruct
the youth and ignorant persons of his parish.
Can. 64. Every Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall de5 to t Here every Sunday, whether there be any

GY or the week following.
; Can, 68.

r 2
, ohne fo IE o-,

\ ve, - A -* f 0 . 4 * »

ge . At.” + al a od, OS \ TT, YO OOTY h p 4

als EE. Mc,

ö

e

. .
= \,v

r A | 2 Ss % | wo. 2 nh, A
r

eee. 0%
| To Men of Reason and Reli ion. 39
46 62: 06h St V0 G3 ELgNTC IO0 7114533 JOU
Can. 68, No minister shall refuse or delay to christen
any child that is brought to the church to him upon
Sundays or holidays to be christened, or to bury auy
corps that is brought to the church or church-yard.,,.;
(N, B. Inability to pay fees does not alter the case.) ,
Can. 76. No ecclefiastical persons {hall spend their
2 idly, by day or by night, playing at dice, cards
tables, 3 4 wes unt
Now let the clergyman , who has observed only the
five canons for one year last, past, and Who has rea
over all the canons in his congregation; (as the King's
ratification straitly enjoins im to do once every year)
let him, I say, cast the first, stone at us,, for not observ-
* Canons (fo called) of the church of England.
3. * However we cannot be (it is said) friends to
the church, because we do not obey the Governors of it,
and /ubmt ourselves (as at our ordination. we 2
to do) to all their godly admonitions and injunctions.“
RE 1 ans.ver, in every individual point of an indifferent
nature, We do and will (by the grace of God) obey
RE the governors of the church. But the testifying. tl
AF gespel of the grace of God, is not a point of an indifferent nature. The ministry which we have received of
tee Lord Jesus, we are at all hazards to fulfil. It is the
= 5.7:hen of the Lord which is laid upon us here; and
ve are to obey God rather than man. Nor yet do we in
any ways violate the promise which each of us made,
when it was laid unto him, Take thou authority to
preach the word of God, in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” We then
promised to submit (mark the words) to the godly admonitions and injunctions of our ordinary. But we dith
| HEY. | * Ma e PAI?
FTbe author of a: tract just published at Necattle, fen
titled, The Notions of the Methodisis fully disproved, in u
letter to the Rev. Mr. John Wesley) much insists, upon this
objetklion. I have read, and believe it quite needless oke
any further notice of this performance? the writer bebe fo
wterly unacquainted with the merits'of the caüse, and (bei
himself fo perfectly a firanger both to my lise, hin e
wnting ; and to the word of God, and to the 3 and homilies of the church of Eugl ang.

1 *
oy a _-- --

40 An zaxnzer APPEAL

not, could not promise to obey suck injunctions, a8. te
know are contrary to the word of Gt.
84. © But why chen (say some) do you leave the
church Leave the thurch f What can you, mean ?
Do we leave so much as the church walls? Four on
eyes tell you, we do not. Do we leave the ordinances
* church ® You daily fee and know the centrary.
we leave the fundamental doftrine of the church,
namely, Salvation by Faith ? -It is our constant theme,
in public, in private, in writing, in conversation. Do
we leave the” practice of the church, the standard whereof are the ten commandments ? Which are so essentially
in-wrought in her constitution, (as little as you may
«pprehend it) that whosoever breaks one of the least of
these, 'is no member of the church of England. I believe you do not care to put the cause on this issue,
Neither do you mean this, by leaving the church. In
truth, I cannot coriceive what you mean. I doubt
you cannot. "conceive yourfef.. You have retailed a
Pwene from somebody else, which you no more understand than he. And no marvel; for it is a true
observation, © © 0 8
Nonsense is never to be understood,”

88. Nearly related to this is that other objection,
that we divide the church. Remember the church is,
The faithful people, or true believers. Now how do
e divide these? Why, by :our: societies.” Very
good. Now the case is plain. We divide them (you
{ay) by. uniting them together,” Truly, a very uncommon way of diuiding. O, but we divide those who
are thus united with each other, from the rest of the
church.“ By no means. Many of them were before
Joined to all their brethren of the church of England
(and many were not, until they knew us) by affembling
themselves "together, to hear the word of God, and to
eat of one bread, and drink of one cup. And do they
now forsake that afsenbling themselves together? You
cannot, you dare not say it. You know they are more
diligent therein than ever; it being one of the fixed
rules of our sacieties, That every member attend the
ordinances of God,” i. e. le doth not divide from the

church,

.
> - --

To Men of Reason and Religion. it

church. And if any member of the church does thus
divide from or leave it, he hath no more place among
G e eee, Ib 17.91 1 40
86. I have considered this objection the more at
large, because it is of most weight with sincere minds.
And to all these, if they have fairly and impartially
weighed the answer as well as the objection, I believe
it clearly appears, that we are neither undermining not
deftroying, neither dividing nor leaving the church. 8
far from it, that we have great heaviness, on her account, yea, continual sorrow in our hearts. And our
prayer to God is, that he would repair the breaches
of Sion, and build the walls of Jerusalem, that this our
desolate church may flourish again, and be the praise
of-the' whole earth,” 39049 5 12h 1 He20 ge "I OITG
87. But perhaps you have heard, that we in truth
regard no church at all : that gain'is the true spring of
all our actions: thu J, in particular, am well paid for
my work, having thirteen hundred pounds a year (as
Reverend Author accurately computes it) at the Foundery alone, over and above what I receive from Bristol,
== Kingswood, Newcastle, and other places: and that
BE wholoever survives me, will fee I have made good use
of my time; for I shall not die a beggar- .
88. I freely own, this is one of the best advised objections which has ever yet been made; because it not
only puts us upon 33 a negative, (Which is seld pom
an easy task) but also one of such a kind as scarce admits of any demonstrative proof at all. But for such
proof as the nature of the thing allows, I appeal to ny
manner of life which hath been from 3
Ye who have seen it (and not with a friendly eye) for
these twelve or fourteen years last past, or for ay
part of that time, Have ye ever seen any thing like
the love of gain therein? Did I not continually remember the words of the Lord Jesus, „It is more
blessed to give than to receive? Ye of Oxford, Do ye
not know these things are so ? What gain did I seek
among you? Of whom did I take any thing? From
whom did I covet filver, or gold, or apparel ? To
whom did I deny any thing which I had even to the
hour that I departed from you ? Ve of Epworth and
SEO D 3 W roote,

43 2h An 'EARNEST APPEAL

Wrooete;, zwang whom 1 ministered for (nearly) the
ace of three. years, what gain did I seek among you?
r of whom did I take or covet any thing Ve of
Savannah and Frederica, among whom God afterwards
proved me, and shewed me what Was in my heart,
What gain did I seek among you Of whom did I take
any thing? Or whose food or apparel did I covet (for
Hlver or gold had ye none, no more than I myself for
aunny months) even when I was in hunger and nakedness ? Ye yourselves, and the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, know that 1 lie not.
89. But lit is said) things are fairly altered now.
Now I cannat-complain of wanting any thing ; having
the yearly income of a bishop of London, over and
above what I gain at other places,” At what other
places my friend '? Inform yourself a little better, and
vou will find, that both at Newcastle, Bristol, and
Kingswood, (che only places beside London, where
any collection at all is made) the money collected is
both received and expended by the stewards of those
several societies, and never comes into my hands at all,
meit her first nor last. And you, or any who desire it,
Fhall read over the accounts kept by any of those stew -
ards, and fee with your ,own eyes, that by all these
Adcietzes I gain just as much as you do.
90. The case in London stands thus. In November
12439, two gentlemen, then unknown to me (Mr. Ball
And Mr. Watkins) came and desired me once and again,
to preach in a place called the Foundery near MoorFelds. With much reluctance I at length complied.
To soon. after pressed to take that place into my own
hands. These who-were most earnest therein, lent me
the purchase money, which was 1151. Mr. Watkins
and Mr. Ball then delivered me the names of several
subscribers, whe offered to pay, some four, or six, some
ten shillings a year towards the repayment of the purchase- money, and the putting the buildings into repair.
This amounted one year to near 200l. the second to
8 about 140, and so the hst. | 1% 0
9. The united society begun a little after, whose
weelly contribution (chiefly for the poor) is received
. and\ewpendediby- sy ata *- =
Tot. 7s 6 ands

To Men of Reason and Rellgion. 43

hands at all. But there is also a quarterly subseription
of many of the society, which is nearly equal to that
above mentioned. Y WP
92. The uses to which these subscriptions have been
hitherto applied, are, 1st, the payment of that 414151,
adly. The repairing (I might almost say rebuilding)
that vast, uncouth heap of ruins at the Foundery ;
gdly. The building galleries both for men and women ;
gthly. The enlarging the society room to near thrice
its first bigness. All taxes and occasional expences are
likewise defrayed out of this fund. And it has been
hitherto so far from yielding any overplus, that it has
never {ufficed for these purposes yet. So far from it,
that I am still in debt, on these accounts, near gool.
So much have I hitherto gained by preaching the gospel ! Besides a debt of 130l. still remaining on account
of the schools built at Bristol ; and another of above
2001, on account of that now building at Newcastle.
J desire any reasonable man would now sit down and
lay these things together, and let him see, whether, allowing me a gram of common sense, (if not of common
honesty) he can possibly conceive, that a view of gain
would induce me to act in this manner. s
93. You can never reconcile it with any degree af
common sense, that a man who wants nothing, who
has already all the necessaries, all the conveniencies,
nay, and many of the superfluities of life, and these nat
only independent on any one, but lefs liable to comin1 than even a gentleman's frechold estate, that
uch an one should calmly and deliberately throw up
his ease, most of his friends, his reputation, and that
way of life which of all others is most agreeable both
to his natural temper and education: that he should
toil day and night, spend all his time and strength,
knowingly destroy a firm constitution, and haften into
weakness, pain, diseases, death, to gain a debt of
six or seven hundred pounds! |
94. But supposing the ballance an the other fide, let
me alk you one plain question. For What gain (setting conscience aside) will you be obliged to att thus?
To live exactly as I do? For what price will you
Preach (and that wich all your might, not 40 .casy
3 TS ne |

*

44 An rARN EST APPEAL ©

indolent fashionable way) eighteen, or nineteen times
every week ? And this throughout the year? What
shall I give you, to travel seven or eight hundred miles,
in all weathers, every two or three months ? For 'what
salary will you abstam from all other diversions, than
the doing good, and the praising God? I am mistaken
if you would not prefer strangling to such a life even
with thousands of gold and silver.

95. And what is the comfort you have found out
for me in these circumstances? Why, that I shall
not die a beggar.” So now I am supposed to be heaping up riches, -- © that I may leave them behind me.
Leave them behind me! For whom? My wife and
children? Who are they? They are yet unborn;
Unless thou meanest the children of faith whom-God
hath given me. But my heavenly Father feedeth them;
Indeed if I lay up riches at all, it must be to leave behind me : (seeing my fellowship is a provision for life.)
But I cannot understand this. What comfort would
it be to my soul, now launched into eternity, that I had
teft bend me gold as the dust, and silver as the sand of
the sea ? Will it follow me over the great gulph? Or
can I go back to it? Thou that liftest up thy eyes in
hell, what do thy riches profit thee now? Will all
| thou once hadst under the sun, gain thee a drop of water to cool thy tongue? O the comfort of riches left
behind to one who is tormented in that flame! -- You

me in mind of those celebrated lines (which I once
exceedingly admired) addressed by way of ern
to. the soul of a poor self-murderer : . +

4 Yet shall thy grave with rising flowers be drest,
And the green turf lie light upon thy breast!
Here shall the year its earliest S show ;
Here the first roses of the spring shall blow :
While angels, with their ers wings o'ershade
The place, now sacred by thy relicks made.”

96. I will now simply tell you my sense. of these
matters, Whether you will hear, or whether you will
'forbear; Food and raiment 1 have; such food as 1
chuse to eat, and such raiment as I chuse to put on. I
have «of nor where to lay my head. 8 is
n

To Men of Reason and Religion. 45

needful for life and godliness. And I apprehend this
is all the world can afford. The kings of the earth
can give me no more. For, as to gold and silver, I
count it dung and dross: I trample it under my feet.
I (yet not I, but by the grace of God that is in me)
esteem it just as the mire in the streets. I desire it not;
I seek it not: I only fear, least any. of it should. cleave
to me, and I should not be able to shake it off, before
my spirit returns to God, It must indeed pass through
my hands; but I will take care (God being my helper)
that the mammon of unrighteousness /shall only pals
through; it shall not rest there. None of the accursed
thing shall be found in my tents, when the Lord calleth me hence. And hear ye this, all you Who have
discovered the treasures which I am to leave behind
me: If I leave behind me ten pounds (above my debts,
and the little arrears ,of my fellowship) you and all
= mankind bear witness against me, that I lived and
died a thief and a robber.
--_ 97. Before I conclude, 1 3 bat intreat you
who know God, to review the whole matter from the
foundation. Call to mind what the state of religion
was, in our nation, a few years since. In whom did
you find the holy tempers that were in Christ? Bowels
of mercies, lowliness, meeknels, ,gentlenels, | contempt
of the world, patience, temperance, long: suffering ?
A burning love to God, rejoicing evermore, and in
every thing giving thanks; and a tender love to all
mankind, covering, believing, hoping, enduring all
things? Perhaps yen dd aol know en such man ja
the world. But how many, that had all un ialy tempers What vanity and pride, what stubbornmess and
lelf-will, what anger, fretfulness, discontent, what suspicion and resentment, what mordinate affeftions, what
irregular passions, what, foobsh and hurtful desires
might you find, in those who are called the best of men?
In those Who made the striftest profession of religion 7
And how few did you know who went so far as the
profession of religion, who had even the form of godliness ? Did you not frequently bewail, wherever your
lot was cast, the general want of even outward'religion ?
How few were seen at the public worship or
o

46 An rARNT ST APPEAL
How much sewer at the Lord's table? And was even
this lit rle flock zealous of good works, careful, as they
had time, to do good to all men? On the other hand,
did you not with grief observe, outward irreligion in
every place? Where could you be for one week,
without being an eye or an ear witness, of curling,
swearing,” or prophaneness, of fsabbath-breaking or
drunkenness, of quarrelling or brawling, of revenge
or 'obscenity ? Were 'thess things done in a corner?
Did not gross iniquity of all kinds overspread our land
as à flood ? Yea, and daily increase, in spite of all
the opposition 'which the children of God did or could
make against it, thin Reagan fon 50
98. If you had been then told, that the jealous God
would soon arise and maintain his own cause ; that he
would pour down his Sparit from on high, and renew
the face of the earth; that he would shed abroad his
love in the hearts of the outcasts of men, producing
all holy and heavenly tempers, expelling anger, and
pride, and evil desire, and all unholy and earthly tempers; causing outward religion, the work of faith, the
Patience of hope, the labour of love, to flourish and
abound ; and wherever it spread, abolishing outwardirreligion, destroying all the works of the devil: if
ou had been told, that this living knowledge of the
rd would in a short space overspread our land; yea,
and daily encrease, in s.»te of all the opposition
which the devil and his children did or could make
against it: Would you not vehemently have desired
ta see that day, that you might bicss God and rejoice
therein 34k 05 3 | 6 |
99. Behold the day of the Lord is come. He 1s
again visiting and redeeming his people. Having eyes,
fee ye not? Having ears, do ye not hear? Neither
understand with your hearts ? At this hour the Lord
is rolling away our reproach. Already his standard is
set up. His spirit is poured forth on the outcasts of
men, and his love shed abroad 'in their hearts. Love
of all mankind, meekness, gentlencfs, humblenels of
mind, holy and heavenly affections, do take place of
hate, anger, pride, revenge, and vile or vain affettions.
Hence wherever the power of the Lord spreads, fprings
WII | outward

To Men of Reason and Religion. 47

ontward religion in all its forms. The houses of God
dre filled ; the table of the Lord is thronged on every
side. And those, who thus shew their love of God,
shew they love. their neighbour also, by being careful
to maintain good works, by doing all manner of good
(as they have time) to all men, They are likewise
careful to abstain from all evil. Cursing, sabbathbreaking, drunkenness, with all other (however fashionable) works of the devil, are not once named among
chem. All this is plain, demonstrable fact. For this
also is not done in a corner. Now, do you acknowtledge the day of your visitation ? Do you bless God
and rejoice therein ?

100. What hinders? Is it this, that men fay all
manner of evil of those whom God is pleased to use as
instruments in his work? O ye fools, did ye suppole
the devil was dead? Or that he would not fight for
his kingdom? And what weapons shall he fight with
if not with lies? Is he not a liar, and the father of it ?
Suffer ye then thus far. Let the devil and his children
fay all manner of evil of us. And let them go on deceiving each other, and being deceived. But ye need
not be deceived also.-- Or if you are, if you will
believe all they say: be it so, that we are weak, filly,
wicked men; without sense, without learning, without
even a desire or design of doing good: yet I insist
upon the fact. Christ is preached, and sinners are
converted to God. This none but a madman can
deny. We are ready to prove it by a cloud of witnesses. Neither therefore can the inference be denied,
that God is now visiting his people. O that all men
may know in this their day, the things that make for
their peace h

101. Upon the whole, to men of the world I would
still recommend the known advice of Gamaliel : Refrain from these men, and let them alone ; for if this
work be of men, it will come to nought ; but if it be of
Cod, ye cannot overthrow it, left haply ye be found even
to fight against God. But unto you whom God hath
chosen out of the world, I fay ye are our brethren, and
of our Father's house, it behoveth you, in whatsoever

manner ye are able, to strengthen our hands in God.

And

48 „Ha b Rar APPEAL, &c.

And this ye are all able to do; to wish us good luck ig
che name of the Lord, arid, to pray contihually, that
none of these things may de ws; arid ey we" may not
count our lives tens unto ourselves, fo that we may finish
our course” with joy, and the mimftry 4 which. we have fecave * ** Lint efies P

1 1 „
6 1 -11 4 14
_ 4
\
o 1
” © #
'S. p
*
”"
*
; : |
.
*
-
.
1 ;
* .* 1
*
4 7
3 „
, 3 5
« >
6 1 *s Ev *_ .

Pug =» - n
. -- 33 os . 4 - 8 < 2
f a a 1 . f q g , * . . .
» N 8 . e 8 1 -- * 3 7 a 3 -- : 5 5
. 4 fi * < - 0 0 _>_ * *: , * -- 4 z 1 A a _--_-- * 4 5
Ms - 5 0 To © . $43 1, wy 8 F - Y 5 ** N 5 * Ln, Fo
wa F 4 0 A > a > i "3 Ace - , 1 p 4 lt \ = by

|
; 7
*
I 9 =--y

&+ $4 44% Kk Kk K KEK %

Primitive Christianity.

APPY the souls who first believ'd,
To Jesus, and each other cleav'd,
Join'd by the unction from above,
In mystic fellowship of love.

Meek, simple followers of the Lamb
They liv'd, and spake, and thought the same,
Brake the Commemorative bread,

And drank the Spirit of their Head.

On God they cast their every care,
Wrestling with God in mighty prayer,
They claim'd the grace, thro' Jesus given:
By prayer, they shut, and open'd heaven..

To Jesus they perform'd their vows,.
A little church in every house;
They joyfully conspir'd to raise
Their ceaseless sacrifice of praise.

Propriety was there unknown,
None call'd what he possess'd his on;
Where all the common blessings share,,
No selfish happinels was there.

With grace abundantly endu'd,

A pure, believing multitude ;

They all were of one heart and soul,
And only love inspir'd the whole.

O what an-age of golden days!

O what a choice, peculiar race !

Wash'd in the Lamb's all cleansing blood,
Anointed. kings, and priests to God!

| *
E 8 Where:

„
8 Where shall I wander now to find -
The successors they left behind ?
The faithful, whom I seck in vain,
Are minish'd from the sons of men.

9 Ye different sets, who all declare,
Lo! here is Christ, or Christ is there !
Your stronger proofs divinely give, *
And shew me where the Christians live.

10 Your claim, alas! ye cannot prove,
Ye want the genuine mark of love:
Thou only, Lord, thine own canst shew,
For sure Thou hast a church below,

11 The gates of hell cannot prevail,
The church on earth can never fail :
Ah! join me to thy secret ones,

Ah! gather all thy living stones,

12 Scatter'd o'er all the earth they lie,
*Till Thou collett them with thine eye,
Draw by the mulick of thy name,
And charm into a beauteous frame.

13 For this the pleading Spirit groans,
And cries in all thy banish'd ones:
Greatest of gifts, thy love impart,
And make us of one mind and heart.

-- - - _ -
* =
-- 2 * -
-- KW W TTTTTWt 4
*
=

14 Join every soul that looks to Thee,
In bonds of perfett charity :
Now, Lord, the glorious fulness give,
And all in all for ever hve,

.

1 JESUS, from whom all blessings flow,
Great Builder of thy church below,
If now thy Spirit moves my breast,
Hear, and fulfil thy own request,

Cor J
The few that truly call Thee Lord,
And wait thy sanctifying word,
And Thee their utmost Saviour own,
Unite, and perfect them in one.

Gather them in on every side,

And in thy tabernacle hide;

Give them a resting place to find,
A covert from the storm and wind.

O find them out some calm recess,
Some unfrequented wilderness !

Thou, Lord, the secret place prepare,
And hide, and feed the woman there.

Thither collect thy little flock,

Under the shadow of their rock :

The holy seed, the royal race,

The standing monuments of thy grace ?

O let them all thy mind express,
Stand forth thy chosen witnesles !
Thy power unto salvation shew,
And perfect holinels below :

The fulness of thy grace receive,
And simply to thy glory live;

Strongly reflect the light divine,
And in a land of darkness shine,

In them let all mankind behold,
How Christians liv'd in days of old ;
(Mighty their envious foes to move,
A proverb.of reproach--and love.)

O make them of one soul and heart,
The all conforming mind impart ;
2. op of peace and unity,

Ihe sinless mind that was in Thee.
--
Call them into thy wond'rous light,
Worthy to walk with Thee in white;
Make up thy jewels, Lord, and shew
The glorious, spotlets church below.

From every sinful wrinkle free,
Redeem'd rom all iniquity:

The fellowship of saints make known;
And O my God, might I be one!

O might my lot be cast with these,
The least of Jesu's witnesses !

O that my Lord would count me meet
To walh his dear disciples feet!

This only thing do I require,
Thou know'st *tis all my heart's desire,
Freely what I receive to give,

The servant of thy church to live.

After my lowly Lord to go,

And wait upon the saints below,
Enjoy his grace to angels given,
And serve the royal heirs of heaven.

Lord, if I now thy drawings feel,
And ask according to thy wall,
Confirm the prayer, the seal impart,
And speak the answer to my heart.

Tell me (or Thou shalt never go)
Thy prayer is heard, it shall be so.“ --
The word hath pass'd thy lips--and IL
Shall with thy people live and die.

--

REASON ax» RELIGION.

N a former Treatise I declared, in the plainest-

manner I could, both my Principles and Practice;
and answered some of the most important, as well as. -
the most common objections to each. But I have not
yet delivered my own soul, I believe it is still incumbent upon me to answer other objections, particularly
such as have been urged by those who are-esteemed religious or reasonable men. |

These partly relate to the Doctrines I teach, partly
to my manner of teaching them, and partly to the effetts which are supposed to follow from teaching these
dottrines m this manner. 5 |

I. 1. I will briefly mention what those doctrines
are, before I consider, the objections against: them.
Now all I teach respetts either the nature and condition of Justification, the nature and condition of
Salvation, the nature of justifying and saving Faith,
or the Author of Faith and Salvation. | |

2, First, The nature of Justification, It sometimes
mcans,* our acquittal at the last day, But this is alto-

I gether

84 A rARTHER APPEAL, Part I.

gether out of the present question: that Justification
whereof our Articles and Homilies speak, meaning present forgiveness, pardon of fins, and consequently acceptance with God: who therein * declares his righteoufness or mercy, by or for the remission of the fins
that are past, saying, I will be merciful to thy unrighteousness, and thine iniquities I will remember no more.

I believe, + the condition of this, is Faith : I mean,
not only, that without Faith we, cannot be justified :
but also, that as foon as any one has true Faith, in that
moment he is justisied.

} Good works follow this faith, but cannot go before it: much less can sanctification, which implies, a
continued course of good works, springing from holinels
of Heart. But it is allowed, that entire 5 sanctification
goes before our justification at the last day.

It is allowed also, that || Repentance, and T fruits
meet for repentance, go before Faith. Repentance absolutely must go before faith; fruits meet for it, if there
be opportunity. By repentance, I mean conviction of
fin, producing real desires and fincere resolutions of
amendment : and by fruits meet for repentance, ** forgiving our brother, ++ ceasing from evil, doing good,
77 using the ordinances of God, and in general $$ obcyimg him according to the measure of grace which we
have received. But these, I cannot as yet, term good
works ; because they do not spring from faith and the
love of God.

g. By salvation I mean, not barely, according to the
vulgar notion: deliverance from hell, or going to heaven: but a present deliverance from fin, a restoration
of the soul to its primitive health, its original purity ; a
recovery of the divine nature ; -the renewal of our souls
after the image of God, in righteousness and true hol.
ness, in justice, mercy, and truth. This implics all
Holy, and heavenly tempers, and by consequence all holiness of conversation,

* Rom. iii. 25, + Rom. iv. 5, &c. Þ* Luke vi. 43.
Q Heb. x11. 14. || Mark i. 15. J Matt. iii. 5.
Matt. vi. 14, 13. . Luke iii. 4, 9, Kc. r Matt.
vn. 7. 5 Matt, xxv. 29. 4

Now

To Men of Reason and Religion. 35

"Now, if by salvation we mean a present salvation

from fin, we cannot say, holiness is the condition of it.
For it is the thing itself. Salvation, in this sense, and
holiness are synonimous terms. We mult therefore say,
% Me are saved by Faith, Faith is the sole condition of
_--_ this Salvation. For without Faith we cannot be thus
saved. But wholoever believeth, is saved already.
. Without Faith we cannot be thus saved. For we
= cannot rightly serve God, unless we love him. And
| we cannot love him, unless we know him ; neither can.
we know God, unless by saith. Therefore Salvation
by Faith, is only in other words, the love of God by
the knowledge of God: or, the recovery of the image
of God, by a true spiritual acquaintance with him.

4. Faith, in general, is, a divine, supernatural #[xor,*
of things not seen, not discoverable by our bodily senses,
as being either past, future or spiritual. Justifying
Faith implies, not only a divine #syo,* that God was
in Chriit, reconciling the world unto himself, but a sure.
trust and confidence, that Christ died for my fins, that
he loved me and gave himself for me. And the moment a penitent sinner believes this, God pardons and
absolves him.

And as soon as his pardon or justification is witnest
to him by the Holy Ghost, he is saved. He loves
God and all mankind. He has the mind that was in
Christ, and power to walk as he also walked, From that
time (unless he make shipwreck of the faith) salvation
gradually increases in his soul. For fo ts the kingdom of
God, as if a man should cast feed into the ground--And
it springeth up, first the blade, then the ear, after that
the full corn in the ear.

5. The first sowing of this seed, I cannot conceive
to be other than instantaneous : whether I consider experience, or the word of God, or the very nature of
the thing. However I contend not for a circumstance,
but the substance ; if you can attain it another way, do.
Only see that you do attain it; for if you fall short,
you perish everlastingly.

n _
3 = F - 4x. * ”

* Evidence or Conviction.
F 2 This

56 A raxruex APPEAL, Part I.

1 _ This beginning of that vast, inward change, is usu3 ally termed, The New Birth, Baptism is the outward
sign of this inward grace, which is supposed by our
Church, to be given with and through that sign to all
infants, and to those of riper years, if they repent and
believe the gospel, But how extremety idle are the
common disputes on this head? I tell a finner, © You
must be born again.” No, say you, he was born
again in baptism. Therefore he cannot be born again
now.” Alas! What trifling is this? What if he was
then a child of God ? He is now manifestly a child of
the devil, For the works of his father he doth.
iherefore do not play upon words. He. must go
through an entire change of heart. In one not yet
baptized, you yourself would call that change, The
New Birth. In him, call it what you will; but remember mean time, that if either he or you die without
it, your baptism will be fo far from profiting you, that
u will greatly increase your damnation. |
6. Ihe Author of faith and falvation is God alone.
It is he that works in us both to will and to do. He
is the sole giver of every good gift, and the sole author
of every good work. There is no more of power than
of merit in man; but as all merit is in the Son of God,
in what he has done and suffered for us, fo all power is
in the Spirit of God. And therefore every man, in
order to believe unto falvation, must receive the Holy
Ghost. This is essentially necessary to every christian,
not in order to his working miracles, but in order to
faith, peace, joy, and love, the ordinary fruits of the
Spirit.
Although no man on earth can explain the particular
manner, wherein the Spirit of God works on the soul,
yet whosoever has these fruits, cannot but know and
feel that God has wrought them in his heart.
Sometimes, he acts more particularly on the understanding, opening or enlightening it, (as the Scripture
speaks) and revealing, unveiling, discovering to us %
deep things of God. |
Sometimes he acts on the wills and affections of men:
withdrawing them from evil, inclining them to good,
| | inspiring,

8 ö +

To Men of Reason and Religion. 57

: inspiring, (breathing, as it were) good thoughts into

them : so it has frequently been exprest, by an easy,
natural metaphor, strictly analogous to 1, Tivpa, Saritus, and the words used in most modern tongues also,
to denote the Third Person in the Ever-blefsed Trinity.
But however it be exprest, it is certain, all true Faith,
and the whole work of Salvation, every good thought,
word and work, is altogether by the operation of the
Spirit of God. |

II. 1. I come now to consider the principal objeftions, which have lately been made against these
Doctrines.

I know nothing material which has been objected, as
to the nature of Justification ; but many persons seem '
to be very confused in their thoughts concerning it, and
speak as if they had never heard of any Justification,
antecedent to that of the last day. To clear up this,
there needs only a closer inspection of our Articles and
Homilies ; wherein Justification is always taken, for the
present remission of our sins. |

But many are the objections which: have been warm
ly urged, against the condition of Justification, Faith
alone: particularly in two Treatises, the former entitled,
The Notions of the Methodists fully difproved : the second,
The Notions of the Methodists farther disproved, . In both
of which it is vehemently affirmed, 1. That this is not
a scriptural Doctrine. 2. That it is not the Doctrine
of the Church of England. |

It will not be needful to name the former of these
any more; seeing there is neither one text produced
therein, to prove this Doctrine unscriptural, nor one

sentence from the Articles or Homilies, to prove it con-

trary to the Doctrine of the Church. But so much of
the latter as relates to the merits of the cause, I will endeavour to consider calmly. As to what is personal,” I.
leave it as it is. God be merciful to me, a. sinner !

2, To prove this Doctrine unscriptural, that“ Faith
alone is the condition of Justification,” you alledge,
that * Sandtisication, according to Scripture, must go
before it:“ to evince which, you quote the following

2 | texts,

88 A raxTHex APPEAL, Part l. -

texts, which I leave as I find them: * Go, disciple all
nations teaching them to observe all things, tohatsoever I
have commanded them, + He that believeth and is bap-
. tized shall be saved, Þf Preach repentance and remaffuon
of jms. FI Repent and be baptized every one of you, for
the remission of fins, || Repent and be converted, that
your, fens may be blotted out. A By one offering, he hath
perfected for ever them that are sanctisied. You add,
St. Paul taught * Repentance toward God, and Faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ ; and calls ++ Repentance
from dead works, and Faith toward God, firft principles.”

You subjoin, But ye are washed, lays he, but ye
are sanctisted, but ye are justified. By washed is meant
their baptism ; and by their baptism is meant, first their
Sanctification, and then their Justification.”” This is a
flat begging the question ; you take for granted, the
very point which you ought to prove, St. Peter
also, you say, affirms, that baptifm does save us or justify
us.” Again, you beg the question : you take for granted what I utterly deny, viz. that fave and juftify are
here synonimous terms. Till this is proved, you can
draw no inference at all; for you have no foundation
whereon to build.

I conceive these and all the Scriptures which can be
quoted to prove SanRtification antecedent to Justification, (if they do not relate to our final Justification)
prove only (what I have never denied) that repentance,
or conviction of fin, and fruits meet for repentance,
precede that Faith whereby we are justified : but by no
means, that the love of God, or any branch of true holiness, must or can precede Faith,

3. It is objected, secondly, That Justification by
Faith alone, is not the Doctrine of the Church of

England. |

Jou believe, says the Writer above-mentioned,
that no good work can be previous to Justification, nor
consequently a condition of it, But God be praised,

Matt. xxxiti. 19, 20. + Mark xvi. 16. f Luke
xxiv. 47. Acts ii. g8. || Chap. iii. 19, 1 Heb,
x. +4, ** Acts xx. 21, Tt Heb. vi. 1.

* ; | our

To Men of Reason and Religion. 59

our Church has no where delivered such abominable
Doctrine.“ Page 14.

The Clergy contend for Inward Holiness, as previous to the first Justification..--This is the Dofrine
they universally inculcate, and which you cannot op-
-- without contradicting the Doctrine of our Church.“

26.

All your strongest persuasives to the love of God,
will not blanch over the deformity of that Doctrine,
that men may be justified---by faith alone unless you
publickly recant this horrid Doctrine, your faith is
vain.“ Page 27.

% If you will vouchsafe to purge out this venomous
part of your principles, in which the wide, essential, fundamental, irreconcileable difference, as you very justly
term it, mainly consists, then there will be found so
far no disagreement between you and the Clergy of the
Church of England.“ ibid.

4. In order to be clearly and fully satisfied, what the
Doctrine of the Church of England is (as it stands oppots to the Doctrine of the Antinomians, on the one

d, and to that of Justification by works on the other)
I will simply set down what occurs on this head, either
in her Liturgy, Articles or Homilies.

* Spare thou them, O God, which confess their
faults : restore thou them that are penitent, accordin
to thy promises declared unto mankind in Christ Jesu,
our Lord.

6« He pardoneth and absolveth all them that wy rebent and unfeignedly believe his holy gospel.” |

* Almighty God, who dost forgive the fins of them
that are penitent, create and make in us new and contrite hearts; that we worthily lamenting our sins, __
acknowledging our wretchedness, may obtain of thee
fect remission and forgiveness, through Jesus Christ --
Lord,” Collect for Ash-Wednesday.

* Almighty God---hath promised forgiveness of fins
to all them that with hearty repentance and true faith
turn unto him,” ,Commumon-Otkee. _

* Our Lord Jesus Christ hath left power to absolve
all finners who truly repent ag: believe in him.“ Visitaton of the sick.

« Give

60 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part I.

$ Give him unfeigned repentance and stedfast faith,

that his fins may be blotted out. ibid. |

He is a merciful receiver of all true, penitent sinners, and 1s ready to pardon us, if we come unto him
with faithful repentance.” Commination Office.

Infants indeed, our Church supposes to be justified
in baptism, although they cannot then either believe or
repent, But she expressly requires both Repentance
and Faith, in thole who come to be baptized when they
are of riper years. |

As earnestly therefore as our Church inculcates,
Tustification by Faith alone, she neverthelels supposes
Repentance to be previous to Faith, and fruits meet for
repentance : yea, and Universal Holiness to be previous
to final Justification, as evidently appears from the fol.
lowing words :

Let us beseech him---that the rest of our life may
be pure and holy, so that at the last we may come to
his eternal joy.” Absolution.

« May we seriously apply our hearts to that holy and
heavenly wisdom here, which may in the end bring us
to life everlasting.” Visitation of the sick.

© Raise us from the death of fin unto the life of
righteousnels,---that at the last day we may be found acceptable in thy sight.” Burial Office.

„If we from henceforth walk in his ways,---seeking
always his glory, Christ will set us on his right hand.“
Commination Office;

5, We come next to the Articles of our Church:
the former part of the ninth runs thus:

Of Orrginal or Burth-Sin,

% Original fin---1s the fault and corruption of the
nature of every man---whereby man is very far gone
from Original Righteousness, and is of his own nature

mclined to evil, so that the flesh lusteth always con-

trary to the spirit : and therefore in every person born

into this world, it deserveth God's . wrath and damnation.“ 8 2 8927 4 |

To Men of Reason and Religion. | 61

AR T. x. Of Free- Mill.

© The condition of man after the fall of Adam is
fuch, that he cannot turn and' prepare himself by his
own natural strength and good works to faith and calling upon God, Wherefore we have no power to do
good works, pleasant and acceptable to God, without
the grace of God by Christ ety us, that we may
have a good will, and working with us when we have
that good will.” |

ART. XI. Of. the Justification of Man.

«© We are accounted righteous before God, only for
the merit of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ by faith,
and not for our own works or deservings. Wherefore
that we are justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome
Doctrine, and very full of comfort, as more largely is
expressed in the Homily of Justification,” |

I believe this Article relates to the meritorious cause
of Justification, rather than to the condition of it. On
this therefore I do not build any thing concerning it,
but on those that follow.

ART. XII. Of Good Works.

& Albeit that good works, which are the fruits of
Faith, and follow after Justification, cannot put away
our fins---yet are they plealing and acceptable to God
in Christ, and do spring out necessarily of a true and
lively Faith: insomuch that by them a lively Faith may
5 as evidently known, as a tree may be known by the
ruit.“ | |

We are taught here, 1. That good works in general,
follow after Justihcation. 2. That they spring out of
a true and lively Faith, that faith whereby we are justified, g. That true, justifying Faith may be as evidently
known by them, as a tree discerned by the fruit.

Does it not follow, That the supposing any good
work to go before Justification, is full as absurd as the

supposing an apple or any other fruit to grow before
the tree ?
Rs _

62 A raxtyzex APPEAL, Part I.

But let us hear the Church, speaking yet more
plainly.

ART. XIII. Of Works done before Justification.

& Works done before the grace of Christ, and the
Inspiration of his Spirit, (i. e. before Justification, as
the title expresles it) are not pleasant to God, forasmuch
as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ-- yea rather,
for that they are not done as God hath willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not they have the
nature of sin.” | : | |

Now, if all works done before Justification, have the
nature of sin, (both because they spring not of faith in
Christ, and because they are not done as God hath willed and commanded them to be done) what becomes of
Sanctification previous to Justification ? It is utterly
excluded: seeing whatever is previous to Justification,
is not good or holy, but evil and sinful. |

Although therefore our Church does frequently assert, that we ought to repent and bring forth fruits meet
for repentance, if ever we would attain to that faith,
whereby alone. we are justified ; yet she never asserts
{and here the hinge of the question turns) that these are
good words, so long as they are previous to Justification,
Nay she expressly asserts the direct contrary, viz. That
they have all the nature of fin. So that this Horrid,
scandalous, wicked, abominable, venomous, blasphemous doctrine,“ is nevertheless the doctrine of the
Church of England. |

6. It remains, to consider what occurs in the Homilies, first with regard to the meritorious cause of our
Justification, agreeable to the 11th, and then with regard to the condition of it, agreeable to the 12th and
2 3th Articles.

« These things must go together in our Justification ;
upon God's part, his great mercy and grace; upon
Christ's part, the satisfaction of God's justice ; and
upon our part, true and lively faith in the mercies of.
Jesus Christ.” Homily on Salvation, Part I.

& So that the grace of God doth not shut out the
justice (or righteousness) of God in our JEN]

ut

To Men of Reason and Religion. 653

but only shutteth out the righteousness of man --as to
deserving our justification.”

„ And therefore St. Paul declareth nothing on the
behalf of man, concerning his Justification, but only a
true faith.” | |

And yet that faith doth not shut out repentance,
hope, love, to be joined with faith (that is, afterwards ;
see below) in every man that is justified--Neither doth
faith shut out the r1ghteousnels of our good works, necessarily to be done afterwards, But it excludeth them
fo, that we may not do them to this intent, to be made
Just (or, to be justified) by doing them.”

“% That we are jufttfied by faith alone, is spoken, to
take away clearly all merit of our works, and wholl
to ascribe the merit and deferving of our Justification
unto Christ only.” Ibid. Part II.

The true meaning of this saying, We be justified
by faith only, is this, We be justified by the merits of
Christ only, and not of our own works,” Ibid.
Part III.

7. Thus far touching the meritorious cause of our
Justification ; referred to in the 11th Article. The
12th and 19th are a summary of what now follows,
with regard to the condition of it,

« Of (justifying) true faith, three things are specially
to be noted, 1. That it bringeth forth good works.
2. That without it can no good works be done, g.
What good works it doth bring forth.” Sermon on
Faith. Part I.

„% Without Faith can no good work be done, acceptable and pleasant unto God, For as, a branch cannot
bear fruit of itself, faith our Saviour Christ, except jt
abide in the vine, so cannot you except you abide in
me. Faith giveth life to the oul; and they be as much
dead to God that lack faith, as they be to the world,
whole bodies lack fouls, Without faith all that is done
of us, is but dead before God. Even as a picture is but
a dead representation of the thing itself, so be the works
of all unfaithful { unbeheving) persons before God.
They be but shadows of lively and good: things, and
not good things indeed, For true faith doth give life
to

64 A rAR TRE APPEAL, Part I,

to the works, and without faith no work is good before God.“ Ibid. Part III. |
We mult set no good works before faith, nor
think that before faith a man may do any good works,
For such works are as the course of a horse that runneth out of the way, which taketh great labour, but
to no purpose.” Ibid,

Without faith we have no virtues, but only the
shadows of them. All the life of them that lack the
true faith is fin.” Ibid,
As men fist have life, and after be nourished, fo
must our faith go before, and after be nourished with
good works. And life may be without nourishment, |
but nourishment cannot be without life.” Homily of |
Works annexed to Faith, Part I.

* I can shew a man, that by faith without works
lived and came to heaven, But without faith never
man had life. The Thief on the cross only believed,
and the most merciful God justified him. Truth it is,

if he had lived and not regarded faith and the works
thereof, he should have lost his salvation again. But
this I fay, faith by itself saved him, But works by
themselves never justified any man.”

„Good works go not before, in him which shall
afterwards be justified. But good works do follow
after, when a man is first justified. Homily on Fasting. Part J.
38. From the whole tenor then of her Liturgy, Articles and Homilies, the Doctrine of the Church of England, appears to be this:

1. That no good work properly so called, can go before Justification :

2. That no degree of true sanctification can be previous to it.

. That as the meritorious cause of Justification is,
the life and death of Christ ; so the condition of it is
faith, Faith alone; and

4. That. both inward and outward holiness, are con-

sequent on this faith, and are the ordinary, stated condition, of final justification,

az

* c 1 0 o ” =
Sonar bag. ad a dd Ade RS * 3
* - : f ” " » 1 . 7 363
j ͤœw ß ̃ d
* . 9 I n r . q 1

een hh *
r
-- al Iz EL, = * 4 % --- T „ wi.

9. And

nm.
1 13% Aa. 445 2231 0 . * *

To Men of Reason and Religion. 63
9. And'what more can you delire, who tive hither.
to opposed Justification by Faith-alone, merely upon a
rinciple conscience ; because you was zealous for

inc and good works? Do I not effectually secure
these from contempt, at the same time that I defend
the doftrines of the Church ? I not only allow, but
vehemently contend, that none shall ever enter into
glory, who is not holy on earth, as well in heart, as in
all manner of conversation. I cry aloud, Let all that /
have believed, be careful to maintain 725 works : and,” £25
Let every one that nameth, the * rist, dep ert from
all iniquity. I exhort even those who are conscious
they do not believe, Cease to do evil, learn to do well ++
the kingdom of heaven is at hand: therefore repent, and
bring forth fruits meet for repentance. Are not these”
directions the very same in substance, which you yourself would give to perions so ertumftanced? What”
means then the endless strise f -words Or, what doth”

10. Many of those who are 2 zealous of
good works, as you, think I have allowed you too
much. -Nay, my brethren, but how can we ft "alk
lowing it, if we allow the scriptures to be from God ?
For is it not written, and do not yourselves believe,
without holiness no man shall fee the Lords And har
then, without fighting about words, can we deny, that
holiness is a condition of final acceptance? And, as td
the first acceptance of pardon, does not all experience *
as well as scripture prove, that no man ever yet truly
believed the gospel, who did not first repent ? That
none was ever yet truly convinced of righteousness, *
obo was not first convinced of fin? Repentance' thereore in this sense, we cannot deny to be necessarily pre-

vious to faith. Is it not equally undeniable, that the
running back into known, wilful sin, (suppose it were
adrunkenness or uncleanness) stisles that repentance” or
conviction? And can that repentance come to any
good issue in his soul, Who resolves not to forgive his
other? Or who obstinately refrains from what God '
convinces him is right, whether it be prayet or hearing
is word? Would you scruple yourlelf to tell one o
hese, Why if you will thus drink away all convie0 tion,

| _--_ * wa
4 4 - wh. 4 * Var -- W £4 .
4. pn » 2 . 4 ®
1 4 > 4 . 1 * -- x = * I: y

wa”
o 7 f
eee *

your arguing reproue ?

n N -- = . E
ed ka of Beoggr
3 -

* Pg 1
ee og, AFL: on dn dat AI Es.

"wx

66 A raxtHtR APPEAL, Part I.

tivn, how should you ever truly know your want of
| Christ? Or consequently, believe in him P. If you
| will not forgive your brother his trespasses, neither will
your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses.---If
| ou will not ask, how can you expect to receive P- If
you will not hear, how can Faith come by hearing ? It
is plain, you grieve the Spirit of God; you will not
1. have him to reign over you. For wnto him that hath,
| shall be given but from him that hath not, i. e. uses it
not, be talen away even that which he hath.”
Would you scruple on a proper occasion to say this ?
Lou could not scruple it, if you believe the Bible.
But in saying this, you allow all which I have faid,
viz. That previous to justifying Faith, there must be
Repentance, and if opportunity permit, Fruits meet for
Repentance. nene
11. And yet I allow you this, that although both
Repentance and the Fruits thereof are in some sense necessary before Justification, yet neither the one nor the
other is necessary in the same sense or in the same degree
with Faith. Not in the same degree. For in whatever moment a man believes (in the christian sense of
the word) he is justified, his fins are blotted out, his
Faith is counted to him for Righteousness, But it is
not so, at whatever moment he repents, or brings forth
any or all the Fruits of Repemtance. Faith alone therefore justifies ; which Repentance alone does not ; much
less any outward work. And consequently, none of
these are necessary to Justification, in the same degres
with Faith, | |
Nor in the same sense. For none of these has so direft, immediate a relation to Justification as Faith. This
is proximately necessary thereto; Repentance, remotely,
as it is necessary to the increase or continuance of Faith,
And even in this sense, these are only necessary, on supfition---if there be time and opportunity for them:
or in many instances there is not ; but God cuts short
- his work, and Faith prevents the Fruits of Repentance,
So that the general proposition is not overthrown, but
clearly established by these concessions; and we conclude still, both on the authority of Scripture and the
h FE hes Church,

| .

*

| To Men of Reason and Religion A
Church, that Faith alone is the proximate condition of

III. 1. I was once inclined to believe that none
would openly object, against what I had any where
said of the Nature of Salvation, How greatly then was
I surprised some months ago, when I was shewn a kind
of Circular Letter, which one of those whom the Holy
Ghost hath made Overseers of his Church, I was informed had sent to all the Clergy of his Diocele !

Part of it ran (nearly, if not exactly) thus:

© There is great indiscretion in preaching up a sort
of Religion, as the True and Only Christianity, which
in their own account of it, consists in an Enthusiastic
Ardor, to be understood or attained by very few, and

not to be practised without breaking in upon the common duties of life,”

O my Lord, what manner of words are these ! Suppoling candor and love out of the question, are they
words of truth? I dare stake my life upon it, there 18
not one true clause in all this paragraph. |

The propositions contained therein, are these: ' + 5

1. That the Religion I preach consists in an EnthuHate Ang 1 2 ors
2. That it can be attained by very few: '

g. That it can be understood by very few:

4. That it cannot be practised without breaking in

upon the common duties of life.

5. And that all this may be proved by my own 'account of it, | bs oy Eno ff

I earnestly intreat your Grace to review my own
account of it, as it stands in any of my former writings :
or to consider the short account which is given in this,
And if you can thence make good any one of those propositions, I do hereby promise before God and the
world, that I will never preach more,

2 At

%

68 A ranru APPEAL, Part 1.

At present I do not well understand what your
Grace means by An Enthusiastic 'Ardor,”” Surely
you do not mean, the love of God! No, not though
a poor, pardoned finner shoul-l carry it fo far, as to
love the Lord his God; with all his heart, and with all
his soul, and with all his strength ! But this alone is
the Ardor which I preach up, as the foundation of the
True and Only Christianity, I pray God fo to fill your
whole heart therewith, that you may praise him for

= os n

*

.
e

-

ever and ever. | |
But why should your Grace believe, that the love of
God, can be attained by very few? Or, that it can
be understood by very few ? All who attain it, understand it well. And did not he who is loving to every
man design, that every man should'.attain true love?
O that all would know in this their day, the things that
make for their peace! : RAY TERS |
And cannot the love both of God and our neighbour
be praftised, without breaking in upon the common
duties of life? Nay, can any of the common duties
of life, be rightly practised without them? I appre-

her nab 4 ---_-- =-- wow ITS ---- 41.85 Lido 99. & wo< 4 =»
„ 4_OPPLCHCHU a alu Livni anyarg HIT LI UT, ne

--

only foundation for all those duties, when I preach,
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
thy neighbour as thyself.

2. With this Letter was sent (I believe to every
Clergyman in the Diocese) the Pamphlet entitled, 06fServations on the Conduct and Behaviour f a certain Sect,
asually diftinguished by the name of Methodists. It has
been generally supposed "to be wrote by a person, who
is every way my superior. Perhaps one reason why he
did not inscribe his name was, that his greatness might
not make me afraid: and that I might have liberty to
r as it were, on gven ground, while I answer for

in considering, therefore, such parts of these Observations, as naturally fall in my way, I will take that
method Which, 1 believe, that Author desires, using
no ceremdny at all but | eaking as to an Equal, that
it may the more easily be lcerned, where the Truth

The

-- n
* 9

. ; Po , * r 2 N * N * * * = ' 6 8
8 r ; J< + 418 - fd. ALT 2 r * 4 i L YL
1 mY 1 = irons e 2 * a 1 7 f 8 8 bd es 1 * -- * 1
F r e 3 Fd. © 1 oC SAS 1 TS g - --_z „ 8

--

*

To Men of Reason and "Religion:

6g
The first Query relating to Doctrine, is this? :
« Whether Notions in Religion may not be heightened to such extremes, as to lead some into a disregard
of Religion itself, through despair of attaining such exalted heights? And whether others who have imbibed
those ' Notions, may not be led by them, into a disregard and disesteem of the common duties and offices of
life ? To such a degree, atleast, as is inconsistent with
that attention to them, and that diligence in them, which
Providence has made necessary to the well-being of private families and public societies, and which Christianity
does not only require in all stations, and in all conditions,
but declares at the same time, that the performance even
of the lowest offices in life, as unto God, (whose Providence has placed people in their several stations) is truly
= a {crving of Chril, and will not fail of its reward in the
next world?“ 12
1 You have interwoven so many particulars in this general Question, that I must divide and anfwer them one
by one. 23 |
2. 1. Whether Notions in Religion may not be
heightened to such extremes as to lead some into a disregard of Religion itself? OT Ne,
A. They may. But that I have fo heightened them,
lies upon you to prove. 5 |
Q. 2. Whether others may not be led into a difreWT g2rd of Religion, through despair of attaining such ex-
= alted heights ? | | 155 8
A. What heights? The loving God with all our
heart? I believe, this is the most exalted height in man
or angel. But I have not heard, that any have been
led into a disregard of Religion, through Nee of atWeaining this. | ee
2. 3. Whether others who have imbibed these Notions, may not be led by them, into a disregard and
disesteem, of the common duties and offices of life? *
A. My Notions are, © True Religion is the loving
WG od with all our heart, and our neighbour as oursetyes ;
end in that love abstaining from all evil, and doing all
Sp osfible good to all men.” Now, it is not possible in
the nature of things, that any. should be led by these
_ WS. Notions,

«+ xs
,

VV -- AMEN» Bath,
nn D

i 1 ad cc 0 Woes of

a be lec
2 \& 4 at least 5 1 A e e into hgh

fe, as is in nsistent wit t attention to them,
" 8 mn wag Ke ron has made ra

uite the reverse. They lead men to dis-

charge . bo uties with the firiftest, diligence and
le -- 40

2. 5- Does not Christianity require this attention
ren ence in all stations and in all conditions?

Q. 6. 1 it not 4 that the ren

even of the lowest offices of life, as wy „is trul
a ser rving of Christ ?, And wall. not fail --

mn the next world ꝯ

A. It does, But whom are you. confuting ? Not
me. For this is the Doctrine I preach continually.

3. Query the second. * Whether the enemy of
Christianity may not find, his account, in carrying
Christianity, which was designed for a rule to all stations, and all conditions, to such heights as make it
fairly. practicable by a very few, in comparison, or rather by none?

I answer, 1. The height to which we carry. Christianity (as was but now observed) is this, thou shalt love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbour

thyself, 2. The Enemy of 8 cannot find
bis account, in our carrying it to this height. g. You
will not say, on reflection, that Christianity, even in
is -height, is practicable by very few, or rather by
none: 700 yourself-will confess, this is a rule (as God
Whgne0 it should) for all stations, and all conditions.
the third. Whether, in particular, the
carrying the Doctrine of Justification, by Faith alone
to such a height, as not to allow. that a careful and fincer observance of moral duties is so much as a condition
of Qur acceptance with God, and of our being justified
14 fight : whether this, 1 say, does not naturally

perde ie Fans of uk kurs and a low
1 esteem

To Men of Reason add Religion. 7
esteem of them; or rather to think them no part of the
Christian Religion ? | | | 1
I trust Justification by Faith alone, has been so ex-

lained above, as to secure, not only a high esteem,
but also a careful and sincere observance of all moral
duties. |

4. Query the fourth, © Whether a due and regular attendance on the public offices of Religion, paid
by good men in a serious and composed way, does not
better answer the true ends of devotion, and is not a
better evidence of the co-operation of the Holy Spirit,
than those sudden agonies, roarings and screamings,
tremblings, droppings down, ---- and madnesses,

into which their hearers have been cast ? “
1 must answer this Query likewise, part by part.
Q. 1. Whether a due and regular attendance on the
public offices of Religion, paid in a serious and composed
way, by good (i. e. well-meaning) men, does not answer”
the true ends of Devotion ? | | |
A. I suppose by Devotion you mean public worship z
by the true ends of it, the love of God and man: and
by a due and regular attendance on the public offices of
Religion, paid in a serious and composed way, the going
a5 often as we have opportunity to our Pansh Church,
and to the Sacrament there administered, If fo, the
uestion is, Whether this attendance on those offices,
not produce the love of God and man?” I answer, sometimes it does; and sometimes it does not, I
myself thus attended them for many years; and yet am,
conscious to myself, that during that whole-time, I had.
no more of I of God than a r Bee I know
many hun rhaps thousands of serious ons,
who are ready to lestifp the same thing. po *
2. 2. But is not this a better evidence of the cooperation of the Holy Spirit, than those sudden agonies ?
A. All these: persons, as well as I, can testify also,
that this is no evidence at all of the co-operation of the
Holy Spirit. For some years I attended these public
offices, because I would not be punished for non-attendance. And many 'of these attended them, because their,
parents did before them, or because they would not lose
thein character. Many more, because they r ak

N. Anne APPEAL, Part],
bd 1 . di | .
otions, into either a eee of the

common duties and offices

- O. 4. But may they not. be led. by them into such
a degree at least, of 5 SI for the common Nitin af
1s ineonkNent with that aptentips to thetws 2s

igence in them, which Providence has made nec

A. No. Quite the reverse. They lead men to dis.
go ll hole Gur with the strictest diligence and

© ©. 5: Does not Christianity require this attention

and ence in all stations and in all conditions?
Ves. -

2. 6. Does it not declare, that the performance

= of the Joel. gfices of tie, as 2 God, is trul

a serving of rt 7 At U not faul OL 1tS reward

en 1 15

A. It does. But whom are you confuting? Not

me. For this is the Doctrine I preach continually.

3. Query the second. *© Whether the enemy of
Christianity may not find, his account, in carrying
Christianity, which was designed for a rule to all stations, and all conditions, to fuch heights as make it
fairly pratticable by a very few, in comparison, | or rather by none? 2
IL answer, 1. The height to Which we carry Christianity (as was but now observed) is this, thou alt love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbour

thyself, 2. The Enemy of Christianity cannot find

his account, in our carrying it to this height, g. You
will not say on reflection, that Christianity, even in
this height, is practicable by very few, or rather by
none: you yourself-will confess, this is a rule (as God
designed it should) for all stations, and all conditions.
Query the third. Whether, in particular, the
carrying, the Doctrine of Justification, by Faith alone
to such, a height, as not to allow that a careful and fincers observance of moral duties is so much as a condition
of qur acceptance with God, and of our being justified
a bis fight : whether this, 1 fay, does not naturally
people te a disregard of hose duties, and a low

* 99 y *
s 1 0

To Men of Reason and Religion, 7
esteem of them; or rather to think them no part of the
Christian Religion ? '” ; CONE ITE 7, 1

I trust Justification by Faith alone, has been so exlained above, as to secure, not only a high esteem,
also a careful and sincere observance of all moral
duties. N
4. Query the fourth, © Whether a due and regu-
-- -- on the public offices of Religion, paid
by good men in a serious and composed way, does not
better answer the true ends of devotion, and is not a
better evidence of the co-operation of the Holy Spirit,
than those sudden agonies, roarings and screamings,
tremblings, droppings down, ravings and madnesses,
into which their hearers have been cast * x
1 must answer this Query likewise, part by part.
2. 1. Whether a due and regular attendance on the
public offices of Religion, paid in a serious and composed
way, by good (i. e. well-meaning) men, does not answer
the true ends of Devotion ? : | | «oh
A. I suppose by Devotion you mean public worship z
by the true ends of it, the love of God and man: and
by a due and regular attendance on the public offices of
Religion, paid in a serious and composed way, the going
as often as we have opportunity to our Pansh Church,
and to the Sacrament there administered, If fo, the
uestion is, Whether this attendance on those offices,
þ na not produce the love of God and man?” I answer, sometimes it does; and sometimes it does not. I
myself thus attended them for many years; and yet am
conscious to myself, that during that whole-time, I had
no more of the love of God than a eee I know
many hundreds, perhaps thousands of serious ons,
who are ready to testify the same thing. 1 0
2. 2. But is not this a better evidence of the cooperation of the Holy Spirit, than those sudden agonies ?
A. All these: persons, as well as I, can testify also,
that this is no evidence at all of the co-operation of the
Holy Spirit. For some years I attended these public
offices, because I would not be punished for *non-atten»
dance. And many 'of these attended them, because their,
parents did before them, or because they would not lose
rhein character. Many more, because they e 6s

7 A, FARTHER. APPEAL, Part I.

the means with the end, and fancied this opus operatum
would bring them to heaven. How many thousands
are now under this strong delusion ? Beware, you
bring not their blood on your own head ? Ban- beg
2. 3. However, does not this attendance better answer those ends, than those roarings, screamings, &c p
I suppose you mean, Better than an attendance on
that preaching, which has often been accompanied with

these,”

I answer. 1, There is no manner of need to set the
one in opposition to the other: seeing we continually
exhort all who attend on our preaching, to attend the
offices of the Church. And they do pay a more regular attendance there, than ever they did before. 2.
Their attending the Church did not, in fact, answer
those ends at all, till they attended this preaching also.

It is the preaching remission of sins through Jesus

hrist, which alone answers the true ends of Devotion,
And this will always be accompanied with the co-operation of the Holy Spirit ; though not always with sudden agonies, roarings, screamings, tremblings, or droppings down. Indeed, if God is pleased at any time to
permit any of these, I cannot hinder it. Neither can
this hinder the work of his Spirit in the soul : which
may be carried on either with or without them, But,
4. 1 cannot apprehend it to be any reasonable proof,
that this is not the work of God,” that a convinced
sinner should fall into an extreme agony, both of body
and soul, (Journal g. p. 26.) That another should roar
for the disquietness of her heart (p. 40.) that others
should scream or cty with a loud and bitter cry, © What
must we do to be saved?” (p. 50.) that others should
exceedingly tremble and quake (p. 58.) And others,
in a deep sense of the majesty of God, should fall prostrate upon the ground. (p. 39.) 5 1 ttf

Indeed by picking out one single word from a sentence, and then putting together what you had gleaned
in sixty or seventy pages, you have drawn a terrible
groupe, for them who look no farther. than those two

ines, in the Observations. But the bare addition of
half a line to each word, just as it stands in the place

1 1
-- „ 0

--

To Men of Reason and Religion. 79

from which you quoted it, reconciles all both to Scripture and Reason, and the spectre- form vanishes away.
You have taken into your account, ravings and madnesses too. As instances of the former, you refer to the
case of John Haydon, p. 44. and of Thomas Maxfield,
P- 30. I with you would calmly consider, his reasoning on that head, who is not prejudiced in my favour.
What influence sudden and sharp awakenings may
have upon the body, I pretend not to explain. But I
make no question Satan, so far as he gets power, may
exert himself on such occasions, partly to hinder the
good work in the . who are thus touched with
the -- arrows of conviction, and partly to disparage
the work of God, as if it tended to lead people to. distraction.“ |
For instances of madness you may refer to page 88.
90, 91, 92, 93: 'The words in page 88, are these :
El could not but be under some concern, with regard to one or two persons, who were tormented in an
unaccountable manner, and seemed to be indeed lunatic
as well as sore-vexed, --Soon after I was sent sor t 676

sf 1h = 2 -- fa ... 5 ..M aw . *
2 -- -- 2 ths avs az 08 Y torn Of rae Devil, that 1 |

almost wondered her relations did not say much religion
hath made thee mad. We prayed God to bruife Satan
under her feet. Immediately we had the petition we asted of him. She cried out vehemently, ** He is gone, he
is gone,” and was filled with the spirit of Love, and of
a sound mind, I have seen her many times since strong
in the Lord. When I afked abruptly, 4 What do you -
desire now ? ” She answered, © Heaven,” I asked,
What is in your heart ? ”” She replied, God.“ I
asked, ** But how is your heart when any thing provokes you? She said, © By the grace of God, I am
not r at any thing. All the things of this
world pass by me as shadows.” Are these the words
Nadge that is beside herself ? Let any man of reason
judge Foy 5 |
Your next instance, p. 60, stand thus:

AD owner I came to Usk, where 1 og
a small company of r le, on, © The
Man is come, to Garmin -- is lost. ' One grey
headed man wept and trembled exceedingly: and

* | another
| A raxruen APPEAL, Part .

another who was there (I have since heard) as well as
two or three who were at the Devauden are gone quite

distrafled ; that is, (my express words are that immedi-

ately follow, specifying what it was which some accounted diftraftion) ** They mourn and refuse to be comforted,
till they have Redemption through his blood,”

If you think the case mentioned, p. 92, 93, to be
another instance of madness, I contend not. It was
because I did not understand that uncommon case, that
J prefaced it with this reflection. The fact I nakedly
relate, and leave every man to his own judgment upon
it.” Only be pleased to observe, that this madnels, if
fuch it was, is no more chargeable upon me than upon
you. For the subjeQ of it had no relation to, or com_ with me, nor had I ever seen her before that

r.
35. Query the fifth, © Whether those exalted strains
in religion, and an imagination of being already in a state
of perfection, are not apt to lead men to spiritual pride,
wid to a contempt of their fellow christians ; while they
'eonsfider them as only going on in what they call the
low and imperfect way, (i. e. as growing in grace and
goodness only by degrees) even though it appeared by
the lives of those who are considered by them as in that
low and imperfett way, that they are persons who are
gradually working out their falvation, by their own

' Honest endeavours, and through the ordinary assistance

of God's grace; with an humble reliance upon the
merits of Christ for pardon of their sins, and the acceptance of their sincere, though imperfett services ?

Il I must divide this Query too, but first permit me to

ask, What do you mean by those exalted strains in religion ? I have said again and again, I know of no more
exalted strain, than I will love thee, O Lord, my
God: especially, according to the propriety of David's expression Tv mars. Ex intimis visceribus
diligam te, Domine, This premised, let us go on step

2. 1. Whether the | preaching of loving God
from our inmost bowels,” is not apt to lead men to

spiritual pride, and to contempt of their fellow ChrisA. No:

Te Men of Reason and Religion. 75

A. No: But so far as it takes place, it will humble
them to the dust. | 51

2. 2. Whether an imagination of being already in a
state of perfection, is not apt to lead men into this spiritual pride ? 7 $9:4-0 | |

A. 1. If it be a false imagination, it is spiritual pride.
2, But true Christian Perfection is no than humble love.

2. 3. Do not men who imagine they have attained
this, despise others, as only going on in what they account the low and imperfett way, that is, as growing
in grace and goodness, by degrees ?

A. 1. Men who only imagine they have attained
this, may probably despise those that are going on in any
way. 2. But the growing in grace and goodness by
degrees, is no mark of a low and imperfect way. Those
who are fathers in Christ, grow in grace, by degrees as
well as the new-born babes.

2. 4. Do they not despise those who are working
out their salvation, with an humble reliance upon the
merits of Christ for the pardon of their fins, and the
acceptance of their sincere though imperfett services? _

A. 1. They who really love God, despise no man.
But 2. They grieve to hear many talk of thus relying
on Christ, who though perhaps they are grave, honest,
moral men, yet by their own words appear not to love
God at all; whose souls cleave to the dust, who love
the -_ who have no part of the mind that was in
Christ. ; | |

6. Query the sixth. Whether the fame exalted
strains and notions, do not tend to weaken the natural
and civil relations among men, by leading the inferiors
into whose heads those notions are infused to a disesteem
of their superiors ; while they consider them as in a
much lower dispensation than themselves ; though those
superiors are otherwise sober and good men, and regular
attendants on the ordinances of Religion?

I have mentioned before, what those exalted notions
are: these do not tend to weaken either the natural or
civil relations among men; or to lead inferiors to a difesteem of their superiors, even where those superiors -
are neither good nor sober men. 6

Query

76 A raf APPEAL, Part 1.
Query the seventh; | © Whether a gradual improve.
ment in grace and goodness is not a better foundation of

| rt, and of an assutunce of à gospel new-birth,
than that which is founded on the of a og int
and instantaneous change; which, if there be l
things is not casily distinguisned from fancy and imagination; the workings whereof we may well suppose to
be more strong powerful, whe the person considers himself in the state of one who is Ad as a
candidate for wares Paseo, and is taught in due time

to ex
r go one step at a time.

1. Whether a 1 improvement in grace and
ness, is not a good foundation of comfort
A. Doubtless it is, if by grace and goodness be meant
the knowledge and love of God through Christ ?
. Whether it be not a good foundation of an
assurance of a Gospel New-Birth'?
2 If 3 grow in this knowledge and love, it
proof that we are born of the Spirit. But
-- in no wise supersede the previous witness of
God's Spirit with ours, that we are the children of
God. And this is properly the foundation of the assurance of faith.”
Q. 3. Whether this improvement is not a beter |
foundation of comfort, and of an assurance of a gof
New Birth, than that which is founded on the dofrme
of a sudden and instantaheous change?
A. A better foundation than that -- That / What ?
To nvhat substantive does this refer? According to
the Rules of Grammar, (for all the other substantives
are in the Genitive oy and/ consequently to be considered as only parts of that which governs them) you
must mean, A --.-- foundation than that foundation
which is founded on this doctrine.““ As soon as 1 understand the question, I will endeavour tb answer it.
Q. 4. Can that sudden and instantariedus change be
easily distinguished from fancy and imagination ?
A. Just as easily as light from darkness: seeing it
brings sorth with it a peace that Pannen all understanding, Joy -anispeakable and full of glory, the ore of

f
o Men of Reason and Religion. 77
God and all mankind filling the heart, and power over
all fn. | | 4

Q. 5. May we not well suppose the workings of
imagination to be more strong and powerful in one who
is taught to expect such a change?

A. Perhaps we may -- But {till the tree is known by
its fruits. such fruits as those Sow matt
imagination was never yet strong enough to produce,
nor any power, fave that of the Almighty.

7. There is only one clause in the eighth Query,
which falls under our present enquiry. |

They make it their principal employ, wherever
they go, to instil into people a few favourite tenets of
their on; and this with -- diligence and zeal as if
the whole of christianity depended upon them, and all
efforts toward the true christian life, without a belief
of those tenets, were vain and ineffectual.“

I plead guilty to this charge. I do make it my _
cipal, nay, my whole employ, and that wherever I go,
to instil into the people, a few favourite tenets, (Only
be it observed, they are not my own, but his that sent
me.) And it is undoubtedly true, that this I do,
{though deeply conscious of my want, both of zeal
and diligence) as if the whole of christianity depended
upon them, and all efforts without them were void and
vain,

I frequently sum them all up in one. © In Christ
Jesus, (i. e. according to his gospel) neither circumcision availeth any thing nor uncircumcision, but faith
which worketh by love.” But many times I inst
them one by one, under these, or the like expressions,
© Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy mind, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength : thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself ; ”” as thy own soul: as Christ loved us. God
is Love: and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in
God, and God in him. Love worketh no ill to his
neighbour : therefore love is the fulhlling of the law.
While we have time let us do good unto all men; especially unto them that are of the houschold of faith.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you,
even so do unto them.“

'; These

78 A rARTUER APPEAL, Part I.”

These are my favourite tenets, and have been for
many years. O that I could instil them into every
foul throughout the land! Ought they not to be inKilled with such diligence and zeal, as if the whole of
christianity depended upon them? For, who can
deny, that all efforts toward a christian life, without
more than a bare belief, without a thorough Cx pe-

rience and practice of these, are utterly vain and ineffetual ? 2

8. Part of your ninth Query is to the same essect:

„% A few young heads set up their own Schemes, as
the great standard of christianity ; and indulge their
own notions to such a degree, as to perplex, unhinge,
terrify and distratt the minds of multitudes of) people,
who have lived from their infancy under a Golpel.
Ministry, and in the regular exercise of a Gospel-worMip. And all this, by persuading them, that they
neither are, nor can be true christians, but by adhering
to their doctrines.“

What do you mean by their own schemes? Their
own notions? Their dottrines? Are they not yours
too? Are they not the {chemes, the notions, the
doctrines of Jesus Christ ? The great, fundamental
truths of his gospel ? Can you deny one of them,
without denying the Bible ?--It is hard for you to kick
against the pricks!

They persuade (you say) multitudes of people,
that they cannot be true christians, but by adhering to
their doctrines. Why, who says they can? Wholoever he be, I will prove him to be an infidel, Do you
say, that any man can be a true christian, without loving God and his neighbour ? Surely you have not so
learned Christ! It is your doctrine, as well as mine,
and St. Paul's, Though I speak with the tongue of
men and angels, though I have all knowledge, and all
faith; though I give all my goods to feed the poor,
yea, my body to be burned, and have not love, I am
nothing.“ |

| Whatever public worship, therefore, people may
have attended, or whatever Ministry they have lived
under from thew infancy, they must at all hazards, be

convinced

:

To Men of Reason and Religion. 79

convinced of this, or they perish for ever: yea, though
that conviction at first unhinge them ever so much;
though it should, in a manner distratt them for a season. For it is better that they should be perplexed and

terrified now, than they should sleep on and awake in
hell. ?

9. In the 16th, 12th, and 19th Queries I am not
concerned. But you include me also, when you say in
the 11th, © They absolutely deny, that recreations of
any kind, considered as such, are or can be innocent.“

I cannot find any such assertion of mine, either in
the place you refer to, or any other. But what kinds
of recreation are innocent, it is casy to determine by
that plain rule, Whether ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God.” |

I am now to take my leave of you for the present.
But first I would earnestly intreat you to acquaint yourself what our doctrines are, before you make any farther
observations upon them. Surely, touching the nature
of salvation we agree, that “pure 1eligion and undefled is this, to visit the fatherless and widow in their
affliction,” to do all possible good from a principle of
Love to God and man: and to keep ourselves unspotted

from the world, inwardly and outwardly to abstain from
all evil.

10. With regard to the condition of falvation, it may
be remembered, that I allow, not only faith, but likewile holiness or universal obedience, to be the ordinary
condition of final salvation : and that when I say, faith
alone is the condition of present salvation, what I would
allert is this; 1. That without faith no man can be
saved from his fins, can be either inwardly or outwardly
holy. And 2. That at what time; soever faith is given,
holiness. commences in the foul. For that instant, the
love of God, (which is the source of holinels) is shed
abroad in the heart. 1

But it is objected by the Author of. © The Notions of
the Met hodists disproved,” St. James says, Can faith
ave him ?“ I answer, Such a saith as is without works

-- 11 H 2 cannot

=

*
%

80 A raRT ER APPEAL, Part I.

cannot bring a man to heaven. But this is quite beside
the present question. |

You obj 2. © St. Paul says, That faith made perfe by love, St. James, That faith made perfect by works,
is the condition of salvation,” You mean final salvation. I fay so too: but this also is beside the question.

You object, g. That the Belief of the Gospel, is called
the obedience of faith, Rom. i. 3. And 4. That what
Ilaiah terms Believing, St. Paul terms Obeying. Suppole I grant you both the one and the other, what will

u inferr

You object, 5. That in one Scripture our Lord is
{tiled © The Saviour of them that believe: and
m another, The Author of eternal salvation, to all
them that obey him.“ 6., That to the Galatians St.
Paul writes,“ Neither circumcision availeth any thing,
nor uncircumcision, but faith which worketh by love ; ””
and to the Corinthians, ** circumcision is nothing, and
uncircumcifion is nothing, but the keeping the commandments of God.” And hence you conclude,
© There are several texts of Scripture, wherein unbelief and disobedience are equivalently used,” Very
true : but can you conclude from thence, that we are
not Saved by faith alone ?

11. You proceed to answer some texts which I had
quoted. The first is Ephesians ii. 8. By grace ye are
laved through faith.” * But (say you) faith does not
mean here, that grace especially so called, but includes
also obedience,” But how do you prove this? That
circumstance you had forgot: and so run off with a
comment upon the context : to which I have no other
objettion, than that it is nothing at all to the question,

Indeed some time after you add, It is plain then
that good works are always, in St. Paul's judgment,
joined with faith.” (So undoubtedly they are, that is,
as an effect is always joined with its cause) * And therefore we are not saved by faith alone. I cannot possibly
allow the consequence.

You afterwards cite two more texts, and add, . You
see mere faith cannot be a condition of justification,”

| You

To Men of Reason and Religion. 81

You are out of your way. We are no more talking
now of justification than of final salvation. |

In considering Acts xvi. g1. * Believe in the Lord
Jesus and thou shalt be saved.” You say again, Here
the word believe does not signify faith only,--Faith necessarily produces charity and repentance ; therefore,
these are expressed by the word believe,” 1. e. Faith
necessarily 1 7 holiness. Therefore holiness is a
condition of holiness, I want farther proof. That
Paul and Silas spake unto him the word of the Lord;
and that his faith did in the same hour work by love,
I take to be no proof at all. |

You then undertake to shew, that confessing our
sins is a condition of justification, and that a confidence
in the love of Goa, is not a condition. Some of your
words are, This, good Sir, give me leave to say, is
the greatest nonsense and contradiction possible, It is
impossible you can understand this jargon yourself, and.
therefore you labour in vain to make it intelligible to
others. You soar aloft on eagle's wings, and leave the
poor people to gape and stare after you.“

This is very pretty, and very lively. But it is nothing to the purpose. For we are not now speaking of
justification : neither have I faid one word of * The
condition of justification.”” in the whole Tract to which.
you here refer.

In the next place (say you) if we are saved (finally

ou mean) only by a confidence in the love of Gd
Here I must stop you again ; you are now running befide the question, on the other hand. The sole position.
which I here advance is this: True believers are saved.
from mward and outward fin by faith. By faith alonethe love of God and all mankind is shed abroad in their
hearts, bringing with it the mind that was in Christ,
and producing all holinels of conversation.

IV. 1. I am now to consider, What has been lately
objected, with regard to the nature of saving faith.

The Author last mentioned “ cannot understand how
those texts of St. John are at all to the purpose,” 2
John. ui. 1. Behold what manner of love the Fathen

II 3. | hath.

a
-- -- -- -- ů ů = SLA --4 9 --
_

82 A r ATEN APPEAL, Part I.

hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
sons of God,” And chap. iv. 19. We love him, because he first loved us,” I answer 1. These texts were
not produced, in the Appeal, by way of proof, but of
illustration only. But 2. I apprehend they may be
produced as a proof, both that christian faith implies a
confidence. in the love of God, and that such a confidence has a direct tendency to salvation, to holiness
both of heart and life.

% Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of
God!” Are not these words an expression of christian
faith? As dire& an one as can well be conceived ?
And I appeal to every man, whether they do not ex2 the strongest confidence of the love of God ?

our own comment puts this beyond dispute. * Let
us consider attentively and with grateful hearts, the
great love and mercy of God, in calling us to be his
sons, and bestowing on us the privileges belonging to
such.” Do you not perceive, that you have given up
the cause? You have yourself taught us, that these
words imply * A sense of. the great love and mercy of
God, in bestowing upon us the privileges belonging to

huis sons,”

The Apostle adds, Beloved, now are we the sons
of God; and it doth not yet appear what we fhall be:

but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be

like him; for we shall see him as he is.
I suppose no one will say, either that these words are
not expressive of christian faith; or, that they do not

imply the strongest confidence in the love of God, It

follows, © And every man that hath this hope in him,
purifieth himself even as he is pure.” =
Hence it appears, That this faith is a saving faith,

that there is the closest connection between this faith

and holiness, This text therefore is directly to the purPole, in respect of both the cee to be proved.
The other is, We love him, because he first loved
us.“ And here also, for fear I should fail in the proof,
you have drawn it up ready to my hands.
6 God sent his only Son---to redeem us from fin, by
purchasing for us grace and faluation.. By which grace
; we
To Men of Reason and Religion. 83

we through faith and repentance have our fins pardoned-- And therefore we are bound to return the tribute of our love and gratitude, and to obey him faithfully, as long as we live,”

Now, though we have our fins pardoned, if we do
not know they are pardoned, this cannot bind us either
to love or obedience. But if we do know it, and by
that very knowledge, or confidence in the pardoning
love of God, are both bound and enabled to love ax
obey him, this is the whole of what I contend for.

2. You afterwards object against some other texts
which I had cited, to illustrate the nature of savin
faith. My words were, „Hear believing Job, declaring his faith, I know that my Redeemer livelh, I
here affirm two things, 1. That Job was then a belever, 2. That he declared his faith in these words.
And all I affirm, you allow. Your own words are,
God was pleased to bestow upon him a strong assurance of his favour---to inspire him with a prophecy
of the resurrection, and that he should have a share
in it.“

I went on, ©* Hear Thomas, when having seen he
believed, crying out, My Lord, and my God.” Hereon you comment thus, The meaning of which is that
St. Thomas makes a confeshon both of his faith and re-

entance,” I agree with you. But you add, “ In.

t. Thomas's confession there is not implied an assurance
of pardon.” You cannot agree with yourself in this;
but immediately subjoin, If it did imply such an
. assurance, he might well have it, since he had an immediate revelation of it from God himself.”

Yet a little before you endeavoured to prove that one
who was not a whit behind the very chief Apostles had
not such an asfurance : where, in order to shew that
faith does not imply this, you said, ** St. Paul methinks
has fully determined this point (1 Cor. iv. 4.) © I know
nothing by myself, says he, yet am I not hereby justified.” ---* And if an Apostle so illuminated, does not
think himself justified **--- Then I grant, he has fully
determined the point. But before you abfolutely fix
upon that conclusion, be pleased to remember your
own comment that follows, on those other words of St..

Paul,

$4 A rAATUEN APPEAL, Part J.

Paul, The life I now live, I live by faith in the Son
of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.“
. Your words are, And no question a person endowed
with such extraordinary gifts, might arrive at a very
eminent degree of assurance.“-So he did arrive at a
very eminent degree of assurance, though he did not
think himself justified ! |

I can scarce think you have read over that chapter
to the Colossians : else surely you would not assert, that
those words on which the stress lies, (viz. © Who hath
delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath tran-
. Nlated us into the kingdom of his dear Son: in whom
we have redemption through his blood, even the forgivenels of sins,)“ do not relate to Paul and Timothy
who wrote the Epistle, but to the Colossians, to whom
they wrote.” I need be at no pains to answer this;
for presently after your own words are, He hath
made us, meaning the Colossians as well as himself,
meet to be Inheritors.” --

3. You may easily observe, that I quoted the Council of Trent by memory, not having the book then by
me. I own, and thank you for correcting my mistake :
but in correcting one, you make another, For the
decrees of the sixth session were not * published on
the r gth of January: but the seshon itself began on
that day.

I . help reciting your words, although they are
not exactly to the present question.

* The words of the 12th Canon of the Council of
Trent are, | |
lf any man shall say that justifying Faith is nothing else, but a confidence in the Divine Mercy, remitting sins for Christ's fake, and that this confidence
is that alone by which we are justified, let him be accursed.” You add,
This, Sir, I am sure is True Doctrine, and persectly agreeable to the Doctrine of our Church. And
so you are not only anathematized by the Council. of
Trent, but also condemned by our own Church.”

Our Church holds no such scandalous and disgraceful opinion. - According to our Church, no man can
have © the True Faith, who has not a loving heart.”

-- Therefore Faith is not a confidence that any man's

To Men of Reason and Religion. 8

fins are actually forgiven, and he reconciled to God.“
_ (What have the | egg to do with the conclusion ])

4- To decide this, Let our Church speak for herself.
Whether she does not suppose and teach, that every
particular Believer knows that his fins are forgiven,
and he himself is reconciled to God.

First then, Our Church supposes and teaches every

rticular Believer, to say concerning himself, * In
my baptism I was made a member of Christ, a child of
God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven. And
I thank God who hath called me to that state of salvation. And I pray God that I may continue in the
same, to my life's end.“

Now does this person know what he says to be true ?
Tf not, it is the ssest hypocrisy. But if he does,
_ he knows, he in particular is reconciled to
God,

The next words I shall quote may be a comment on
these : may God write them in our hearts! ;
A true christian man is not afraid to die, who is
the very Member of Christ, the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, the Son of God, and the very inheritor of the
everlasting kingdom of heaven. But plainly contrary,
he not only puts away the fear of death, but wishes,
desires and longs heartily for it. Sermon against the fear

Death. I. Part.

Can this be, unless he has a sure confidence that he,
in particular, is reconciled to God?

Men commonly fear Death, first because of leaving their worldly goods and pleasures. 2. For Fear of
the Pains of Death; and, g. For Fear of perpetuat
Damnation. But none of these causes trouble good
men, because they stay themselves by true faith, perfect
charity, and sure hope of endless joy and bliss everlasting.“ Ibid. II. Part.

All these therefore have great cause to be full of
Joy, and not to fear Death nor everlasting Damnation,
For Death cannot deprive them of Jesus Christ, Death
cannot take him from us, nor us from him. Death not
only cannot harm us, but also shall profit us aad join
us to God more perfectly. And thereof a christian
heart may be surely certified, It is God, gs #4

: wic

86 A rANT EN APPEAL, Part I.

which hath given us an earnest of his Spirit. As long as
we be in the body, we are in a strange country. But
we have a delire rather to be at home with God.” Ibid.
He that runneth may read in all these words, the
confidence which -our Church supposes, every partiert Believer to have, that he himself is reconciled to
od. |
To proceed, The only Instrument of Salvation required on our parts is Faith, that is, a sure trust and
confidence, that God both hath and will forgive our
sins, that he hath --_-- us again into his favour, for

the merits of Christ's death and passion.” Second Sermon on the Passion. os

| &

„ But here, we must take heed that we do not halt
with God, through an unconstgat wavering Faith.
Peter coming to Christ upon tie water, because he
fainted in Faith was in danger of drowning. So we, if
we begin to wave or doubt, it is to be feared lest we
should fink as Peter did: not into the water, but into
the bottomless pit of hell-fire. Therefore I say unto
vou, that we must apprehend the merits of Chrilt's
death by Faith, and that with a strong and stedfast
Faith: nothing doubting, but that Christ by his own
oblation hath taken away our fins, and hath restored
us again to God's favour.” Ibid.

5. If it be still said, That the Church speaks only
of men in general, but not of the confidence of this or
that particular person : even this last, poor subterfuge,
is utterly cut off by the following words:

Thou, O man, hast received the body of Christ
which was once broken, and his blood which was shed
for the remission of thy fin. Thou hast received his
body, to have within thee. the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, for to endow thee with grace, and to
comfort thee with their presence. Thou hast received
his body, to endow thee with everlasting righteouinels,
and to assure thee of everlasting bliss.” Sermon on the
Resurrection.

I shall add but one passage more, from the first part
of the Sermon on the Sacrament.

Have a sure and constant Faith, not only that the
death of Christ is available tor all the world, but that

he

To Men of Reason and Religion. 87

He hath made a full and sufficient sacrifice for thee, a
perfect cleansing of thy fins, so that thou mayest say
with the Apostle, he loved thee and gave hunself for
thee, For this is, to make (Christ thme own, and to
apply his merits unto thyself.” | .

Let every reasonable man now judge for himself,
which is the sense of our Church as to the nature of
saving Faith. Does it not abundantly appear, that the
Church of England supposes every particular Believer,
to have a sure confidence, that his fins are forgiven, and
he himself reconciled to God? Yea, and how can the
absolute necessity of this Faith, this unwavering con fidence, be more strongly or peremptorily asserted, than
it is in those words: & If we begin to waver or doubt,
it is to be feared, lest we fink as Peter did: not into the
water; but into the bottomless pit of hell- fire?“

6. I would willingly dismiss this Writer here. I had

{aid in the Earnest Appeal (what I am daily more and
more confirmed in) that this Faith is usually given in a
moment, This you greatly dislike. Your argument
against it, if put into form, will run thus:
They who first apprehended the meaning of the
words delivered, then gave their assent to them, then
had confidence in the promises to which they assented,
and lastly, loved God, did not receive Faith in a moment.“ 8

But the Believers mentioned in the Acts, first apprehended the meaning of the words, then gave their assent,
then had confidence in the promises, and lastly, loved
God : therefore 5
„The Believers mentioned in the Acts, did not receive Faith in a moment.“

I deny the major. They might first apprehend, then
assent, then confide, then love, and yet receive Faith
mi a moment: in that moment, wherein their general
confidence became particular, so that each could say,
„My Lord, and my God.” |

One paragraph more I will be at the pains to transcribe. © You insinuate, that the Sacraments are only
requisite to the well-being of a visible Church: whereas
the Church declares, that the due admmistration of
them, is an essential property thereof, I. fuppole

| you

88 A rAR THEN APPEAL, Part I.

you hinted this to gratify your loving disciples the
Quakers.”

This is flat and plain. Here is a fact positively averred; and a reason also assigned for it. Now, do you
take yourself to be a man of candor, I had almost faid,
of common honesty ? My very words in the place referred to, are, A visible Church is a company of
faithful people. This is the essence of it. And the

roperties thereof are, that the pure Word of God
bo preached therein, and the Sacraments duly administered.”

7. Before I take my leave, I cannot but recommend
to ou that advice of a wile and good Man,

% Be calm in arguing ; for fierceness makes

| Error a fault, and truth discourtesy.“

1 am grieved at your extreme warmth: you are in a
thorough ill-humour from the very beginning of your
book to the end. This cannot hurt me: but it may
yourself, And it does not at all help your Cause, If
you denounce against me all the curses from Genesis to
the Revelation, they will not amount to one argument.
I am willing (fo far as I know myself) to be reproved
either by you or any other. But whatever you do, let
it be done in love, in patience, in meekness of wisdom,

V. 1, With regard to the Author of Faith and
Salvation, abundance of objections have been made: it
being a current opinion, that Christians are not now
to receive the Holy Ghost.” |

Accordingly, whenever we speak of the Spirit of
God, of his operations in the souls of men, of his revealing unto us the things of God, or inspiring us with

ood desires or tempers; whenever we mention the
eeling his mighty power, working in us, according to
his good pleasure : the general answer we have to expett is, © This is all rank Enthusiasm.” So it was with
the Apostles and first Christians, But only Enthusiasts
retend to this now. |

Thus all the Scriptures, abundance of which might
be produced, are set aside at one stroke. And whoever cites them, as belonging to all Christians, is let
down for an Enthusiast.
| The fitst Tract I have seen, wrote expressly on this
head, is remarkably entitled, „The

-

To Men of Reason and Religion. 89
© The Operations of the Holy Spirit imperceptible,

and how men may know, when they are under the
guidance and influence of the Spirit.”

You begin, As we have some among us who pretend, to a more than ordinary guidance by the Spirit--
(indeed I do not : I pretend to no other guidance, than
is ordinarily given to all Christians) it may not be improper to discourse, on the operations of God's Holy
Spirit.“ --

ff To this end, be thou pleased, O gracious Fountain
of Truth, to assist me with thy heavenly direction in
speaking of thee.”

Alas, Sir, what need have you to speak any more ?
You have already granted all I desire, viz. That © we
may all now enjoy, and know that we do enjoy, the
heavenly direction of God's Spirit.“ |

However, you go on, and observe that the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, were granted to the
first Christians only, but his ordinary graces to all
Christians in all ages: both which you then attempt to
enumerate : only suspending your discourse a little,
when * some conceited Enthusiasts '”” come in your
Way.

-- You next enquire, © After what manner these
graces are raised in our souls?” And answer, © How
to distinguish these heavenly motions, from the natural
operations of our minds, we have no light to discover :
the Scriptures -- declaring that the operations of the
Holy Spirit, are not subject to any senlible feelings or

rceptions. For what communication can there be
. feelings which are properties peculiar to matter, and the suggestion of the Spirit ?. All reasonable
Christians believe, that he works his graces in us in an
imperceptible manner; and that there is no senible difference between his and the natural operations of our
minds.“

I conceive this to be the strength of your Cause. To
support that conclusion, that the operations of the Spi--
rit are imperceptible, you here alledge, 1. That all
reasonable Christians believe this.” So you fay. But
I want proof. 2. * That there can be no communcations (1 fear, you mistook the word) between the

suggestions

* ---- -- --
---- *
4 -- a --

ec” --- -- _
- -

--

3 v

CASIES ts -
Pr

--
*
j
g
----

2 -- -- * -- -- ny.

--

90 A rARTHER APPEAL, Part J.

suggestions of the Spirit, and feelings which are properties peculiar to matter.“ How! Are the feelings
now in queition, properties peculiar to matter? The
feeling of peace, joy, love? Or any feelings at all ?
I can no more understand the philosophy than the divinity of this. g. That the Scriptures declare, the
operations of the Spirit are not subject to any sensible
seclings.” You are here disproving, as you suppole, a
proposition of mine. But are you sure you 9 9
it? By feeling, I mean, being inwardly conscious of,
By the operations of the Spirit, I do not mean the
manner in which he operates, but the graces which he
operates in a Christian, Now be pleased to produce
those Scriptures which declare, That a Christian carinot feel or perceive these operations.“

3. Are you not convinced, Sir, that you have laid
to my charge things which I know not? 1 do not.
_ gravely tell you (as much an Enthusiast as you over and
over athrm me to be) * That I sensibly feel (in your
sense) the motions of the Holy Spirit.” Much less do
1 © make this, any more than convulsions, agonies,
howlings, roarings, and violent contorsions of the body,”
either“ Certain signs of men's being in a state of salvation,” or © necessary in order thereto.” You might
with equal justice and truth inform the world, and the
\\ orihipful the Magistrates of Newcastle, that I make
{eciny the wind or feeling the light, necessary to salvation.

Neither do I ** confounra the extraordinary with the
ordinary operations of the Spirit.” And as to your last
enquiry, © What is the best, proof of our being led by
the Spirit? I have no exception to that just and
scriptural answer, which you yourself have given, © A
thorough change and renovation of mind and heart,
and the leading a new and holy life.“

4. * That 1 confound the extraordinary with the
ordinary r of the Spirit, and therefore am an
Enthußiast,“ is allo strongly urged in a Charge delivered
to his Clergy, and lately published by the Lord Bishop
of Litchheld and Coventry.

An extract of the former part of this, I subjoin, in
his Lordship's words,

I can-

1 *

To Men of Reason and Religion. 91

© 1 cannot think it improper to obviate the contagion, of those enthusiastical pretensions, that have lately
betrayed whole multitudes, either into presumption or
melancholy. Enthusiasm indeed, when detected, is apt
to create infidelity ; and Infidelity is fo shocking a thing,
that many rather run into the other extreme, and take
refuge in Enthusiasm. But Infidelity and Enthusiasm

leem now to att in concert against our established Re-

ligion. As Infidelity has been sufficiently opposed, I
{hall now lay before you the weaknels of thole enthusiastical pretensions,” Page 1, 2. |

Now to confute effectually, and strike at the root of
thole enthusiastical pretensions,

“ First, I shall shew, that it is necessary to lay down
some method for distinguishing real from pretended In-
{spiration.” Page g. 5.

„% Many expressions occur in the New Testament
concerning the operations of the Holy Spirit. But
men of an enthusiastical temper, have confounded pasfages of a quite different nature, and have jumbled to-

gether those that relate to the extraordinary operations

of the Spirit, with those that relate to his ordinary insluences. It is therefore necessary to use some method
for separating those passages, relating to the operations
of the Spirit, that have been so misapplied to the service of Enthusiastical Pretenders,” Page 5, 6, 7.

] proceed therefore to shew,

„ Secondly, That a distinction is to be made between
those passages of Scripture about the blessed Spirit that
peculiarly belong to the Primitive Church, and those
that relate to Christians in all ages.“ Page 7.

The exigencies of the apostolical age required the
miraculous gifts of the Spirit. But thele soon ceased.
When therefore we meet in the Scripture with an account of those extraordinary gifts, and likewise with an
account of his ordinary operations, we mult distinguish
the one from the other, And that not only for our
own satisfaction, but as a means to stop the growth of
Enthusiasm.” Page 8, 9, 10.

* And such a distinction ought to be made, by the
beit methods of interpreting the Scriptures : which most
certainly are an attentive consideration of the occasion

I 2 and

-_ IF . Py

ag -- 4

-- --

|
$

-- --
s

San

Fg

92 A rARTHER APPEAL, Part I,

and scope of thole passages, in concurrence with the
general sense of the Primitive Church.” Page 11.

„I propole, thirdly, to specify some of the chief
passages of Scripture that are misapplied by modern
Enthusiasts, and to shew that they are to be interpreted
chiefly, if not only, of the apostolical Church ; and
that they very little, if at all relate, to the present state
of Christians.” Page 12.

I begin, says your Lordship, with the original promise of the Spirit. as made by our Lord a little before
he left the world.“

I must take the liberty to stop your-Lordship on the
threshold, I deny that this is the original promise of
the Spirit, I expect his assistance, in virtue of many

romiles, some hundred years prior to this.

If you fay, © However this is the original or first
promise of the Spirit, in the New Testament.” No,
my Lord; those words were spoken long before : he
fall baptize you with the Holy Ghoft, and with fire.

Will you reply? „ Well, but this is the original
promise made by our Lord,” I answer, not so neither.
For it was before this, Jesus himself stood and cried,
„If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink,
he thet believeth on me, as the Scripture hath said, out
of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. And this
he spake of the Spirit, which they should receive who
believed on him,“ ( 3cAAov Aajuf3avery 6s mrigevoblts dg avtor).
If I mistake not, this may more justly be termed our
Lord's original promile of the Spirit, And who will
assert, that this is to be interpreted chiefly, if not only,
of the apostolical Church ?

5. Your Lordship proceeds: It occurs in the 14th
and 16th chapters of St. John's Gospel; in which he
uses these / words.” In what verses, my Lord ?
* Why 1s not this specified? Unless to furnish your
Lordfhip with an opportunity of doing the very thing
whereof you before complained, of “ confounding passages of a quite contrary natnre, and jumbling together

*I take it for granted, that the citation of texts in the margin,
which is totally wiong, is a blunder of the Printer's,

thole

Cd

To Men of Reason and Religion, 93
those that relate to the extraordinary operations of the
Spirit, with those that relate to his W influences?“

You cite the words thus; When the Spirit of Truth ts
come he will guide you into all Truth and 15 will fhew you
things to come, ('Thele are nearly the words that occur,
Chap. xvi. ver. 13.

And again, The Comforter, which is the Toly Choft,
whom the Father will fend in my name, he hall teach you
all things, and bring all things to your remembrance whatsoever I have jaid unto you. These words occur in the
14th chapter, at the 26th verse.“

But, my Lord, I want the original promise still; the

original (I mean) of those made in this very discourse.
Indeed your margin tells us, where it is, (chap. xiv.
ver. 16.) but the words appear not. Taken together
with the context they run thus :

F ye love me, keep my commandments,

Ang I will pray the Father, and he will give yu another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ev

Even tne Spirit of 1ruth, whom the world 8 receive, because it feeth, him not, neither knoweth him, Chap.

XiV. ver. 13, 18, 1

My Lord, haffer 1 me to enquire, why you flipt over
this text ? Was it not (J appeal to the Scarcher of
your heart ) because you was conlcious to yourself, thaꝝ
it would necessarily drive you to that unhappy dilemma,
either to assert that for ever, is 7% 4wyz, meant only
sixty or seventy years; or to allow that the text must
be interpreted of the ordinary operations of the Spirit,
in all future ages of the Church,

And indeed that the promise in this text belongs to
all Christians, evidently appears, not only from vour
Lordship's own concession, and from the text itself, (for
who can deny, that this Comforter or Paraclete s now
given to all them that believe?) but also from the preceding, as well as following, words. The preceding
are, If ye love me, keep my commandments... An
I wilt pray the Father,” -- None surely can doubt, but
thele belong to all Christians in all ages. The folluwimng
words are, Even the Spirit of Truth, . whom the world.
cannot receive. True; the world cannot; but all Chris-

tans can, and will receive him for ever.

1 3 6. The:

94 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part I.

6. The second promise of the Comforter, made in
this chapter, together with its context, stands thus:

Judas faith unto him, (not Iscariot) Lord, how 1s
it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto
the world ? ” ver. 22.

* Jesus answered and said unto him, if any man love
me, he will keep my word. And my Father will love
him, and we will come unto him, and make our aboge
with him,” ver. 29.

* He that loveth me not, keepeth not my word: and
the word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's
which sent me,“ ver. 24. |

„ These things have I spoken unto you, being yet
with you,” ver. 25. |

* But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach
you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you,” ver. 26.

Now, how does your Lordship prove that this promile belongs only to the Primitive Church? Why,
1. You say, © It is very clear from the bare recital of
the words,” I apprehend not. But this 1s the very
question, which is not to be begged, but proved. 2.
You say, The Spirit's bringing all things to their remembrance, whatsoever he had faid unto them, cannot possibly
be applied to any other persons but the Apostles.”
Cannot be applied!“ This is a flat begging the
question again, which I cannot give up without better
reasons, g. The gifts of prophecy and of being guided
into all truth, and taught all things, can be apphed only
to the Apostles, and those of that age who were immediately inspired,” Here your Lordship, in order the
more plausibly to beg the quest:on again, ; jumbles together the extraordinary with the ordinary operations
of the Spirit.” The gift of prophecy, we know, 1s
dne of his extraordinary operations; but there is not a
word of it in this text: nor, therefore ought it to be
© confounded with his ordinary operations,“ such as the
being guided into all truth, (all that is necessary to
{alvation) and taught all (necessary) things, in a due use
of the means he hath ordained, ver. 26. *

To Men of Reason and Religion. 95

In the same manner, namely, in a serious and constant use of proper means, I believe the assistance of
the Holy Ghost is given to all Christians, to bring all
things needful to their remembrance, whatsoever Christ
hath spoken to them in his word. So that I see no ac- .
casion to grant, without some kind of proof, (especially
considering the occasion of this, and the scope of the
preceding verses) that even * this promise cannot possibly be applied to any other persons but the Apostles.”

7. In the same Discourse of our Lord we have a
third promise of the Comforter. The whole clause

runs thus : | |

[

«© If I go not away, the Comforter will not come
unto you; but if I go, I will send him unto you, chap,
xvi. ver. 7. |

And when he is come, he will reprove (or convince) the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of
Judgment, ver. 8,

Of fin, because they believe not on me:

„ Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and
ye lee me no more ;

+ Of judgment, because the Prince of this World is
judged, ver. 9, 10, 11.

I have yet many things to say unto you; but ye
cannot bear them now : (ver. 12.) But when he shall
come, the Spirit of Truth, he will guide you into all
truth--And he will shew you things to come, ver. 13.

There is only one sentence here which has not already
been considered, He wil! shew you things to come.
And this, it is granted, relates to the gift of prophecy,
one of the extraordinary operations of the Spirit.

The general conclusion which your Lordship draws,
is exprest in these words. Consequently all pretensions to the Spirit, in the proper sense of the words of
this promise . e. of these several texts of St. John)
are vain and insignificant, as they are claimed by modern Enthusiasts.” And in the end of the same paragraph you add, None but the ordinary operations of
the Spirit are to be now expected, since those that are
of a miraculous (or extraordinary) kind are not pretend-

ed to, even by modern Enthuhalts,”
My

er - --

-- --

96 A rAR TER APPEAL, Part J.

My Lord, this is surprising. I read it over and over,
before I could credit my own eyes. I verily believe
this one clause, with unprejudiced persons, will be an
answer to the whole book. You have been vehemently crying out all along against those Enthusiastical
Pretenders ; nay, the very design of your book, as you
openly declare, was * to stop the growth of their enthusiasm: who have had assurance (as you positively
affirm, page 6,) to claim to themselves the extraordinary
operations of the Holy Spirit.” And here you as
positively affirm, that those extraordinary operations
are not pretended to by them at all!“

8. Yet your Lordship proceeds, . The next passage
of Scripture I shall mention as peculiarly belonging to
the primitive times, though milapplied to the present
state of Christians by modern Enthusiasts, is what relates to the testimony of the Spirit, and praying by the
Spirit, in the 8th chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. Page 16.

I believe it incumbent upon me thoroughly to weigh
the force of your Lordship's reasoning on this head.
You begin, © After St. Paul had treated of that spiritual principle in Christians, which enables them to
mortify the deeds of the body he says, © If any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.” This
makes the distinction of a true Christian, particularly
in opposition to the Jews.” I apprehend it is just -
here, that your Lordship turns out of the way, when
you say, © Particularly in opposition to the Jews.”
Such a particular oppofition I cannot allow, till some
stronger proof is produced, than St. Paul's occasionally
mentioning six verles before, © the imperfettion of the

ewish law.“ a

Vet your Lordship's mind is so full of this, that
after repeating the 14th and 1th verses (* as many as
are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God:
for ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to
fear : but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba, Father !**) you add, © In the
former part of this verse, the Apostle shews again the
imperfettion of the Jewish law.” This allo calls for
proc: otherwile, it will not be allowed, that he here

{peaks

To Men of Reason and Religion, 97

speaks of the Jewish law at all: not, though we grant
that © the Jews were subject to the fear of death, and
lived, in consequence of it, in a state of bondage.“
For are not all Unbelievers, as well as the Jews, more
or less, in the same fear and bondage ?
Your Lordship goes on, In the latter part of the
verse he shews the superiority of the Christian law to
that of the Jews.” Page 18, Where is the proof, my
Lord? How does it appear, that he is speaking either
of the Christian or Jewish law, in those words, Ve
have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry,
Abba, Father?“ However, you infer, © Christians
then are the adopted Sons of God, in contradistinction
to the Jews, as the former had the gifts of the Holy
Ghost, which none of the latter had at that time : and
the body of the Jews never had.” No, nor the body
of the Christians neither, So that if this be a proof
against the Jews, it is the very same against the Christlans.
I must observe farther on the preceding words, 1.
That your Lordship begins here, to take the word Christians in a new and peculiar sense, for the whole body of
the then Christian Church: 2. That it 1s a bad inference, * as, or because they had the gifts of the Holy
Ghost, therefore they were the Sons of God.“ On the
one hand, if they were the children of God, it was not,
because they had those gifts. On the other, a man
may have all those gists, and yet be a child of the devil.
9. I conceive, not only that your Lordship has
proved nothing hitherto, not one point that has any relation to the question ; but that, strictly speaking, you
have not attempted to prove any thing, having taken
for granted whatever came in your way, In the same
manner you proceed, The Apostle goes on, The
Spirit itself beareth witness with our Spirit, that we
are the children of God.” This passage, as it is connetted with the preceding one, relates to the general
adoption of Christians, or their becoming the sons of
God instead of the Jews.“ This passage relates
How is that proved? By its connexion with the preceding ? In nowise, unless it be good arguing to prove
| ignotum

98 A ranTutrR APPEAL, Part I.

ignotum per ignotius. It has not yet been proved, that
the preceding paslage itself has any relation to this matter.

Your Lordship adds, But what was the ground of
this preference that was given to christians? It was
plainly the (miraculous) gifts of the spirit, which they
had, and which the Jews had not.” This preference
given to christians, was just before exprest by their becoming the Sons of God instead of the Jews. Were
the gifts of the spirit then the ground of this preference ?
The ground of their becoming the Sons of God? What
an assertion is this! And how little is it mended, though
I allow, that * these miraculous gifts of the spirit, were
a testimony that God acknowledged the christians to be
his people and not the Jews: (fince the christians who
worked miracles, did it not by the works of the law,
but by the hearing of faith ? ”)

Your Lordship concludes, From these passages of
St. Paul, compared together, it clearly follows, that the
forementioned testimony of the Spirit, was the public
testimony of miraculous l consequently, the
witness of the Spirit that we are the children of God,
cannot poslibly be applied, to the private testimony of
the Spirit given to our own consciences, as is pretended
by modern Enthusiasts.” Page 20.

If your conclusion, my Lord, will stand without the
premises it may : but that it has no manner of connection with them, I truit it does partly, and will more
fully appear, when we view the whole passage to which
you refer. And I believe that paslage, with very little
comment, will prove, in direct opposition to that conclusion, that the testimony of the Spirit there mentioned,
is not the public tcitimony of miraculous gifts, but must
be applied to the private testimony of the Spirit, given
to our own consciences.

10. St. Paul begins the eighth chapter of his Epistle
to the Romans, with the great privilege of every christian believer, (whether Jew or Gentile before) There
is now no condemnation for them that are in Christ
Jetus,” engrafted into him by faith, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit.” For now every
one of them may truly say, The law (or power) of the
spirit of life in Christ Jesus (given unto me for his fake)

hath

To Men of Reason and Religion. 99

hath made me free from the law (or power) of fin and
death. For that which the law could not do, in that
it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own
Son, in the likeness of sinful ne :{h, and for sin,” did;

when he © condemned,” (crucihed, put to death, destroyed) © fin in the flesh : That the righteousness of the
law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit. For they that are after the
flesh, mind the things of the flesh ; but they that ars
after the spirit, the things of the spirit,” Verle 1--g,

Is it not evident, that the Apostle is here describing
a true christian, a holy belicver? In opposition, not
particularly to a Jew, much less to the Jewish law;
but to every unholy man, to all, whether Jews or
Gentiles, who walk after the flesh ? He goes on,

* For, to be carnally-minded is death; but to be
spiritually-minded 3 is life and peace. Because the carnal
mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the
law of God ; neither indeed can be. So then they that
are in the flesh, cannot please God. Verse 6, 7, 8.

The opposition between a holy and unholy man, 1s
{till glaring and undeniable, But can any man discern,
the least glimmering of opposition, between the Chriftian and the Jewish law ?

The Apostle goes on, * But ye are not in the flesh,
but m the spirit, if fo be that the Spirit of God dwell
in you. Now if any man have not the spirit of Christ,
he is none of his. But if Christ be in you, the body
is dead, because of (or with regard to) fin, but the spirit is life because of righteousness. But if the spirit of
him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you,
He that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken
your mortal bodies by his spirit which dwelleth in you.
Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh,
to live after the flesh, For if ye live after the flesh ye
shall die; but if ye through the spirit do mortify the
deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many as are
led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.“
Verse 9--14.

Ils there one word here, is there any the least intimation of miraculous gifts, or of the Jewish law ?

* It

200 A 'raxtures APPEAL. Part I.

It follows, For ye have not received the spirit of
bondage again, to fear (such as all sinners have, when
they are first stirred up to seek God, and begin to serve
him from a slavish fear of punishment) But ye have received the spirit of adoption (of free love) whereby we
cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit itself (which God hath
sent forth into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father,) beareth witness with our Spirit, that we are the children of
God.” Verse 15, 16. g

I am now willing to leave it, without farther comment, to the judgment of every impartial reader, whether it does not appear from the whole scope and tenor
of the text and context taken together, that this passage
does not refer to the Jewish law, and to the public testimony of miracles: neither of which can be dragged
in, without putting the utmost force on the natural
meaning of the words. And if so, it will follow, that
this witness of the Spirit is the private testimony given
to our own consciences: which, consequently, all
sober Christians may claim, without any danger of enthusiasm.

11. But I go on (says your Lordship, page 21,
to the consideration of the other passages in the same
chapter, relating to our praying by the Spirit, namely
at verse 26 and 27, which runs thus, Likewise the
spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not
what we should pray for as we ought ; but the spirit itself maketh interceshon for us, with groanings which
cannot he uttered, And he that searcheth the hearts,
knoweth what is the mind of the spirit, because he
maketh intercession for the saints, according to the will
of God.”

Here is a circumstance highly needful to be observed,
before we enter upon this question, Your Lordship
undertakes to fix the meaning of an expression used by
St. Paul, in the fourteenth chapter of his first epistle to
the Corinthians. And in order thereto, you laboriously
explain part of the eighth chapter to the Romans. My
Lord, how is this? Will it be said, Why this is

often alledged to prove the wrong sense of that Scripture? JI conceive, this will not salve the matter at
all, Your Lordship had before laid down a particular

method,

To Men of Reason and Religion. 10t
method, as the only sure one whereby to distinguisn
what Scriptures belong to all christians, and what do
not. This method is, the considering the occasion and
scope of those passages, by comparing the text and context together, You then propose, by the use of this
method, to shew, that several texts have been misapplied by Enthusiasts, One of these is the 15th verse of
the 14th chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians.
And to shew, that Enthusiasts have misapplied this, you
comment on the eighth chapter to the Romans !

However, let us weigh the comment itself, The
material part of it begins thus: (p. 22.) „Now he
adds another proof of the truth of Christianity: likewise the spirit helpeth our infirmities (or our distresses,
for @Yuriaiy esignisies both,” I doubt that: I require
authority for it.) © And then he mentions, in what
' instances he does so, viz. In prayers to God about
afflictions ----” (In nothing else, my Lord? Did he
help their infirmities, in no other instance than this?)
© We know not, says he, what we should pray for as
we ought. That is, whether it be best for us to bear
afflictions, or to be delivered from them. But the spirit, or the gift of the Spirit, instrufts us how to pray
in a manner agreeable to the will of God.” The Spirit, or the gift of the Spirit! What marvellous reasoning is this? If these “ are often put for each other,“
what then? How 1s that evinced to be the case here ?

12, The Apostle goes on, The Spirit itself (p. 23.)
maketh intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be
uttered e that is, the spiritual or inspired person prayed
in that capacity for the whole assembly.” „That is!“
Nay, that is again the very point to be proved, else we
get not one step farther,

The Apostle goes on thus, verse 27. And he that
(p. 24.) « fearcheth the hearts, *hnoweth what is the mind
of the spirit (that 1s, of the spiritual or inspired person)
because he maketh intercession for the saints according to
the Mill of God.” That is, God knows the intention
of the spiritual person, who has the gift of prayer,
which he uses for the benefit of the whole assembly;
he, I say, leaves it entirely to God, whether it be best

that

102 A rARTUTR APPEAL, Part I.

that they should suffer afflictions, or be delivered from
them.“ Page 25. ; CRE

My Lord, this is more astonishing than all the rest !
I was expecting all along in reading the preceding pages
(and fo I suppose, was every thinking reader) when
your Lordship would mention, that the person miraculously inspired for that intent, and praying x, Os%»
either for the support or deliverance of the people,
should have the very petition which he asked of him.
Whereas you intended no such thing! But shut up
the whole with that lame and impotent conclusion,
He leaves it to God, whether it be best they should
suffer asslictions, or be delivered from them.”

Had he then that miraculous gift of God, that he
might do what any common christian might have done
without it? Why, any person in the congregation
might have prayed thus: nay, could not pray otherwile, if he had the ordinary grace of God: Leaving
it to God, whether he should suffer afflictions still, or
be delivered from them.” Was it only in the Apostolical age, that * the Spirit instrufted christians thus to
pray? Cannot a man pray thus, either for himself
or others, unlels he have the miraculous gift of prayer!
-- Ho, according to your Lordship's judgment, To
pray in such a manner, as in the event to leave the continuance of our sufferings, or our deliverance from them,
with a due submishon, to the good pleasure of God,”
is one of thole extraordinary operations of the Spirit, which none now pretend to but “ modern Enthusiasts!“

I IT beleech your Lordship to consider. Can you coolly
maintain, that * the praying with a due submission to
the Will of God,”” even in heavy affliction, is a miraculous gift? An extraordinary operation of the Holy
Ghost? Is this peculiar to the primitive times ? Is
it what none but Enthusiasts now pretend to? If not,
then your Lordship's own account of praying by the
Spirit indisputably proves that this is one of the ordinary privileges of all christians, to the end of the world.

13. I go on (your Lordship adds) to another palsage of Scripture, that has been entirely (p. 27.) milapplied by modern Enthusiasts, 1 Cor, ii. 4, 5. * And

ny

To Men of Reason and Religion. 103

my speech and my preaching were not with enticmg
words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the
Ipirit and of power; that your faith should not stand
in the wisdom of man, but in the power of God.“
Page 29.

« It is only necessary to evince, that by the demonstration of the Spirit and of power is meant the demonstration of the truth of Christianity, that arises from the
prophecies of the Old Testament and the miracles of
Christ and his Apostles,” Yes, it is neceflary farther
to evince, that these words have no other meaning.
But first, How will you evince, that they bear this?
In order thereto, your Lordship argues thus:

„The former seems to be the demonstration of the

Spirit, with regard to the prophetical testimonies of him.

[And the demonstration of power, must fignify the

ower of God, exerted in miracles.” (p. go.) © Must;”

hy so? That 9p often fignifies miraculous power,

is allowed--But what follows? That it must mean fo
in this place ? That till remains to be proved.

Indeed your Lordship says, this © appears from the
following verse, in which is assigned the reason for
using this method of proving Christianity to be true,

viz. That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of _.

man, but in the power of God, By the power of God
therefore must necessarily be understood, the miracles
performed-by Christ and his Apostles.” By the illative
particle, therefore, this proposition should be an inference from some other: but what other I cannot yet
discern, So that, for the present I can only look upon
it, as a fresh instance of begging the question.

* He goes on in the 5th, 10th and following verses,
to explain this demonstration of the Spirit and of
power.” But he does not say one syllable therein,
either of the ancient prophecies, or of miracles. Nor
will it be eafily proved, that he speaks either of one or
the other, from the beginning of the chapter to the end.

After transcribing the 1gth verse, © which things
allo we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth, comparing spiritual things with spiritual,” your Lordship
adds, „From which last passage it appears, that the

wor

104 nA rarxTHER APPEAL, Part J.

words which the Holy Ghost is faid to teach, must be
the prophetical revelations of the Old Testament, which
were discovered to the Apostles by the same Spirit. 1
cannot apprehend, how this appears. I cannot as yet
see any connection at all between the premises and the
conclusion. -

Upon the whole, I defire any calm and serious man,
to read over this whole chapter ; and then he will eafily
judge, what is the natural meaning of the words in
question : and whether (although it be allowed, that
they were peculiarly fulfilled in the Apostles, yet) they
do not manifestly belong, in a lower sense, to every true
Minister of Christ ? For what can be more undeniable
than this, that our preaching also is vain, unless it be
attended with the power of that Spirit, who alone
Picrorth the heart? And that your hearing is vain,
unless the same power be present to heal your soul, and
to give you a Faith which standeth nat in the wisdom

of man, but in the power of God ? 3

14. Another passage that (your Lordship thinks)
has been misapplied by Enthusiasts, but was really peculiar to the times of the Apostles, is 1 John ii. 20, and
27, (p. 35-) © Ye have en Unction from the Ely
. -- yo A 0 21! tumgs. -- But the Anointing
which ye have received of him abideth in you: and
ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same
Anomting teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and
is no lie. And even as it hath taught vou, ye shall
abide in him.“ „Here the Apostle arms the true
Christians against Seducers, by an argument drawn from
the Unction, from the Holy One, that was in or rather
among them: that is, from the immediate inspiration of
some of their Teachers.“ Page 37.

Hexe it rests upon your Lordihip, to prove (as well
as afhrm) 1. That i should be translated among: 2.
That this Unction from the Holy One means, © The
inspiration of some of their Teachers,” |

The latter your Lordship attempts to prove thus:
„The Inspired Teachers of old were set apart for

that office, by an extraordinary effusion of the Holy
Ghost: therefore (p. 38.) ER

To Men of Reason and Religion. 105,
© The Unction from the Holy One here, means such

an effusion.” I deny the COnQUEnce ; lo the question

is still to be proved.

Your Lordship's second argument is drawn from the

26th verse of the 14th chapter of St. John's gospel,
Proposed in form, it will stand thus:

11 those words, he shall teach you all things, relate only to a miraculous gift of the Holy Ghost, then
these words, the same Anointing teacheth you of all
things, relate to the same miraculous gift :

But those words relate only to a miraculous gift :

Therefore, these relate to the Tame.”

I conceive, it will not be very ealy to make good the
consequence in the first proposition. But I deny the
minor also: the contradictory whereto, I trust, has appeared to be true,

I grant indeed, that these words were more eminently
fulfilled, in the age of the Apostles. But this is altogether consistent with their belonging in a lower sense,
to all Christians, in all ages: seeing they have all need
of an Unction from the Holy One, a supernatural asl:itance from the Holy Ghost, that they may know in the
due ule of all proper means, all things needful for
their souls health. Therefore it is no enthusiasm, to
teach that the Unction f em the Holy One, belongs to
all Christians in all ages.

15. There is one topic of your Lordship's yet untouched; that is, authority: one you have very frequently made use of, and wherein, probably, the generality of readers suppose your Lordship's great streugth
lies. And indeed when your Lordship first mentioned,
(p- 11.) © The general sense of the primitive Church,“
I presumed you would have produced so numerous authorities, that I should not casily be able to con{ult Fan
all. But I soon found my mistake; your Lordih:;
ire only Chrylostom, Jerom, Origen, and oa
nasius.

However, though these four can no more be me

the Primitive Church, than the Church Univer'(:!,

L conlent to abide by their suffrage. Nay, I will go a

step farther still. If any two ot thele aftirm, that thode.

wann belong only to the Apostolical age, and not.
| "i

3 i”

oO RO EEE. „„ •?P--4?Cͥ2.

_ -- 6 # --
=_ -- - --

„

106 A ranrurk APPEAL, Part I.

to the Christians of succeeding times, I will give up the
whole cause. 125 |

But let it be observed: if they should affirm, that
these primarily belong to the Christians of the apostolical age, that does not prove the point, becaule my
may in a secondary sense belong to others not withstanding : nor does any of them speak home to the question,
unless he maintain in express terms, that these texts refer only to the miraculous gifts of the Spirit, and not
at all to the state of ordinary Christians,

16. Concerning those three texts, John xiv. ver. 16,
and 26; and John xvi. ver. 13, © I could eafily add
{fays your Lordship,*) the authorities of Chrysostom
and the other Commentators,” St. Chrysostom's authority I will confider now, and that of the others,
when they are produced,

It is granted, that he interprets not only John xvi.
13, but also both the paslages in the 14th chapter, as
primarily belonging to the Apostles. Yet part of his
comment on the 26th verse, 1s as follows.

Such is that grace (of the Comforter) that if it
finds sadness, it takes it away; if evil defire, it consumes
it. It casts out fear, and suffers him that receives it to
be man no longer, but translates him, as it were, into
heaven, Hence none of them counted any thing his
own, but continued in prayer, with gladness and singleness of heart, For this chiefly is there need of the
Holy Ghost, For the fruit of the Spirit 1s joy, peace,
faith, meekness. Indeed spiritual men often grieve ;
but that grief is sweeter than joy. For whatever is of
the Spirit, is the greatest gain, as Whatever is of the
world, is the greatest loss. Let us therefore in keeping
the commandmentsꝯ (according to our Lord's exhortation, ver. 15.) * secure the unconquerable ashstance of
the Spirit, and we shall be nothing inferior to angels.“

St, Chrysostom here, after he had fhewn, that the
promise of the Comforter primarily belonged to the
Apostles : (and who ever 8 it ?) undeniably
teaches, that in a secondary sense, it belongs to all Chril- |
tians: to all spiritual men, all who keep the commendments. I appeal therefore to all mankind, whether his
. | * Page 15. : 1 40 i

5 authority

To Men of Reason and Religion. 107
authority touching the promise of our Lord in these
texts, does not overthrow the proposition it was cited
to prove ?

Although your Lordship names no other author here,
yet page 42, you say, The assigned sense of these pasfages was confirmed by the 4uthority of Origen.” It is
needful therefore to add, what occurs in his works,
with regard to the present question. |

He occasionally mentions this promise of our Lord,
in four several places. But it is in one only that he
speaks pertinently to the point in hand, (vol, II, p40g. edit. bened.) where his words are these:

When the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide
you into all truth, and he will teach you all things.“
„The sum of all good things consists in this, that a
man be found worthy to receive the grace of the Hol
Ghost. Otherwise, nothing will be accounted
in him, who hath not the Holy Spirit.“ |

Do these words confirm that © Sense of those passages which your Lordship had assigned ? ” Rather do
they not utterly overturn it? And prove, (as above)
that although this Rn of our Lord, primarily belongs to the Apostles, yet in the secondary sense, it
belongs (according to Origen's judgment) to all Christians in all ages?

1. The fourth text mentioned as belonging to the
first Christians only, is Rom. viii. 15, 16, and p. 26, it
is said, This interpretation is confirmed by the authority of the most eminent Fathers.” The Reader is particularly referred to Origen and 7eron: in locum. But
here seems to be a mistake of the name. Ferom in locum should mean, Jerom upon the place, upon Rom.
vii. 15, 16, But I cannot perceive, that there is one
word upon that place, in all St. Jerom's Works.

Nor indeed has Origin commented upon it any more
than Jerom. But he occasionally mentions it in thele
words:

„He is a babe who is fed with milk- but if he seeks
the things that are above- Without doubt he will be of
the number of those, who receive not the Spirit of Bondage again unto fear, but the Spirit of Adoption, through
whom they cry, Abba, Father.“ Vol. I. p. 79.

9 a Again,

10 A rART AER APPEAL, Part I.

Again, The fulness of time is come when they
who are willing, receive the Adoption, as Paul teaches
in these words, Ye have not received the Spirit of
Bondage again unto Fear; but ye have received the
Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father!“
And it is written in the gospel according to St. John,
& To as many as received him, to them gave he power
to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe
in his name.“ Vol. I. p. 231, 232.

Yet again, Every one that is born of God, and
doth not commit fin, by his very actions faith, Our
Father which art in heaven, the Spirit itself bearin
witness with their Spirit, that they are the Children o
God.“ - Ibid. f |

According to Origen therefore, this testimony of the
Spirit, is not any publick testimony by miracles, pecular to the first times, but an inward testimony, belonging in common to all that are born of God. And consequently the authority of Origen does not confirm
that interpretation neither; but absolutely destroy it. .

18. The last authority your Lordship appeals to. on
this text is, That of the great John Chrysostom, who
reckons the testimony of the Spirit of Adoption by
which we cry Abba, Father! among the miraculous
gifts of the Spirit.” “I rather chuse (your Lordship
adds, p. 26.) to refer you to the words of St. Chrysostom, than to transcribe them here, as having almost
translated them in the present account of the testimony
of the Spirit.“ | :

However, I believe it will not be labour lost, to
transcribe a few of those words, |

It is in his comment on the 14th verse, that he first
mentions, St, Paul's comparison between a Jew and a
Christian, How fairly your Lordship has represented
this, let every Reader judge, _ |

« As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
Sons of God.”'----* Whereas the same title had been
given of old to the Jews alfo,--- he shews in the sequel,
how great a difference there is, between that honour
and this. For though, says he, the titles are the same,
yet the things are not, And he plainly proves it, by
comparing both what they had received, and 2

Te Men of Reason and Religion. 109

looked for. And first he shews what they had received»
viz. A Spirit of Bondage. Therefore he adds, Ye
have not received the Spirit of Bondage again unto
Fear: but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption.“
What means the Spirit of Fear ? -- Observe their
Whole life, and you will know clearly, For punishments were at their heels, and much fear was on every
side, and before their face----But with us it is not so.
For our mind and conscience are cleansed, so that we
do all things well, not for fear of present punishment,
but through our love of God, BE an habit of virtue.
They therefore, though they were called sons, yet were
as slaves ; but we, being made free, have received the
Adoption, and look not for a land of milk and honey,
but for heaven.“
He brings also another proof, that we have the SpiTit of Adoption, by which, says he, we cry, Abba, Father.
---- THis is the first word we utter, aur T&; Vavpads
dag meirag, xa} Tor Etvoy xa Taxa Aoxeuuatur viyuer 2
after those amazing thracs {or birth pangs) and that
. strange and wonderful manner of bringing forth.“ |
© He brings yet another proof of the superiority of
those who had this Spi- of Adoption. The Spirit
n witnels with our Spirit that we are the
Children of God,” I prove this, says he, not only
from the voice itself, but also from the cause whence
that voice proceeds, For the Spirit suggests the words
while we thus speak, which he hath elsewhere exprest
more plainly, * God hath sent forth the Spirit of has
Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father ! But what
is, The Spirit bearing witness with our Spirit“ He
means, the Paraclete by the gift given unto us.“
(But that this was an extraordinary gift, we have no
intimation at all, neither before nor after) And when
the Spirit beareth witnels, what doubt is left? If a
man or an angel spake, some might doubt. But when
the Most High -- witnels to us, who can doubt
any longer ?

Now let any reasonable man judge how far your
Lordship has © translated the words of St. Chrysostom ?
And whether he reckons the testimony of the Spirit
among the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost ? ”” Or

among

110 A rAR TUR APPEAL, Part I.

among those ordinary gifts of the Spirit of Christ,
which if a man have not, he is none of his?

19. The fifth text your Lordship quotes, as describing a miraculous gift of the Spirit, is 1 Cor. xiv. 15:
to prove which, you comment on the 8th chapter to
the Romans, particularly the 26th verse: and here
again it is said, That the interpretation assigned, is
confirmed by several of the most eminent Fathers, more
especially the great John Chrysostom as well as by Origen and Jerom upon the place,” |

I cannot find St. Jerom to have writ one line upon
the place. And it is obvious, that St. Chrysostom supposes, the whole context from the 14th to the 25th
verle, to relate to all Christians in all ages. How this
can be faid to © confirm the interpretation assigned,
J cannot conjecture. Nay, it is remarkable that he expounds the former part of the 26th verse, as describing
the ordinary privilege of all Christians. Thus far,
therefore, he does not confirm, but overthrow ** the
interpretation before assigned.” But in the middle of
the verse he breaks off, and expounds the latter part,
as describing one of the miraculous gifts. |

Yet I must do the justice to this venerable man to
observe, he does not suppose that miraculous gift was
given, only that the inspired might do what any ordinary Christian might have done without it. (This interpretation even of the latter part of the verse, he does
in no wise confirm.) But that he might ask in every
particular circumstance, the determinate thing which it
was the will of God to give.

20. The third Father by whom it is said this interrages is confirmed, is Origin. The first passage of

is which relates to Romans viii. 26. runs thus: Vol.

% Paul perceiving how far he was, after all these
things, from knowing to pray for what he ought as he
ought, says, We know not what we should pray for as we

| ought, But he adds, whence what is wanting may be
bad by one who indeed does not know, but labours to
be found worthy of having the defect supplied. For
he says, Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our insirmities, For we know not what we should pray for as
| we

To Men of Reason and Religion. 111

as we ought, But the Spirit itself maketh intercession
for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. And
he that scarcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind
of the Spirit ; because he maketh intercession for the
saints, according to the will of God.” The Spirit
which crieth Abba, Father, in the hearts of the saints,
knoweth well our groanings in this tabernacle, making
intercession for us to God, with groanings which cannot be uttered, . Lo the {ame effect it that Scripture, 1
Cor. xiv. 15, © I will pray with the spirit, I will pray
with the understanding allo.” For our understanding
or mind & „e) cannot pray, if the spirit do not pray

fore it, and the underitanding, as it were, listen
to it.“

Again (Vol. II. p. 146.) “ I would know, how the
saints cry to God without a voice, The Apostle shews,
“God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying, Abba, Father!“ And he adds, The
Spirit itself maketh intercession for us, with groanings
which cannot be uttered.” And again, 4 He that
searcheth the hearts, knoweth what is the mind of the
spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints, according to the Will of God.” Thus therefore, the
Spirit making intercession for us with God, the cry of
the saints is heard without a voice.”

Once more in his Homily on Joshua, (Vol. II.

r

F. Jesus our Lord, doth not forsake us; but although
when we would pray, we know not what to pray for
as we ought, yet the Spirit itself maketh intercession for
us with groanings which cannot be uttered. Now the
Lord is that Spirit: the Spirit assists our prayers, and
offers them to God with groanings which we cannot
express in words,” 3

I believe all rational men will observe from hence,
that Origen is so far from confirming, that he quite
overturns your Lordship's interpretation of the 16th as
well as the 26th verse of this chapter: seeing, in his
judgment, both that testimony of the Spirit, and this
prayer belong to all christians in all ages. |

21. The sixth Scripture which your Lordship has
undertaken to shew, ©. relates only to the Apostolical

W , * times,“

110 A rART HER APPEAL, Part TI,
among those ordinary gifts of the Spirit of Christ,
which if a man have not, he is none of his?

19. The fifth text your Lordship quotes, as describing a miraculous gift of the Spirit, is 1 Cor. xiv. 15:
to prove which, you comment on the 8th chapter to
the Romans, particularly the 26th verse: and here
again it is said, That the interpretation assigned, is
confirmed by several of the most eminent Fathers, more
especially the great John Chrysostom as well as by Origen and Jerom upon the place.“ |

I cannot find St. Jerom to have writ one line upon
the place. And it is obvious, that St. Chrysostom supposes, the whole context from the 14th to the 25th
verle, to relate to all Christians in all ages. How this
can be faid to ©& confirm the interpretation assigned,
I cannot conjecture. Nay, it is remarkable that he expounds the former part of the 26th verse, as describing
the ordinary privilege of all Christians. Thus far,
therefore, he does not confirm, but overthrow * the
interpretation before assigned.” But in the middle of
the verse he breaks off, and expounds the latter part,
as describing one of the miraculous gifts. |

Yet I must do the justice to this venerable man to
observe, he does not suppose that miraculous gift was
given, wy that the inspired might do what any ordinary Christian might have done without it. (This interpretation even of the latter part of the verse, he does
in no wise confirm.) But that he might ask in every
particular circumstance, the determinate thing which it
was the will of God to give.

20. The third Father by whom it is said this inter3 is confirmed, is Origin. The first passage of

is which relates to Romans viii, 26. runs thus: Vol.
I. p. 199.) 3

“ Paul perceiving how far he was, after all these
things, from knowing to pray for what he ought as he
ought, says, We know not what we should pray for as we
ought, But he adds, whence what is wanting may be
had by one who indeed does not know, but labours to
be found worthy of having the defect supplied. For
he fays, © Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities, For we know not what we should pray for as

A we

To Men of Reason and Religion. 111

as we ought, But the Spirit itself maketh intercession
for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. And
he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind
of the Spirit ; because he maketh intercession for the
saints, according to the will of God.” The Spirit
which crieth Abba, Father, in the hearts of the saints,
knoweth well our groanings in this tabernacle, makin
intercession for us to God, with groanings which cannot be uttered. . To the same effect it that Scripture, 1
Cor. xiv. 15, © I will pray with the spirit, I will pray
with the understanding al{o.” For our understanding
or mind 6 »;) cannot pray, if the spirit do not pray

fore it, and the underitanding, as it were, listen
to it.“

Again (Vol. II. p. 146.) “ I would know, how the
saints cry to God without a voice. The Apostle shews,
“God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying, Abba, Father!“ And he adds, The
Spirit itself maketh intercession for us, with groanings
which cannot be uttered.” And again, le that
searcheth the hearts, knoweth what is the mind of the
spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints, according to the Will of God.” Thus therefore, the
Spirit making intercession for us with God, the cry of
the saints is heard without a voice.”

Once more in his Homily on Joshua, (Vol. II,
gs HOG
« Jesus our Lord, doth not forsake us; but although
when we would pray, we know not what to pray for
as we ought, yet the Spirit itself maketh intercession for
us with groanings which cannot be uttered. Now the
Lord is that Spirit: the Spirit assists our prayers, and
offers them to God with groanings which we cannot
express in words.“ 8

I believe all rational men will observe from hence,
that Origen is so far from confirming, that he quite
overturns your Lordship's interpretation of the 16th as
well as the 26th verse of this chapter: seeing, in his
judgment, both that testimony of the Spirit, and this
prayer belong to all christians in all ages. TEES:

21. The sixth Scripture which your Lordship has
undertaken to shew, ©. relates only to the Apostolical

\ : . times,“
*
” 4

1141 A vaAAT AER APPEAL, Part I.

times,” is 1 Cor. ii. 4, 3. And „ this interpretation
also, (it is aid) is confirmed by the authority of Chryfostom, Origen, and other ancient Writers.” (p. 33.)
With those other © Ancient Writers I have no concern yet. St. Chrysostom fo far confirms this interpretation, as to explam that whole phrase, the demonstration of the Spirit and of power, of © the power of the
Spirit shewn by miracles,” But he says not one word,
ob any Proof of the Christian Religion, arising from
the types and ane 7s of the Old Testament.”
Origen has these words (Vol, I. p. g21.)

* Our word has a certain peculiar demonstration,
more divine than the Grecian, Logical demonstration,
This the Apostle terms, The demonstration of the Spirit and of power: of the Spirit, because of the prophecies, sufficient to convince any one, especially of
the things that relate'to Christ ; of power, becau of
the miraculous powers, some footsteps of which till
remain,”

Hence we may doubtless infer. That Origen judged
this text to relate, in its primary sense to the Apostles :
but can we thence infer, that he did not judge it to belong, in a lower sense, to all true Ministers of Christ ?

Let us hear him speaking for himself in the same
Treatise (p. 377 ) 8

« And my speech and my preaching were not with
enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration
of the Spirit and of power : that your faith should not
stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.
Those who hear the word preached with power, are
themselves filled with power,” (N. B. Not the power
of working miracles) which they demonstrate both in
their disposition, and in their life, and in their striving
for the truth unto death. But some, although they

rofess to believe, have not this power of God in them,
but are empty thereof.“

(Did Origen then believe, that the power mentioned
in this text, belonged only to the Apostolical age 7)

See the force of the word, conquering believers by
a persuasiveness attended with the power of God! 1
{peak this to shew the meaning of him that said, And
my speech and my preaching were not with the --

8 wo

--

To Men of Reason and Religion. 113
words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the
Spirit and of power; that your faith should not stand
in the wisdom of men, hut in the power of God.“
This divine saying means, That what is spoken is not
sufficient of itself (although it be true and most worthy,
to be believed) to pierce a man's soul, if there be nat.
also a certain power from God given to the speaker,
and grace bloom upan what is spoken, and this grace
cannot be but from God.” |

After observing, That this is the very passage which
your Lordship mentions at the close of the other (but
does not cite it) I desire every unprejudiced person to
judge, whether Origen does not clearly determine, that
the power, spoken of in this text, is in some measure
given to all true Ministers in all ages? E

22, The last Scripture which your Lordship affirms
© to be peculiar to the times of the Apostles,” is that
in the first epistle of St. Jobn, concerning the Unction
of the Holy One. 1

To confirm this interpretation, we are referred to the
authority of Origen and Chrysostom, on the parallel
passages in St. John's gospel, p. 42. + *

But it has appeared, That both these Fathers suppose
those passages to belong to all christians, And conse-

uently their authority (if these are parallel passages)
Gands full against this wnterpretation. | |

" Your Lordship subjoins, „ I shall here only add tha
of the great Athanasius, who (in his epistle to Serapiq!
interprets, the Unction from the Holy One, not merely
of divine grace, but of the extraordinary gifts of , the
Holy Spirit.” e
Nay, it is enough, if he interprets it at all of ardinary grage, such as is common to all christians. -
And this your Lordship allows he does. But I cannot allow that he interprets it of any thing else, I cannot
perceive, that he interprets it at all, © of the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit.“ :
His words are, The Holy Spirit is called, and is,
the. UnQtion and the Seal, For John writes, The
anointing which ye have received of him, #ideth in
Jos. and ye need not that any man should teach. you,
ut as this anointing, | his Spirit,] teacheth you of
all things,” Again, it is written in the prophet Isaiah,
| Þ ia | The

also, in a

things of God, and revealeth them to the sons of men,

*

114 A rAR TRR APPEAL, Part I.
* The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath

anointed me.” And Paul writes thus; “ In whom
also ye were sealed.” And again, Grieve not the
Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto tho
day of redemption.” This anointing is the breath of
the Son, fo that he who hath the Spirit may say, We
are the sweet smelling savour of Christ.” Because we
are partakers of the Holy Spirit, we have the Son:
and having the Son, we have the Spirit, crying in our
hearts, Abba, Father.” -

And fo, in his Oration against the Arians.

He sendeth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts,
crying, Abba, Father. His Son in us, invoking the
Father, makes him to be called our Father. Certainly
God cannot be called their Father, who have not the
Son m their hearts.”

Is it not easy to be observed here, 1. That Athanasius makes that testimony of the Spirit, common to all
the children of God: 2. That he joins the anointing of
the Holy One, with that seal of the Spirit wherewith
all that org are sealed to the day of redemption :
and g. That he does not, throughout this passage, speak
of the extraordinary gifts at all ?

Therefore, upon the whole, the sense of the Primitive Church, so far as it can be gathered from the authors above cited, is, That although some of these
Sc1ip: ures primarily refer, to those extraordinary gifts
of the Spirit, which were given tothe Apostles and a
few other 3 in the Apostolical age: yet they refer

econdary sense, to those ordinary operations
of the Holy Spirit, which all the children of God do
and will experience, even to the end of the world.”

23. What I mean by the ordinary operations of the
Holy Ghost, I sum up in the words of a modern
Writer : | |

& Sanctification being opposed to our corruption,
and answering fully to the latitude thereof, whatsoever
of holiness and 8 is wanting in our nature,
must be supplied by the Spirit of God, Wherefore by
nature we are totally, void of knowing the Will of God;
this Spirit searcheth all things, yea, even the deep

so

#

To Men of Reason and Religion. 115

so that thereby the darkness of their understanding is
expelled, and they are enlightened with the knowledge
of God. The same spirit which revealeth the object of
faith, generally to the universal Church, doth also illuminate the understanding of such as believe, that 3
may receive the truth. For faith is the gift of God,

not only in the object, but also in the act. And this
gift is a gift of the Holy Ghost working within us
And as the increase of perfection, so the original of
faith is from the Spirit of God, by an internal illumination of the soul,”

The second part of the office of the Holy Ghost
is, the renewing of man in all the parts and faculties of
hisfoul. For our natural corruption conlisting in an
aversation of our wills, and a depravation of our affections, an inclination of them to the Will of God, is
wrought within us by the Spirit of God.”

+ The third part of this office is, To lead, direct and
govern us in our actions and conversations, If we live
in the Spirit, quickened by his renovation, we- must
also walk in the Spirit, following his direction, led by
his manuduction. We are also animated and acted by
the Spirit of God, who giveth both to will and 'to do :
and * as many as are thus led by the Spirit of God, are
the Sons of God. Moreover, that this direction may
prove more effectual, we are guided in our prayers by
the same Spirit: according to the promise, I will
pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace and supplication,””
(Zech. xii. 10.) Whereas then * this is the confidence
which we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he heareth us:“ and whereas © we
know not what we should pray for as we ought, + the
Spirit itself maketh RATE he for us with groanings
which cannot be uttered ;*” and 4 he that searcheth
the hearts, knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints according to
the Will of God.” From which intercession (made
for all true christians) * he hath the h name of the Paraclete given him by Christ, who said, I will pray the

x * Father,
* Rom. viii. 14, f Ver. 26. f Ver. 27. { John
xiv. 16. 26, * L 2 |

-- ⏑-- _ . _

2]

116 A raxrntR APPEAL, Part I.

| Father, and he will give you another Paraclete. For f
any man fin, we have a Paraclete with the Father, Tesus
Chrift the righteous, saith St. John: who maketh inter-

"ceffion for us, saith St. Paul, (Rom. viii. 94.) And *
| whic

have “ another Paraclete, faith our Saviour : +

allo maketh intercession for us, saith St. Paul. A
Paraclete then, in the notion of the Scriptures, is an
Intercessor.“

* It is also the office of the Holy Ghost, to assure
us of the adoption of Sons, to create in us a Tense of the
paternal love of God towards us, to-give us an earnest
of our everlasting inheritance, * The love of God is
shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is
oe unto us. For as many as are led by the Spigit of

od, they are the Sons of God. And because we are
Sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into
our hearts, crying Abba, Father, 4 For we have not received the Spirit of bondage again to fear, hut we have
received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba,
Father: the Spirit itself bearing witness with our Spirit,
that we are the children of God.“ 5 5

& As therefore we are born again by the Spirit, and
receive from him our regeneration, fo we are also
the same Spirit assured of our Adoption. Because being Sons we are also hers, heirs of God and joint heirs
with Christ, by the same Spirit we have the pledge, or
rather the earnest of our inheritance. For he which
establisheth us in Christ, and hath anointed us is God;
who hath also sealed us, and hath given us the earnest
of his Spirit in our hearts: so that we are sealed with
that Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of
our inheritance. The Spirit of God, as given unto us
in this life, is to be looked upon as an earnest, being

art of that reward which is promised, and upon perance of the covenant which God hath made with
us, certainly to be received.”

Your Lordship observed, that © the interpretation of
those passages, which relate to the untton from the Holy
One, depends on the sense of thole other passages of holy
Scripture, particularly, those in St. John's Gospel.”
* John xiv. 16. + Rom. vi. 27. f Ver. 15, 16.
Now

To Men of Reason and Religion. 117

Now if so, then these words fix the sense of six out of
the seven texts in question : and every one of them, in
the judgment of this writer, delcribes the ordinary gifts
bestowed on all Christians, |

It now rests with your Lordship, to take your choice
either to condemn or acquit both. Either your Lordship must condemn Bishop Pearson for an Enthusiast,
(a man no ways inferior to Bishop Chrysostom :): or you
must acquit me: for I have his express authority on
my fide, concerning every text which I affirm to belong
to all Christians, 2

24. But I have greater authority than his, and such
as I reverence, only less than that of the Oracles of
God, I mean that of our own Church. I shall close
this head, by setting down what occurs in her authentic
records, concerning either our receiving the Holy Ghost,
or his ordinary operations in all true Christians.

In her daily service, she teaches us all to beseech
God, « to grant us his Holy Spirit, that those things
may please him which we do at this present, and that
the rest of our life may be pure and holy: to pray
for our Sovereign Lord the King, that God would replenish him with the Grace of his Holy Spirit ; for all
the Royal Family, that they may be Als E. with lis
Holy Spirit, and enriched with his Heavenly Grace :
for all the Clergy and people, that he would send dow:s
upon them the healthful Spixit of his Grace; for the
Catholick Church, that it may be guided and governed
by his good Spirit : and for all therein who at any time
make their common supplications unto him, that the
fellowship or communion of the Holy Ghost may be
with them all evermore.

Her collects are full of petitions to the same effect:
* Grant that we may daily be renewed by the Holy
Spirit,---+ Grant that in all our sufferings here, for the
testimony of thy truth, we may by faith behold the
glory that shall be revealed, and being filled with the
Holy Ghost, may love and bless our perlecutors. Send
thy Holy Ghost and pour into our hearts that most excels

* Colleft for Cbrimas Day, + St. Stephen's Day.
} Quinquagelima Sunday. Wy ih 25 (Rat
L 2 lent

248 A txkturr APPEAL, Part I.

lent gift of charity. O Lord, from whom all goo@
ings do come, grant to us thy humble fervants, that
by thy holy inspiration, we may think those things that
are good, an by thy merciful guidance may perform
" ; "4 + We beseech thee leave us not comfortless,
but send to us the Holy Ghost to comfort us. 2 Grant
us by the same spirit to have a right judgment in all
things, and evermore to rejoice in his holy comfort.
(N. B. The Church here teaches all Christians to claim
tie Comforter, in virtue of the promise made, John xiv.)
5 Grant us, Lord we beseech thee, the Spint to think
and do always such things as be rightfal. || O God,
forasmuch as without thee, we are not able to please
thee, mercifully grant that thy Holy Spirit may in all
things direct and rule our hearts. I Cleanse the thoughts
of our hearts by the inspiration of thy Holy Spirit, that
we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy
Holy Name.“

„Ge thy Holy Spirit to this infant (or this person)
chat he may be born again. Give thy Holy Spirit to
these persons (N. B. already baptized) that they may
continue thy servants,” |

* Almighty God, who hast vouchlafed to regenerate
these persons by water and the Holy Ghost---Streogthen
them with the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and daily
, increase in them the manifold gifts of * grace,”
Office of Confirmation. @,

From these passages it may sufficiently appear, for
what purposes every Christian, according to the doctrine of the Church of England, does now receive the
.. Holy Choft. But this will be still more clear g rom those
that follow : wherein the reader may likewise observe,
bo ain, rational sense of God's revealing himself to us,
the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and of a Believer's feeling in himself the mighty working of the Spirit
of Christ.
25. God gave them of old, grace to be his, chil-
|. tidy, as he doth us now. But now, by the caming of

85: * * 2 5 .

* Fifth Sunday afier Easter. + Sunday after 3 Day.
Whitsunday 6 Ninth Sunday after Trinity, | 4-26 "<p
unday after Trinity. 1 Commutgns Office. ..

= =
27 1 - our
&* # . f g

To Men of Reaforr and Religion. 119
tir Saviour Christ, we have rectived more abundantly
the Spirit of God in our hearts.“ Homily on Faith,
Part II. | 5

„He died to deftroy the rule of the Devil in w,
and he rose again to fend down his Holy Spirit, to rule
in our hearts.” FHomely on the Resurrection.

We have the Holy Spirit in our hearts, as a seal and
pledge of our everlasting inheritance. J1bt:d.

* The Holy Ghost fat upon each of them, like as it
had been gloven tongues of fire: to teach, that it is he
that giveth eloquence and utterance in preaching the
gospel ; which engendereth a burning zeal 0. 2God's word, and giveth all men a tongue, yea, a fiery

e. (N. B. Whatever occurs in any of the Journals, of God's © giving me utterance,” or enabling
me to fpeak with power,“ cannot therefore be quoted
as Enthusiafm, without wounding the Church thr
my fide) So that if any man be a dumb Christian,
not professing his faith openly, he giveth men occasion
-to doubt, left he have not the grace of the Holy Ghost
within hm.” Homily on Whitsunday. Part I. |
It is the office of the Holy Ghost to sanctify;
which the more it is hid from our understanding,”
(i. e. the particular manner of his working) © the more
it ought. to move all men, to wonder at the secret and
mighty workings of God's holy Spirit which is within
us. For it is the Holy Ghost that doth quicker: the
minds of men, stirring up godly motions in their hearts.
Neither doth he think it suncient inwardly to work
the new birth of man, unlefs he doth also dwel and
abide in him. Know ye not, faith St. Paul, that ye

are the Temple of God, and that his Spirit dwelleth in
you ? Know ye not, that your bodies are the Temples
of the Holy Ghost which is within you?” Again he
saith, Ye are not in the flesh but in the Spirit; ” 18
why? © The Spirit of God dwelleth in you.” To
this, agreeth St. John, © The anointing which ye
have received he meaneth the Holy Ghost] abideth
in you.“ And St. Peter faith the fame, The Spirit
of glory and of- God resteth upon you.“ O what

comfort is this to the heart of a true Christian, to think
that the Holy Ghost dwelleth in him! If God be

* 1 John ji. 27. with

*

----ñ--ͤ-- -- -- -- H ---- =

120 A raxrurn APPEAL, Fart I.
with us, as the Apostle faith, who can be against us? ”
He giveth patience and joyfulness of heart, in temptation and affliction, and is therefore worthily called * the
Comforter, He doth instruct the hearts the simple,
in the knowledge of God and his word; therefore he is
justly termed + The Spirit of Truth. And where the
Holy Ghost doth instruct and teach, there is no delay
at all in learning.” Ibid.

(From this passage I learn, 1. That every true Christian now receives the Holy Ghost, as the Paraclete or Com-

forter promised by our Lord, John xiv. 13. Secondly,

that every Christian receives him as the Spirit of truth
(promised John xvi.) to teach all things : And, g. That

the anointing, mentioned in the first Epistle of St. John, -

abides in every Christian.)

26. * In reading of God's word, he profiteth most,
that is most inspired with the Holy Ghost.” Homily on
reading the Scripture, Part I. © |

«© Human and worldly wisdom is not needful to the
understanding of Scripture, but the revelation of the
Holy Ghost, who inspireth the true meaning unto

them that with humility and diligence search for it.“

Ibid. Part II. **

„% Make him know and seel, that there is no other
name under heaven given unto men, whereby we can
be saved.“

„If we feel our conscience at peace with God,
through remission of our sins, --all is of God.“ Homily
on Rogation Week, Part II. 1

If you feel such a faith in you, rejoice in it, and
let it be daily increasing by well-working.” Homily on
Faith. Part III. | | 9

„The faithful may feel wreught tranquility of conscience, the increale of faith and hope, with many other
graces of God,” Homily on the Sacrament. Part 1.

«© Godly men feel inwardly God's Holy Spirit, inflaming their hearts with love. Homily on certain places
of Scripture, Part I.

God give us grace, to know thele things, and to
feel them in our hearts ! this knowledge and feeling is

* John xiv, 16, + John xvi. 13. |
$ | | not

” - *
To Men of Reafon and Religion. 124

not of ourselves. Let us therefore meekly call upon
the bountiful Spirit, the Holy Ghost, to inspire us with
his 8 that we may be able to hear the

of God to our salvation, For without his lively inspi
ration, can we not so much as speak the name of
Mediator. No man can fay that Jesus is the Lord,
but by. the Holy Ghost.” Much less should we be
able to believe and know these great mysteries, that be
opened to us by Christ, © But we have received, saith
St. Paul, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit
which is of God; “ for this purpose, © that we may
know the things which are freely given to us of God.“
In the power of the Holy Ghost resteth all ability to
know God and to please him. It is he that purifieth
the mind by his secret working. He enlighteneth the
heart, to conceive worthy thoughts of almighty God.
He sitteth in the tongue of man, to stir him to speak
his honour, He only ministereth spiritual strength to
the powers of the soul and body. And if we have any
gift, whereby we may profit our neighbour, all s
wrought by this one and the felf-fame Spirit,” Homily
for Rogation Week, Part III.

27. Every proposition which I have any where advanced, concerning those operations of the Holy Ghost,
which I believe are common to all Christians in all ages,
is here clearly maintained by our own Church.

Under a full sense of this, I could not well understand for many years, how it was, that on the mentioning any of these great truths, even among men of education, the cry, immediately arose, an Enthuhast, an
Enthusiast! but I now plainly perceive, this is only
an old fallacy in a new shape. To object Enthusiasm
to any person or doctrine, is but a decent method of
begging the question, It generally spares the objector
the trouble of reasoning, and is a shorter and catier way
of carrying his cause,

For %, nay I affert that till a man receives the
Holy Ghost, he is without God in the world; that he
cannot know the things of God, unless God reveal them
unto him by his Spirit: no, nor have even one hoty,
or heavenly temper, without the infpiration of the --1 |
One,” Now should one who is conscious to 1

at |

- O_-- -- -- oe O_o
-- -- ------ OE -- 6 2 -- a --

-- ----

122 + A raxTHeR APPEAL, Part I.

that he has experienced none of these things, attempt
to confute these propositions, either from scripture or
antiquity, it might prove a difficult task, What then
shall he do? Why, cry out, © Enthusiasm ! Enthufiasm !”” and the work is done,

But what does he mean by Enthusiasm ? perhaps nothing at all: few have any distin idea of its meaning.
Perhaps, something very bad,” or, * something I
never experienced and do not understand.” Shall I
tell you then, what that * terrible something” is? I
believe, thinking men mean by Enthusiasm, a sort of
religious madness ; a false imagination of being inspired
by God : and by an Enthusiast, one that fancies himself under the influence of the Holy Ghost, when in
fact he is nt. nd |

Let him prove me guilty of this, who can, I will
tell you once more the. whole of my belief on thele
heads. And if any man will shew me (by arguments,
r hard names) what is wrong, I will thank God and

im. |

28, Every good gift is from God, and 1s given. to
man by the Holy Ghost, - By nature there is in us no
good thing. And there can be none, but so far, as it is
wrought in us by that good Spirit, Have we any true
knowledge of what is good ? this is not the result of
our natural understanding. * The natural man difcerneth not the things of the Spirit of God:“ fo that
we never can discern them, until God “ reveals them
unto us by his Spirit.” Reveals, that is, unveils, uncovers gives us to know what we did not know before.
Have we love? „ It is shed abroad in our hearts, by
the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.” He inspires,
breathes, infuses into our soul, what of ourselves we
could not have. Does our spirit rejoice in God our
Saviour? It is Foy in (or by) the Holy Ghost, Have
we true inward peace? It is the peace of God, wrought
in us by the same Spirit. Faith, peace, joy, love, are
all his fruits. And as we are. figuratively said, to see
the light of faith, so by a like figure of speech we are
said to feel, this peace and joy and love: that is, we
have an inward experience of them, which we cannot

find any fitter word to express,
The

| To Men of Reison and Retigion. , 12g
The reasons why in speaking of these things I use ,

those terms, (inspiration particularly) are, 1. Because
they are scriptural. 2. Because they are used by our
Church. g. Because know none better. The word
„ influence of the Holy Ghost,” Which I suppose you
use, is both a far strowger and a less natural term than
inspiration. It is far stronger ; even as far as flowing
into the soul **is a stronger expression than * breathing
upon it.” And less natural; as breathing bears a near
relation to spirit ; to which flowing in, has only a distant relation. \ 89851
« But you thought I had meant immediate inspiration.“ So I do, or I mean nothing at all. Not indeed such inspiration as is fine medizs, But all inspiration, though by means, is immediate. Suppose, for
instance, you are employed in private prayer, and God
pours his love into your heart. God then acts immediately on your foul : and the love of him which you
then experience, is as immediately breathed into you
by the Holy Ghost, as if you had lived 1700 years ago.
Change the term. Say, God then aslists you to love

him? Well, and is not this immediate assistance 7

Say, © His Spirit concurs with yours.“ You gain no
ground. It 1s immediate concurrence or none at all,
God, a Spirit, acts upon your spirit, Make it out any
otherwise if you can.

1 cannot conceive, how that harmless word, immediate, came to be fuch a bugbear in the world: © why,
I thought you meant such inspiration as the Apostles
had ; and such receiving the Holy Ghost as that was at
the day of Pentecost.” I do, in part: indeed I do not
mean, that Christians now receive the Holy Ghost, in
order to work miracles: but they do doubtless now re-
'ceive, yea, are filled with the Holy Ghojt, in order to
be filled with the fruits of that blessed Spirit. And he
inspires into all true believers now, a degree of the same
peace and joy and love, which the Apostles felt in
themsel ves on that day, when they were first filled with
the Holy Ghost,

29. I have now considered the most material objections I know, which have been lately made against the
great doctrines I teach, I have produced, so far as in

me

A ranrien APPEAL, Part I.

$24
me lay, the strength of those .objeftions, and then an-
-- on I hope, in the. spirit of meekness. And
now I trust it appears, that thesę doctrines are no other
than the doctrines of Jesus Chrift : that they are all
evidently contained in the word of God, by which
alone I desire to stand or fall; that they are fundawentally the fame with the doctrines of che Church of
England, of which I do, and ever did Profess myself a
Member.
ZBut there remains one objeftion, which though
relating to the head of doctrine, yet is independent
on all that went before, And that is, ® Yau cannot
agree in your doctrines yourselves. One holds
one thing and one another, r. Whitfield anathematizes Mr, Wesley; and Mr. Wesley anathematizes Mr.
Whitfield, And yet each pretends to be led by the
Holy Ghost, by the mfallible Spirit of God! Every
reasonable man must conclude from hence, that neither
one nor the other is led by that Spirit.“
F need not say, how continually this has been urged,
both in common conversation and from the press: (I
am grieved to add, and from the pulpit too; for if the
argument were good, it would overturn the Bible.)
Nor, how great stress has been continually laid upon
it: whoever proposes it, proposes it as demonstration,
and generally claps his wings, as bevy quite assured, it
will admit of no answer. o& S
And indeed I am in doubt, whether it does admit
(L am sure, it does not require) any other answer, than
that coarse one of the countryman to the Romish
Champion, Bellarmine, thou liest.“ For every
proposition contained herein, is grossly, shamelessly
false. 1. © You cannot agree in your doctrines amon
yourselves” ------ Who told you so? All our fundamental doctrines, I have recited above. And in every
one of these we do, and have agreed for several years.
In these, we hold one and the same thing. In smaller
23 each of us thinks, and lets think. 2. Mr,
hitefield anathematizes Mr. Wesley.“ Another
shameless untruth. Let any one read what Mr. Whitefield wrote, even in the heat of controversy, and he
will be convinced af the contrary, g. And Mr.
Wesley

To Men of Neason and Religion. s
Weftey znathemiatizes Mr. Whitefield.” This is equall
false and scandalous, ' 1 reverence” Mr. Whitefiel
both as à child of God, and true Minister of Jesus
Christ. 4. And yet each pteterids to be Ted'by the
Holy Ghoft, by the mfallible Spirit of God.” Not in
our private opinions: not does either of us pretend to
be any farther led by the Spirit of God, than every
christian must pretend to be, unless he will deny the
Bible. For only as many as are led by the Spirit of God,
are the Sons of God. Therefore, if you do not pretend to be led by him too, yea, if it be not so va
you are none of quis,

And now, what is become of your gemortbraddn #
Leave it to the carmen and porters its just proprietors
to the zealous apple-women that ery after me in the
street, © This is he that rails at the Whole Dutyful of
Man,” But let every one that pretends to ann or
reason, be ashamed to mention it any more.

30. The first imferertce, eafily deduced from whitt
has been faid, is, That we are not false Prophets.“
In one sense of the word, we are no Prophets at all;
for we do not foretel things to come, But in another
(wherem every Minister is a Prophet) we are. For
we do speak in the name of God. Now a false Prophet (in this sense of the word) 15 one, who declares ay
the Will of God, what is not fo. But we declare (as
has been shewn at large) nothing elfe as the Will of

Goa, but what 1s evidently contamed in his written

word, as explained by our own church. Therefore,
unless you can prove the Bible to be a false book, vo
cannot possibly prove us to be false Prophets.

The dert Which is generally cited on this ceo! is
Matthew, vii. ver. 15. But how unhappily chosen?
In the receding chapters, our Lord had been describing
that righteousness which exceeds the rightebusness of
the Scribes andÞPharisees, and without which we cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven: even the life of
God in the foul ; holiness of Heart, producing all holinefs'6f conver fations In this, he closes that rule which
lums up..the whole with those solemn w ords, „Enter
ye mat Fe strait gate: (such indeed is chat f universal line For wide is the gate, and broad is the

M way

126 A rarTHEeR APPEAL, Part J.

way that leadeth to destruRtion,” The gate of hell is
wide as the whole earth; the way of unholiness is broad
as the great deep. And many there be which go in
thereat; yea, and excuse themselves in so doing.
« Because straight is the gate and narrow the way that
leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.” It
follows, ** Beware of false Prophets; of those who
| speak as from God, what God hath not spoken ; those
who shew you any other way to life, than that which
I have now shewn. So that the false Prophets, here
spoken of, are those who point out any other way to
heaven than this; who teach men to find a wider gate,
a hroader way, than that described in the foregoing
chapters. But it has been abundantly shewn, that we
do not. Therefore (whatever we are beside) we are
not false Prophets.
Neither are we (as has been frequently and vehemently affirmed) deceivers of the people. If we teach
the truth as it is in Jesus, if we speak as the oracles of
God, it follows, that we do not deceive those that hear,
though they should believe whatever we speak. Let
God be true and every man a liar : every man that contradicts his truth. But he will be justified in his saying,
and clear when he is judged.
One thing more I infer, © That we are not Enthufiasts,” This accusation has been confidered at large:
and the main arguments hitherto brought to support it,
have been weighed in the balance and found wanting :
particularly this, * That none but Enthusiasts suppose
either that * promise of the Comforter, or the + witness
of the Spirit, or | that unutterable prayer, or 5 the
Unction from the Holy One, to belong, in common, to
all christians,” O my Lord, how deeply have you
condemned the generation of God's children! Whom
have you. represented as rank, dreaming Enthusiasts ?
As either, deluded or designing men? Not only Bishop
Pearson, a man hitherto accounted both sound in heart,
and of good understanding ; but likewise Archbishop
Cranmer, Bishop Ridley, Bishop Latimer, Bishop

2 John iv. 16. 26. xvi. 43. I Rom. viii, 153 16.
Rom, viu, 26, 27. 1 John ii. 20. 2.
y ' 5 V, Hooper;

|

To Men of Reason and Religion. 127
Hooper; and all the venerable compilers of our Liturgy and 'Homilies : all the members of both the Houles
of Convocation, by whom they were revised and apYroved : yea, King Edward, and all his Lords and
Cominions together, by whole authority they were
established! And, with these modern Enthusiasts,
Origen, Chrysostom and Athanasius are comprehended
in the same censure ! "LL
I grant, a Deist might rank both us and them, in th
number of religious madmen : nay, ought so to do, on
his supposition, that the gospel is but a Cunningly-devised Fable. And on this ground, some of them have
done so in fact. One of them was asking me, some years
since, What! are you one of the Knight-Errants P
How, T'pray, got Quixotism into your head? You
want nothing : you have a good provision for life ; and
are in a way of preferment ; and must you leave all, to
hght windmills : to convert savages in America?” I
could only reply, ** Sir, if the Bible is a lie, I am as
very a madman as you can conceive, But if it be true,
Jam in my senses. I am neither madman nor Enthuflast,” For there is no man who hath left father or
mother, or wife, or house, or land for the gospel's fake;
but he shall receive an hundred fold, in this world,
--_ persecution, and in the world to come, eternal
e.“ F 3 ;
Nominal, outside christians too, men of form may
pass the fame judgment. For we give up all our pretensions to what they account happiness, for what they
(with the Deists) believe to be a mere dream. We expet, therefore, to pass for Enthusiasts with these also.
But wisdom is justified of all her children.
32. I cannot conclude this head without one obvious remark, Suppose we really were Enthusiasts :
suppose our doctrines were false and unsupported either
by Reason, Scripture or Authority: then, why hath
not some- one, who is a wise man, and endued with
knowledge among you, attempted, at least, to shew us
our fault in love nd meekness of wisdom ? © Brethren,
if ye have” bit zeal in your hearts, your wisdom
descendeth not from above. The wisdom that is from
above, is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be intreated,
-- M 2 full

128 A raxzTuer APPEAL, Part I.

full of mexcy or pity» Does this spirit a r in
hngle Trag, of rad those, which 1555 3 apÞ blished
against us? Is there one Writer that has NT us
m love ? Bring it to a single point. Love hopeth all
things. If you had loved us in any degree, you would
bave hoped, that God would some time give us the
knowledge of his truth. But where shall we find even
this lender instance of love ? Has not every one who
bas wrote at all (I do not remember so much as one
exception) treated us as incorrigible? Brethren, how
is this? Why do ye labour to teach us an evil lesson
against yourselves? O may God never suffer W to
deab with yau, ye have gant W. Hel n ob

VI. 1. Before I enter upon the Pre.” TT of
those objettions, which have been made to the manner
of our preaching, I believe it may be satisfactory to
some readers if I relate how I began to provels4 in n
manner.

I was ordained Deacon in 1726, 5 Priest, i in. the
year following. But it was many years after this, befare I was convinced of the great truths above recited,
During all that time I was utterly ignorant, of the natare and condition of justification. Sometimes I confounded it with sanctificatiom (particularly When I was
in Georgia.) At other times I had some confuled- notion about the for givenels of sins: but then 1 took it
for granted, the time of this must be, either the hour
of death, or the day of judgment.

4 was equally ignorant of the nature of dving faith ;
apprchending it to mean no more, than a © Firm assent
to all the propaktiqns contained-in the Old and New
Teftament.'*:

2. As soon as, by the great blessing of God, I had a
clearer view of these. things, I began to declare them
to others also. I believed, and therefore 1 spake.
Wherever I was now. defired to preach, salvation by
faith was my only theme. My constant subjetts were,
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be
saved. Him hath God exalted to be a Prince and a
Saviour, to give repentance and remission of fins.”

* I explained + _ 5 with all my os

To Men of Resson and Religion. 129

both in every Church where I was asked to preach,
and occasionally in the Religious Societies of don
and; Westminster ;:to some or other of which I was
continually pressed to 895 by the Stewards: or other.
Members of them.

Things were in this posture, -- Twas told, « I
must preach no more in this, and this, and another
Church: the reason was usually added; without 1e.
serve, 5 Because you-preach such doctrine.” So much
the more those who could not hear me there, flocked.
together when I was at any of the Societies; where 1
spoke more or less, though with much inconvenience, -
to as many as the room I was in would contain.

g. But after a time, finding those rooms could not
contain a tenth part of the people that were earnest to
hear, I determined to do the same thing in England,
which I had often done in a warmer climate: namely,
when the house would not contain the congregation to
preach in open air. This I accordingly did, first at
Bristol, where the Society- rooms were exceeding {mall,
and at Kingswood, where we had no room at all ; after.
wards in or near London. | |

And I. cannot fay, I have ever seen a more awful
sight, than when on Rose-Green, or the top of Hannam-Mount, some thousands of people were calmly
Joined together in solemn waiting upon God, While

* They stood and under open air ador'd

The God who made both air, earth, heavery
and sky.“

And whether they were listening to his word, With
attention {till as night; or were lifting up their voice
in praise, as the sound of many waters; many a time
have Ii been constrained to say in my heart, * How
dreadfyl is this place!“ this also is no other than (he.
House of God this is the Gate of Heaven |

Be pleased to observe. 1. That I was forbidden,
by a general conlent, to preach in any Church (been
not by any judicial sentence) “for preaching iuch doctine,” This. was the open, avowed cause: there Was
at that time no other, either real or pretended ; 2. That
J had no dere or design to preach in the open air, till
long after this prohibitzon ; 3. Fhat when I did, as it

M 3 Was

---- -- --

r -- -- ----

130 A raerues APPEAL, Part J.

was no matter of choice, so neither of premeditation.
There was no scheme at alk previously! formed, which
was to be supported thereby; nor had E any other end
in view than this, to save ab many souls-as I u. 4
Field. preaching was therefore a sudden expedient, a thing

submitted to, rather than chosery 5 and therefore submit-

ted to, because I thought preaching even thus, better

than not preaching at all: ' First, in regard to my own

foul, because, a dispensation of the gospel committed to me, 1 did not dare, not to preach the gospel;

Secondly, in regard to the fouls of others, whom I every

Where saw, seeking death in the error of their life,
4. But the Author of the Observations and of the Cafe

of the Methodists braefty: stated,” mare Particularly in. the

Point ef fietd-preaching, thinks field-preaching wor se than

1 at all, “ because it is legal.

Your Argument, in form, runs thus:
- © That preaching which is contrary to the hws bf
che land, is worse than not preaching at all:

Ee field preaching is contrary to the hows of the
Therefore, it is worse than not preaching at-all,”
The first: proposition is not self-evident, nor indeed

umversally true. For the preaching” of all the primi-

tive: Christians was contrary to the whole tenor of the

Roman laws; the worstap' of their devil gods being

established by the strongest} laws then in being. Nor

is it ever true, but on {uppelition, that the preaching
in question 1s an indifferent thing.

ut waving this, I deny the second p proposition ; 1 7
as that Jeld-preaching i is contra che aws of our

-- o prove which, you begin thus, It does not appear, that any of the Preachers among the Methodists, -
have qualified the:nfelves and the places of their asseanbling, according to the Att of Toleration.“

I answer, 1. That act grants toleration to those who
dissent from the established Church, But we do not
dissent from it. ere we cannot make use of that
act. 2. That act exempts Dissenters from penalties
rn on e breach of Ig _ *

e.

Te Men of Reasen and Religion, 13
ve are not eonseious of breaking any law at an. Therefore we need not take use of it.

In the next section you say, They heve brite

through alF these provisions, in open defiance of government: and have met not orily in houses, but in the
frefds, notwithstanding the statute (22. Car. II. c. 1. 1.
whict' forbids this by name.“

J answer, 1. We do nothing in ae of
ment, We reverence Magistrates, as the ministers 1
God. 2. Although we have met im the fields, yet we
do not coriceive that statute at all affefts us: not only
because that act points wholly at Dissenters; whereas
we are members of the established Church; but also:
because (they are your own words} it was evidently i in
tended to suppress and prevent sedition: whereas no
sedition, nor any the least approach thereto, car witty
any colour be laid to our charge.

In your gd section you affirm, © That the aft of
Toleration itself cannot secure us in field-preachmg,
from the penalties of former laws,” We have no defire it should; as not apprehending ourselves to be
condemned by any former law whatever. Nor does
what you add, © That the act of Toleration forbids any
assembly of persons dissenting from the Church of England, to Goh with the doors locked,“ affect as at all;
because we do not dissent from it.

In the case of the Methodists briefly stated, your
art observation is, The act of Toleration leaves them
liable to the penalties of several statutes made against
unlawful assemblies.““ |

I suppose then these several statutes fpectfy what
those-unlawful assemblies are; and whether unlawful,
as being condemned by previous laws, or made unlawyful by those starutes.

And it {tilt remains to be proved, that our assemblies
are unlawful, in one or other of these senses.

You next observe, that, * the dissenters of all denominations, qualify themselves: according to the act of
Toleration; otherwise, they are liable to the penalties
of all the laws recited in this act.

F anfwer, as before, all this strikes wide It- relates.
wholly. to, if « persons dissenting from the ay; 120

ut

-

132 A raxrntnr. APPEAL, Part I.

But, we are not the men. We do not dissent from
the Church. Whoever ons it, 1 him to the
roof. 239] 7 rt ul

J You go on, 10 One of those laws so, -- (viz. 422.
Car. II. c. 1. ) is that Which forbids n by,
name; and was evidently intended, not only to suppress,

but also to prevent sedition. As the title of the at
declares, _ as the preamble expresses it, to provide farther and more speedy remedies against it.“

Was this then, in your own judgment, the evident.
intention. of that act, viz. To provide remedies against.
sedition? Does the very title of the act declare this ?
And the preamble also exprels i it? With what justice
then, with what, ingenuity or candor, with what shadow of truth or reason, can any man cite this act against

us? Whom you yourlelf no more suspect of a design to
raise, sedition (I appeal to your own conscience in, the

fight of God) than of a design to blow up the city of

London!

6. Hitherto therefore it hath not been made to apear, that field-preaching is contrary to any law 5
8 However, It is dangerous.” This you.
strongly insist on. It may be attended with mil.
chievous consequences. It may give advantages to the
enemies of the establisned government. It is big with
mischief.” (Observations, sect. I. and II.) f

With what mischief? Why, evil-minded men, by
meeting together in the fields, under pretence of religion, may raise riots and tumults; or by meeting secretly, may carry on private cabals against the slate,”

(Cafe of the Methodists, p. 2.)

« And if the Methodists themselves are a harmless
and loyal people, it is nothing to the point in hand.
For difloyal and seditious persons, may ule such an opportunity of getting together, in order to execute ariy
private design. Mr. Whitefield says, 30, 50 or 80,000.
have attended his preaching at once. Now, 1. He
cannot know one tenth part of such a congregation.
2. All people may come and carry on what designs
they will: therefore 3. This is a great opportunit
put, into the hands 6-11 seclitious Pasons to raile a.
e 1111 % N

2 e With

To Men of Reason and Religion. 13g

% With what safety to the public these ficld-preach.
ings may be continued, let the world judge.” Vue

May 1 peak without e d I cannot think, you
are in earnest. You do not mean what. you say. Do
you believe Mr. Whitefield had eighty thousand, hearers
at once? No more than you believe he had eight
million g. Is not all. this talk of danger, mere finesse ?
Thrown in purely ad movendum inuidiam ? Vou know
governments generally are suspicious; especialli in time
of war : and therefore. apply, 3s you, suppale, -to thei
weak side; in hopes, if pollible to deliver, over these
hereticks to the secular arm. However, 1 will answery
as if you, spoke from Yaur heut. For J la dan,
. you are not.

First, The . cannot know, a 1 part ol

is congregation.” Let us come to the present state of
things. The largest congregations thai no attend the
preaching of any Methodist, are those (God be merciful
to me I) that attend mine. And cannot I know a tenth
art of one of these congregations, either at Bristol,
e Newcastle, or London? As strange as it
may seem, I generally know two thirds of the congreoye in . place even on Sunday cvennig: and
nine in ten of those who; attend at most other times.
. „„ people may come and carry on what desigus
they will.“ Not so. All field-preaching is now in
the open day. And were only ten persons, to come to
luch an. ent with arms, it would soon be enquired,
with what design, they came. This is therefore; 3. No
great opportunity put into the hands of seditious persons to raise disturbances. And if ever any disturbanco
has been raised, it was quite of another kind.

The public then is entirely safe, if it be in no > other
danger than arises from field-preaching.

7. There is one other sentence. belonging to the head,
in the eighth section of the Observations. ** The relig10us societies, you say, in London and Westmmiter,

r many years past, have received no discouragements,
but on the contrary have been countenanced and encouraged both by Bishops and Clergy.” How is this?
Ave FO then; 6 qualified themselves and the *
|
|
|
|
|
|
|

places, This is undoubtedly true.

134 A raxTits APPEAL, Part I.
of their assembling according to the att of Toleration p
Have they © embraced the protettion which "that" act

might give them, in case they complied with the conditions of it? If not, are they not all -* liable to the

penalties of the several statutes made before that time

-- 4
13 vY

against unlawful assemblies ?
How can they escape ? Habe they quialifec
themselves for holding these separate assemblies, according to the tenor of that act ? . Have then the feveral members thereof taken the oaths to the government?”
And are the Doors of the places'Wherein' they meet,
always open àt the time of such meeting? I presume, you know they are not; and that neither the
persons nor places are so qualified ds that act diretts.
How then come © the Bishops and Clergy, to
countenance and encourage unlawful afsemblies? 1
it be said, © they meet in a private, inoffensive way;
that is nothing to the point in hand. If those meetings
are unlawful in themselves, - all their inoffenfivenels
will not make them lawful. „O, but they behave
with modesty and decency.” Very well; but the law!
What is that to the law? There can be no solid defence
but this: they are not dissenters from the Church;
therefore they cannot use, and they do not need the
act of Toleration. And their meetings are not seditious;
therefore the statute against seditious meetings does not
affect them. |
The application is obvious. If our meetings are
illegal, fo are theirs also. But if this plea be good (as
doubt less it is) in one case, it is good in the other also.
9. You propole another objection to our manner of
preaching; in the second part of the Observations, ' The
N of it 71 will mpfer and answer. as briefly as
can 1
They run | wh and d m mare to place and
from county to county: that is, ney Fn in several
draw after
them confused multitudes of people: 4 is, many
come to hear them.“ This is true also. But they
would do well to remember, God is not the author of
consusion or of tumult, but of peace.” I trust: we do;
nor is there any confusion” or tumult aj all, in our
largest

To Men of Reason and Religion. 135

largest congregations: unless at some rare times when the
sons of Babel mois therewith, on purpose to disturb the
peaceable worshippers of Gd.

* But our Church has provided against this preaching up and down, in the ordination of a Priest, by expressly limiting the exercise of the powers then conferred upon him, to the congregation where he shall be
lawfully appointed thereunto,”” _ i '

I 0 Jad 1. Your argument proves, too much, If
it be allowed just as you propole it, it proves, that no
Priest has authority, either to preach or minister the
sacraments, in any other than his own congregation. . ..

2. Had the powers conferred been so limitted when
I was ordained Priest, my ordination would have signified just nothing. For I was not appointed to any
congregation at all: but was ordained as a member of
that © College of Divines,”” (so our statutes express it)
% founded to overturn all heresies, and defend the Catholic Faith.“ .

3. For many years after I was ordained Priest, this
limitation was never heard of. I heard not one syllable
of it, by way of objection, to my preaching up and
down, in Oxford or London, or the parts adjacent, in
Gloucestershire, or Worcestershire ; in Lancashire,
Yorkshire or Lincolnshire. Nor did the strictest Diciplinarian scruple suffering me to exercise those powers
wherever I came, X

4. And in fat, Is it not universally allowed, that
every Priest, as such, has a power, in virtue of his ordination, either to preach or administer the sacrament,
in any congregation, wherever the Rector or, Curate
desires his [et e ? Does not every one then see
through this thin pretence ? OTE KY ob N

10. The Bishops, and Universities indeed have
Power to grant Licences to Itinerants. But the Church

as provided in that case ; they are not to preach in
any church (Canon 50) till they shew their Licence.“

The Church has well provided in that case. But
what has that case to do with the case of common
Clergymen ? Only so much, as: to shew, how grolsly
this Canon has been abused : at Islington in particular,
where the Churchwardens were instructed to *

„ .

236 A raxritex APPEAL, Part I.

by main force, the Priest whom the Vicar Himself had
appointed; from'preaching, and to quote 'this' Canon;
---- as you plainly shew, belongs to quite another
G4 2007 Jiotegr 13D 009 Et TIO (1D de |
3 15 the note you add, « Mr. Wefley being afked, by
5 he preached, replied; By tlie author
of Jefus Christ, conveyed to me by the (now) Archbishop of Canterbury, when he laid his hands upon me
and said, Take thou Authority to preach, the Gospel,
In this reply he thought fit, for a plain reason, to leave
out this latter patt of the Commission : for that would
have shewn his reader, the restraint and limitation, under which the exercise of the powet is granted.“ Nay,
1 did not print the latter part of the words, for a plainer
reason, because I did not speak them. And I did not
speak them then, becaufe they did not come into my
mind. Though probably if they had, I should not
have spoken them: it being my only concern, to anfwer the question proposed, in as few words as I could.
But before those words, which you suppole to imply
such a restraint, as would condemn all the Bifhops and
Clergy in the nation, were those spoken without any
restraint or limitation at all, which | apprehend to convey an indelible character, . Receive the Holy Ghost,
for the office and work of a Priest m the church of
God, now committed unto thee, by the imposition of
our hands, Whose sins thou dost forgive, they are forgiven, and whose fins thou dost retain, they are retained,
And be thou a faithful dispenser of the word of God,
and of his holy Sacraments, in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.”
Lou proceed, In the same Journal he declares,
That he looks upon all the world as his parish, and explains his meaning as follows; © In whatever part of it
1 am, I judge it meet, right, and my bounden duty, to
declare unto all that are willing to hear, the glad tidings
of salvation, This is the work which I know God
hath called me to.” Namely, by the laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery : which directs me how to obey
that general command, „While we have time, let us
do good unto all men.“ , 11999 e Bork «

">.

11. Von

To Men of Reason and Religion. 137
11. You object farther, “ That the Methodists do

not observe the Rubric before the Communion Service;
which dire&s, so many as desire to partake of the holy
Communion, to signify their names to the Curate the
day before.” What Curate desires they should ?
Whenever any Minister will give but one week's notice of this, I undertake, all that have any relation to
me, shall signify their names within the time appointed.

You objett allo, that they break through the twentyeighth Canon, which requires, “ That if strangers come
to any church from other parishes, they should be res
mitted to their own churches, there to receive the
Communion with their neigbours.””

But what if there be no Communion there? Then
this Canon does not touch the cafe, nor does any one
break it, by coming to another church purely becaule
there is no Communion at his own.

As to your next advice, To have a greater regard
to the rules and orders of the church.” I cannot, for
I now regard them, next to the word of Cod. And
as to your last, * To renounce Communion with the
Church,” I dare not, Nay, but let them thrust us
out. We will not leave the ship : if you cast us out
of it, then our Lord will take us up.

12. To the same head may be referred the objection
some time urged, by a friendly and candid man, viz.
„That it was unlawful to use extemporary prayer, because there was a Canon against it.“

It was not quite clear to me, that the Canon he
cited was against extemporary prayer. But supposing
it were, my plain answer would be, That Canon I
dare not obey : because the law of man binds only so
far as is consistent with the word of God.“ |

The fame person objected, my not obeying the
Bishops and Governors of the Church. I answer, I
both do and will obey them, in whatsoever I can with
a clear conscience. So that there is no just ground for
that charge, that I despise either the Rules or the Governors of the Church. I obey them in all things
where I do not apprehend there is some particular law }_
of God to the contrary. Even in that case, J shew all
the deference I can; I endeavour to act as inoffensively

N as

138 A fFakTutR APPEAL, Part I.

as possible: and am ready to submit to any penalty,
which can by law be inflicted upon me. Would to
God every Minister and member of the Church, were
herein altogether as I am!

VII. 1. I have been considering the chief objections
that have lately been urged against the Do&rines I teach.
The main arguments brought against this manner of
teaching, have been considered also, It remains, to
examine the most current objections, concerning the
effects of this teaching. h
Many affirm, *© That it does abundance of hurt;
that it has had very bad effects; insomuch that if any
good at all has been done, yet it bears no proportion to
the evil.“

But come to particulars, . First then, you are disturbers of the public peace.“ "HS

What, do we either teach or raise sedition ? Do we
speak evil of the Ruler of our people? Or do we stir
them up against any of those that are put in authority
under him? Do we directly or indirectly promote
faction, mutiny or rebellion ? I have not found any
man in his senses yet, that would affirm this.

« But it is plain, peace is broke and disturbances do
arise, in consequence of your preaching.” I grant it,
But what would you infer? Have you never read the
Bible? Have you not read, that the Prince of Peace
himself was, in this sense, a disturber of the public
peace? When he came into Jerusalem (Matt. xxi. 10.)
all the city was moved, (ichen) shaken as with an
earthquake. And the disturbance arose higher and
higher, till the whole multitude cried out together,
« Away with him, away with him ; crucify him, crucify him : and Pilate gave sentence it should be done.”
Such another disturber of the public peace, was that
Stephen, even from the time he began disputing with
the Libertines and Cyrenians, till the people stopped
their ears, and ran upon him with one accord, and cast
him out of the city and stoned him. Such disturbers
of the peace were all those ringleaders of the sect of the
Nazarenes, (commonly called Apostles) who wherever
they came, turned the world upside down, And hos

To Men of Reason and Religion. 139

all the rest, that Paul of Tarsus, who occasioned fo
much disturbance at Damascus, (Acts ix.) at Antioch
in Pisidia (chap. x11.) at Iconium (chap. xiv.) at Lystra
(ver. 19.) at Philippi (chap. xvi.) at Thessalonica (chap:
xvii.) and particularly at Ephesus. The consequence
of his preaching there was, That © the whole city was
filled with confusion. And they all ran together with
one accord, some crying one thing, some another: inalmuch as the greater part of them knew not wherefore
they were come together.”

2. And can we expett it to be any otherwise now ?
Although what we preach 15 the gospel of peace, yet
if you will violently and illegally hinder our preaching,
must not this create disturbance? But observe, the
disturbance begins on your part. All is peace, till you
raise that disturbance. And then you very modestly

impute it to us, and lay your own riot at our door!
gut of all this, our Lord hath told us before. Think
not that I am come to fend peace upon earth: that
this will be the immediate effect, wherever my gospel is
3 with power. I am not come to send peace,
ut a sword: this (so far as the wisdom of God permits,
by whom the hairs of your head are all numbered) will
be the first consequence of my coming, whenever my
word turns finners from darkness to light, from the
power of Satan unto God, |

I would wish all you who see this Scripture fulfilled,
by disturbance following the preaching the gospel, to
remember the behaviour of that wise Magistrate at
Ephesus on the like occasion. He did not lay the difturbance to the Preacher's charge, but beckoned to themultitude and said, © Ye men of Ephesus--Ye ought to
be quiet, and to do nothing rashly, For ye have
brought these men, who are neither robbers of temples,
nor yet blasphemers of your goddels :” (not convicted of
any such notorious crime, as can at all excuse this lawless violence.) “ But if Demetrius hath a matter against
any, the Law 1s open, and there are Deputies {or Proconsuls, capable of hearing and deciding the cause) let
them implead one another. But if ye enquire any thing
concerning other things, it shall be determined in a lawful Assembly,”

N 2 2. But

-- -- --

--__-- -- --------_

-- --
!-- -- -- -- ----

Ay ------ - -- --
-- -- -- ̇ e --+[0] . m 1 .wtc 0-«‚--iL
-------- ----
_ - -

--

--

s ---- --
ths - - -- --
-- _-- KKK ̇ a ----ñ ͤ--üdʒʃzʃz w a-- kækæ ----Uö-- -- -- 7 -- ̇ß -- --
” - i = * 2 -- _--_ -- -- ”

o
-- -- -- --

-- -- --
----

- -- -- -

- -- -

|
i

140 A raxtTutr APPEAL, Part J.

3. But you create divisions in private families.“
Accidentally, we do. For instance, suppose an entire
family to have the form, but not the power of godliness; or to have neither the form nor the power; in
cither cale, they may in some sort agree together. But
iuppole, when these hear the plain word of God, one
or two of them are convinced, „This is the truth.
And I have been all this time in the broad way that
leadeth to destruttion : ** these then will begin to mourn
after God ; while the rest remain as they were, Will
they not therefore of consequence divide, and form
themselves into separate parties? Must it not be so, in
the very nature of things? And how exactly docs
this agree with the words of our Lord? “ Suppolc
ye that I came to send peace upon earth? I tell you
nay: but rather division, For from henceforth there
shall be five divided in one houle, three against two,
and two against three, The father shall be divided

" against the jon, and the son against the father: the mo-

ther against her daughter, and the daughter against the

mother; the mother-in-law against the daughter-in-law,

and the daughter-in-law against the mother-in-law,
Luke xu. 51, 52, 53.) And the foes of a man, shall

they of his own houschold,“ (Matt. x. 36.)

Thus it was from the very beginning. For is it to
be fupposed, that a heathen parent, would long endure
a christian child? Or that a heathen husband would
agree with a chiistian wife? Unlels either the believing wife could' gain her huibana ; or the unbelieving
husband prevailed on the wife to renounce her way of
worshipping God: at least, unless she would obey him
in going no more to those Societies or Conventicles,
(irawpias) as they termed the Christian Assemblies,

4. Do you think now, I have an eye to your case?
Doubtless I have; for I do not fight as one that beateth
the air. Why have not I a right to hinder my own
wife or child, from going to a Conventicle? And is
it not the duty of wives to obey their husbands? And
of children to obey their parents?” Only set the case
seventeen hundred years back, and your own conlcience gives you the answer, What would St. Paul have
faid to one whose husband forbade her, to follow this

| way

To Men of Reason and Religion. 141

way any more? What direction would our Saviour
have given to him whose father enjoined him, not to
hear the gospel? His words are extant still, “ He
that loveth father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me. And he that loveth son or daughter more
than me, is not worthy of me, (Matt. x. 37, 38.)
Nay more, If any man cometh to me, and hateth not
(in comparison of me) his father and mother and wife
and children, yea and his own life, he cannot be my
disciple.” (Luke xiv. 26.)

* O, but this is not a parallel case, For they were
Heathens ; but I am a Christian.” _ A Christian! Are
you fo? Do you understand the word? Do you
know what a Christian is? If you are a Christian, you
have the mind that was in Christ; and you so walk as
he allo walked. You are holy as he is holy both in
heart, and in all manner of conversation, Have you
then the mind that was in Christ? And do you walk
as Christ walked? Are you inwardly and outwardly
holy? I fear, not even outwardly. No; you live
in known sin. Alas! How then are you a Christian ?
What a railer, a Christian? A common {wearer, a
Christian ? A sabbath-breaker, a Christian ? A drunkard or whoremwnger, a Christian ? Thou art a Heathen
barefaced ; the wrath of God is on thy head, and the
curse of God upon thy back. Thy camnation slumbereth not. By reason of such Christians it is that the.
holy name of Christ is blasphemed. Such as thou they
ere, that cause the very savages in the Indian woods to
cry out, * Christian much drunk, Christian beat men,
Christian tell lies, Devil-Christian ! Me no Christian.”

And so thou wilt direct thy wife and children in the
way of salvation !----Woe unto thee, thou DevilChristian! Woe unto thee, thou blind leader of the
blind! What wilt thou make them? Two-fold more
the children of hell than thyself ? Be ashamed,
Blush, if thou canst blush. Hide thy face. Lay thee
in the dust, Out of the deep cry unto God, if haply
he may hear thy voice. Instantly smite upon thy
breast, Who knoweth but God may take thee out of
the belly of hell ?

N 3 5. But

---- -- -- -- ---- *
-- -- -- * =
-

142 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part I.

5. © But you are not one of these. You fear God,
and labour to have a conscience void of offence. And
it 15 from a principle of conscience, that you restrain
your wife or children from hearing false doctrine. But
how do you know it is false doctrine ? Have you heard
for yourself? Or, if you have not heard, have you
carefully read what we occasionally answered for ourselves? A man of conscience cannot condemn any
one unheard, This is not common humanity. Nor
will he refrain from hearing what may be the truth,
for no better reason than fear of his reputation. Pray
observe, I do not fay, every man (or any man) is obliged in conscience to hear us. But I do say, every
man in England who c ndemns us, is obliged to hear
us first. This is only common justice, such as is not
denied to a thief or a murderer. Take your choice
therefore. Either hear us, or condemn us not. Either
ipeak nothing at all, or hear before you speak.

But suppose you have both read and heard more
than you liked? Did you read and hear fairly? Was
not you loaded with prejudice? Did you not read or
hear, expecting no good; perhaps desiring to find fault?
If fo, what wonder you judge as you doi? What a poor
mock-trial is this? You had decided the cause in your
own breast, before you heard one word of the evidence.
And still do you talk of acting out of conscience? Yea,
a conscience void of offence ?

We will put the case farther yet. Suppose your
censure was just, and this was actually false doctrine.
Still every one must give an account of himself to God:
and you cannot force the conscience of any one, You
cannot compel another, to see as you see. You ought
not to attempt it. Reason and persuasion are the only
weapons you ought to use, even toward your own wife
and children. Nay, and it is impossible to starve them
into conviction, or to beat even truth into their head.
'Y ou may destroy them, in this way, but cannot convert
them. Remember what our own Poet has said,

By force beasts aft and are by force restrain'd ;
The human mind by gentle means is gain'd.
Thou canst not take, what I refuse to yield :
Nor reap the harvest, tho' thou ipoilst the field.“
6, Every

To Men of Reason and Religion. 143

6. Every reasonable man is convinced of this. And
perhaps you do not concern yourself so much about the
doctrine, but the mischief that is done. How many

oor families are starved, ruined, brought to beggary!
By what ? Not by contributing a penny a week (the
usual contribution in our Societies) and letting that
alone, when they please, when there is any shadow of
reason to suppose they cannot afford it. You will not
| fay, any are brought to beggary by this. Not by gifts
to me: for I receive none; save (sometimes) the food
I eat. And public collections are nothing to me. That
it may evidently appear they are not, when any such
collection is made, to clothe the poor, or for any other

determinate purpose, the money is both received and

expended before many witnesses, without ever going
through my hands at all. And then likewise all possible regard is had, to the circumstances of those who
contribute any thing. And they are told over and
over, if there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man hath, |

But where are all these families that have been brought
to beggary? How 1s it that none of them 1s forth
coming? Are they all out of town? Then indeed I
am in no danger of clearing mylelf from their indictment. It is the easiest thing of a thousand, for one at
Newcastle to say, that I have beggared him and all his
kindred. If one of the long-bearded men on Tynebridge, were to say so just now, I could not readily
confute him, But why will not you bring a few of
these to tell me so to my face? I have not found one
that would do this yet. They pray, you would have
them excused,

I remember a man coming to me with a doleful coun.
tenance, putting himself into many lamentable postures,
gaping as wide as he could, and pointing to his mouth,
as who would say, “he could not speak.” I enquired
of his companion, what was the matter? And was informed, © he had fallen into the hands of Turks, who
had used him in a barbarous manner, and cut out his
tongue by the roots.” I believed him. But when the
man had had a chearfal cup, he could find his tongue
as well as another, I reflected, how is it that I 8

*

144 | A rann APPEAL, Part I.

so readily believe that tale? The answer was easy,
«© Because it was told of a Turk.” My friend, take
knowledge of your own case. If you had not first
took me for a Turk, or something. equally bad, you
could not so readily, have believed that tale!

7. But can it be, that there is no ground at all
for a report, which is in every ones mouth? I will
simply tell you, all the ground which I can conceive.
I believe many of those who attend on my ministry,
have less of this world's goods than they had before, or
at least, might have had, if they did not attend it.
This fact I allow; and it may be eafily accounted for,
in one or other of the following ways.

First, I frequently preach on such texts as thele :
© having food and raiment, let us be content therewith.
They who desire to be rich fall into temptation and a
snare, and many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
men in destruction and perdition. Lay not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth, where the rust and
moth doth corrupt, and where thieves break through
and steal. But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither rust nor moth doth corrupt, and
where thieves do not break through and steal.”

Now should any of those who are labouring by all
possible means, to lay up treasure upon earth, feel these
words, they would not enlarge their desires as hell; but
be content with such things as they had. They then
probably might not heap up so much for their heirs,
as otherwise they would have done. IThese would
therefore have less than if they had not heard me : because they would grasp at less, |

Secondly, Wherever the gospel takes essect, the foes
of a man will be those of his own household, By this
means then {ome who hear and receive it with joy, will
be poorer than they were before. Their domestic foes
will, in many cases, hinder, embroil, and disturb the
course of their affairs. And their relations, who ashst-

ed them before, or promiled at least so to do, will pro-

bably withdraw or deny that assistance, unless they will
be adviled by them. Perhaps their nearest relations:
it being no new thing, for parents to disown their chil-

_ dren, if after the way which they call heresy, these

worship

To Men of Rezfon and Religion. 145

worship the God of their fathers. Hence therefore
some have less of this world's goods than they had in
times past, either because they earn less, or because they
receive less from them on whom they depend,

Thirdly, It is written, that ** Those who received
not the mark of the beast, either on their foreheads, or
in their right hands,” either openly or secretly, were
not permitted to buy or sell any more. Now whatever
the mystery contained herein may be, I apprehend the
plain mark of the bcast is wickedness ; inward and outward unholiness, whatever is secretly or openly contrary to justice, mercy or truth. And certain it is, the
time 1s well nigh come, when thofe who have not this
mark, can neither buy nor sell, can scarce follow any
profession, so as to gain a subsistence thereby. Therefore, many of those who attend on my ministry, are by
this means poorer than before. They will not recave
the mark of the beast, either on their forehead or in
their hand : or if they had received it before, they rid
themselves of it as soon as possible. Some cannot follow their former way of life at all; (as pawnbrokers,
smugglers, buyers or sellers of uncustomed goods) others
cannot follow it as they did before. For they cannot
opprels, cheat or defraud their neighbour : they cannot
le, or say what they do not mean; they mult now
speak the truth from their heart. On all these accounts,
they have less of this world's goods; because they gain
leis inan they did before.

Fourthly, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution : ” if in no other way, yet at
least in this, that“ men will by revilings perlecute
them ; ana fay all manner of evil against them falsely,
for his sake,” One unavoidable effect of this will be,
that men whose subsistence depends on their daily labour, will be often in want, for few will care to employ those of so bad a character. And even those who
did employ them before, perhaps for many years, will
employ them no more ; so that hereby some may be
brought to beggary. | |

8, What does this touch you ? Are you one of those,
* who will have nothing to do with those scandalous
wretches 2” Perhaps you will fay, © And who can

blame

-- - - 8
---- -- 2 ----

--

--------

---- -- -- -_ ax --

8 ©
-- -- -- ----
-

-- --

not an imaginary scene.
too late to remedy it.

146 A rARTHER APPEAL, Part I.

blame me for it: may I not employ whom I please ? ”
We will weigh this. You employed A. B. for several
years. By your own account, he was an honest, diligent man. You had no objeftion to him but his following this way. For this reason you turn him off.
In a short time, having spent his little all, and having
no supply, he wants bread. So does his family too as
well as himself. Before he can get into other business
to procure it, through want of convenient food to eat,
and raiment to put on, he sickens and dies. This is
I Have known the case ; tho?

„% And what then? ” Why then you are a murderer. O earth, cover not thou his Hood No, it doth
not. The cry thereof hath entered in the ears of the Lord
God of Sabbaoth, And God requireth it at your hands:
and will require it in an hour when you think not.
For you have as effectually murdered that man, as if
you had stabbed him to the heart. |

It is not I then who ruin and starve that family ; it
is you; you who call yourself a Protestant ! You who
cry out against the 5 spirit of the Papists !
Ye fools and blind! What are ye better than they ?
Why, Edmund Bonner would have starved the hereticks in prison ; whereas ye starve them in their own
houses. |

And all this time you talk of liberty of conscience ;
yes, liberty for such a conscience as your own : a conscience past feeling; (for sure it had some once) a conscience, seared with a hot iron. Liberty to ferve the
devil, according to your poor, hardened conscience,
you allow; but not liberty to serve God.

Nay, and what marvel? Whosoever thou art that
readest this, and feelest in thy heart a real desire to serve
God, I warn thee, expect no liberty for thy conscience,
from him that hath no conscience at all. All ungodly,

unthankful, unholy men; all villains of whatever de-

nomination, will have liberty indeed all the world over,
as long as their master is god of this world. But expett not liberty to worship God in spirit and in truth,
to practise pure and undefiled religion (unless the *
shout:

To Men of Reason and Religion. 147

should work a new thing in the earth) from any but
those who themselves love and serve God. |

9. © However, it is plain, you make men idle. And
this tends to begger their families.” This objection
having been continually urged for some years, I will
trace it from the foundation.

Two or three years after my return from America,
one Captain Robert Williams of Bristol, made afhdavit
before the (then) Mayor of the city, that © it was a
common report in Georgia, Mr. Wesley took people
off from their work and made them idle, by preaching
so much.“

The fact stood thus: At my first coming to Savannah, the generality of the people rose at seven or eight
in the morning. And that part of them who were accustomed to work, usually worked till six in the evening. A few of them sometimes worked till seven ;
which is the time of sun-set there at Midsummer,

I immediately began reading prayers and expounding.
the second lesson, both in the morning and evening.
The morning service began at five, and ended at, or
before fix : The evening lervice began at seven,

Now supposing all the grown persons in the town,
had been present every morning and evening, would
this have made them idle? Would they oy have
had less, or considerably more time for working

10. The same rule I follow now, both at London,
Bristol and Newcastle-upon-Tyne : concluding the service at every place, winter and summer, before fix in
the morning : and not ordinarily beg'nning to preach,
till near seven in the evening.

Now do you, who make this objectiou, work longer,
through the year, than from fix to six ? Do you defre, that the generality of people should ? Or, can you
count them idle, that work so long?

Some few are indeed accustomed to work longer.
These I advise not to come on week-days. And it is
apparent, that they take this advice, unless on some rare
and extraordinary occasion. |

But I hope, none of you who turn them out of
their employment, have the confidence to talk of my

; making

148 A rARTRERN APPEAL, Part I.

making them idle! Do you (as the homely phrase is)
cry wh---- first? I admire your cunning, but not
your modesty,

So far am I from either causing or encouraging idlenels, than an idle person known to be such, is not suffered to remain in any of our societies : we drive him
out, as we would a thief or a murderer. * To shew
all poslible diligence,” (as well as frugality) is one of
our standing rules: and one, concerning the observance
of which, we continually make the strictest enquiry.

11. But you drive them out of their senses, You
make them mad.” Nay, then they are idle with a
vengeance. This objection therefore being of the utmost importance, deserves our deepest consideration.

And first, I grant, it is my earnest desire to drive all
the world, into what you probably call madness : (I
mean, inward religion) to make them just as mad, as
Paul was when he was so accounted by Festus. _

The counting all things on earth but dung and dross,
so we may win Christ ; the trampling under foot all
the pleasures of the world, the secking no treasure but
in heaven; the having no desire of the praise of men,
a good character, a fair reputation; the being exceeding glad when men revile us, nd persecute us, and say
all manner of evil against us falsely ; the giving God
thanks when our father or mother forsake us, when we
have neither food to eat, nor raiment to put on, nor a
friend but what shoots out bitter words, nor a place
where to lay our head: this is utter distraction in your
account: but in God's it is sober, rational religion: the
genuine fruit, not of a distempered brain, not of a
hckly imagination, but of the power of God in the
heart, of victorious love, and of a found mind.

12, I grant, secondly, it is my endeavour to drive
all I can, into what you term another species of madnefs, which is usually preparatory to this, and which I
term repentance or conviction. |

I cannot describe this better than a writer of our own
has done. I will therefore transcr:he h s words,

When men feel in themselves the heavy burden of
| fin, see damnation to be the reward of it, and behold
with the eye of their mind the horror of hell ; they

; tremble,

To Men of Reason and Religion. 149

tremble, they quake and are inwardly touched with
sorrowfulness of heart, and cannot but accuse themselves, and open their grief unto Almighty God, and
call unto him for mercy. This being done seriously,
their mind is so occupied, partly with sorrow and heaviness, partly with an earnest defire to be delivered
from this danger of hell and damnation, that all desire
of meat and drink is laid apart, and loathsomeness (or,
loathing) of all worldly things and pleasure, cometh in
place. So that nothing then liketh them, more than
to weep, to lament, to mourn, and both words and
behaviour of body to shew themselves weary of life.“

Now what if your wife, or daughter, or acquain--
tance, after hearing one of these field-preachers, Gould
come and tell you, that they {aw e before
them, and beheld with the eye of their mind the horror
of hell? What if they should tremble and quake, and
be fo taken up partly with sorrow and heaviness, parthy
with an earnest desire to be delivered from this dee
of hell and damnation, as to weep, to lament, to
mourn, and both with words and behaviour to shew
themselves weary of life: would you {cruple to say that
they were stark mad ? that these fellows had driven
them out of their senses? And that whatever writer it
was, that talked at this rate, he was fitter for Bedlam
than any other place ?

You have overshot yourself now to some purpose.
These are the very words of our own Church. You
may read them, if you are fo inclined, in the first part
of the Homily on Fasting. And consequently what
you have peremptorily determined to be mere luna
and distraction, is that repentance unto life, which in
the judgment both of the Chutch and of St. Paul, is
never to be repented of.

13. I grant, thirdly, that extraordinary circumstances have attended this conviction in some instances;
A particular account of these I have frequently given,
While the word of God was preached, some persons
have dropped down as dead; some have been, as it
were, in strong convulsions ; some have roared aloud,
though not with an articulate voice; and others spoke
the anguish of their souls.

; Thus,

--

----
-- ----
-- -- 2 -- ---- --

-- -- --
-- 2
-- --

8 - * Er Fe
2 £ . = _ -- __ 4 -- 2 -- --

150 A ranrnzR APPEAL, Part I.

This, I suppose, you believe to be perfect madness.
But it is easily accounted for, either on principles of
Reason or Scripture, | wy
First, on principles of Reason. For how easy is it
to suppose, that a 33 lively and sudden apprehension bt the heinousness of sin, the wrath of Goc, and
the bitter pains of eternal death, should affect the body
as well as the soul, during the present laws of vital
umon; should interrupt or disturb the ordinary circulations, and put nature out of its course ? Yea, we may
uestion, whether while this union subsists, it be possible for the mind to be affected, in so violent a degree,
without some or other of those bodily symptoms following ? |
It is hkewise ealy to account for these things, on
principles of Scripture. For when we take a view of
them in this light, we are to add to the consideration of
natural causes, the agency of those spirits who still excel in strength, and as far as they have leave from God,
will not fail to torment whom they cannot destroy ; to
tear those that are coming to Christ, It is also remarkable, that there 1s plain scripture-precedent of every
symptom Which has lately appeared. So that we cannot allow even the conviction attended with these
to be madness, without giving up both Reason and
Scripture. |
14. I grant, fourthly, That touches of extravagance,
bordering on madness may sometime attend severe con-

viction. And this allo is easy to be accounted for, by

the present laws of the animal ceconomy. For we
know, fear or grief, from a temporal cause, may occasion a fever and thereby a delirium.
It is not strange then that some, while under strong
impressions of grief or fear, from a sense of the wrath
of God, should for a season forget almost all things elle,
and scarce be able to answer a common question : that
some should fancy they see the flames of hell, or the
devil and his angels around them : or that others, for a
space, should be afraid, ike Cain, whosoever meeteth me
will lay me. All these, and whatever less common
effects may sometimes accompany this conviction, are
ealily known from the natural distemper of madness,
b Fo. were

To Men of Reason and Religion. 151

were it only by this one circumstance, that whenever the
person convinced, tastes the pardoning love of God,
they all vanish away in a moment.

Lastly, I have seen one instance (I pray God I may
see no more such !) of real, lasting madnels,

Two or three years since, I took one with me to
Bristol, who was under deep convictions; but of as
sound an understanding in all respects, as ever he had
been in his life, I went a short journey, and when L
came to Bristol again, found him really distracted. I
enquired particularly, at what time and place, and in
what manner this disorder began? And I believe there
are, at least, threescore witnesses, alive and ready to
testify what follows. When I went from Bristol, he
contracted an acquaintance with some persons, who
were not of the same judgment with me. He was soon
Prejudiced against me: quickly after, when our society were met together in Kingswood-house, he began
a vehement invective both against my person and doctrines. In the midst of this, he was struck raving mad.
And so he continued till his friends put him into Bedlam: and probably, aid his madness too to my charge.

15. 1 fear, there may allo be some instances of real
' madness, proceeding from a different cause.

Suppole, for instance, a perfon, hearing me, 1s
strongly convinced, that a liar cannot enter into the
kingdom of heaven. He comes home, and relates this
to his parents or friends, and appears to be very uneasy.
Thefe good Christians are disturbed at this, and afraid
he is running mad too, They are refolved, he shall
never hear any of those fellows more; and keep to it
in spite of all his intreaties. They will not suffer him,
when at home, to be alone, for fear he should read or
pray. And perhaps in awhile they will constrain him,
at least by ted, importunities, to do again the very
thing, for which he was convinced the wrath of God
cometh upon the children of disobedience.

What is the event of this? Sometimes the Spirit
of God is quenched and departs from him.” Now you
have carried the point. The man is easy as ever, and
sins on without any remorse. But in other instances,
Where those -- -- sink deep, and the arrows of

| O 2 the

132 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part J.

.the Almighty stick fast in the soul, you will drive that
person into real, settled madness, before you can quench
the Spirit of God, I am afraid, there have been seveTal instances of this, You have forced the man's conscience, till he is stark mad. But then, pray do not
impute that madness to me, Had you left him to my
direction, or rather to the direction of the Spirit of
God, he would have been filled with love and a sound
mind. But you have taken the matter out of God's
hand. And now you have brought it to a fair conclasion !

16. How frequent this case may be, I know 'not.

But doubtless most of those who make this objection,
of our driving men mad, had never met with such an
instance in their lives. The common cry is occasioned,
either by those who are convinced of fin, or those who
are inwardly converted to God : mere madness both
{as was observed before) to those who are without God
in the world. Yet I do not deny, but you may have
seen one in Bedlam, who said he had followed me. But
observe, a madman's saying this, is no proof of the fact:
nay, and if he really had, it should be farther considered, that his being in Bedlam, is no sure proof of
his being mad. Witness the well-known case of Mr.
Periam; and I doubt more such are to be found. Yea,
it is well if some have not been sent thither, for no
other reason, but because they followed me : their kind
relations either concluding, that they must be distracted,
'before they could do this: or, perhaps hoping, that
Bedlam would make them wa 5 if it did not find
them so.

17. And it must be owned, a confinement of such a
sort, is as fit to cause as to cure distraction. For what
scene of distress is to be compared to it? To be separated at once from all who are near and dear to you :
to be cut off from all reasonable conversation, to be lecluded from all business, from all reading, from every
innocent entertainment of the mind, which is left to
prey wholly upon itself, and. day and night to pore
over your misfortunes : to be shut up day by day in a
gloomy cell, with only the walls to employ your heavy
eyes, in the midst either of melancholly silence, or 44

ri

[1
,
* :
.
„

--_ , . . * £4 - 0
uy ww © -- 2 ---- © *
122... „„ K„ĩ We AA a, EE

p » es
1 =
. *

yo "© PS. --
---- 2 - © --
- oy --

To Men of Reason and Religion. 153

rid cries, groans and laughter intermixt: to be forced
by the main strength of those

«© Who laugh at human nature and compassion, A
to take drenches of nauseous, perhaps torturing medicines, which you know you have no need of now, but.
know not how {con you may, possibly by the operation
of these very drugs on a weak or tender constitution :
here is distress! It is an astonishing thing, a signal proof
of the power of God, if any creature who has his senses when that confinement begins, does not lose them,
before it is at an end |!

How must it heighten the distress, if such a poor
wretch, being deeply convinced of fin, and growing
worle and worse (as he probably will, seeing there 1s
no medicine here for his sickness, no such Physician as
his case requires) be soon placed among the incurables !
Can imagination itself paint such a hell upon earth ?
Where even “ Hope never comes, that comes to all!“
For what remedy ? If a man of sense and human-

ity, should happen to visit that house of woe, would
he give the hearing to a madman's tale? Or if he did,
would he credit it? * Do we not know, might he
say, how well any of these will talk in their lucid intervals ? So that a thousand to one he would concern himself no more about it, but leave the weary to
wait for rest in the grave!

18. I have now answered most of the current objections, particularly such as have appcarcd of weight to
religious or reasonable men. I have endeavoured to
shew, First, That the doctrines I teach are no other

than the great truths of the gospel. 2. That though I
teach them, not as I would, but as I can, yet it is in a
manner not contrary to aw; and Thirdly, That the
effects of thus preaching the gospel, have not been such
as was weakly or wickedly reported : those reports being mere artifices of the Devil, to hinder the work of
God. Whosoever therefore ye are, who look for God
to revive his work in the midst of the years, cry aloud,
that he may finish it nevertheless, may cut it short in
righteousness, Cry to Messiah the Prince, that he may
soon end the transgression, that he may lift up his standard upon carth, lending by whom he will send, and
O 3 working

3 A -raxTizx APPEAL, Part 1. &c.
working his own work, when he pleaseth, and as he
pleaseth, till all the kindreds of the people worship be-

fore him, and the earth be full of the knowledge of the
glory of the Lord !

An ACT of DEVOTION,

2 EHOLD the servant of the Lord!
I wait thy guiding hand to feel,
To hear, and keep thine ev'ry word,

To prove, and do thy perfect will;
Joyful from all my works to cease,
Glad to fulfil all righteousness.

2 Me if thy grace vouchsafe to use,
Meanest of all thy creatures me,
Phe deed, the time, the manner chuse;

Let all my fruit be found of thee,
Let all my works in thee be wrought,
By thee to full perfection brought.

3 My ev'ry weak though good, design,
O'er-rule, or change as seems thee meet,
Jesus, let all the work be thine ;
Thy work, O Lord, is all compleat,
And pleasing in thy Father's fight ;
Thou only hast done all things right.

4 Here then to thee thine own I leave,
Mould as thon wilt the passive clay ;
But let me all thy stamp receive,
But let me all thy words obey,
Serve with a fingle heart and eye,
And to thy glory live and die,

I. 1. 1 is not my present design to touch on any
1 particular Opinions, whether they are right
or wrong: nor on any of those smaller points of practice, which are variously held by men of different persuasions: but first, to point out some things which on
common principles are condemned by men of ev
denomination, and yet found in all; and secondly,
some wherein those of each denomination, are more particularly inconsistent with their own principles,

And, first, it is my design, abstracting from Opinions of every kind, as well as from disputable points
of practice, to mention such of those things as occur to
my mind, which are on common principles condemned,
and notwithstanding found, more or less, among men
of every denomination. :

2, But before I enter on this unpleafing task, I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God, by what.
ever love you bear to God, to your country, to your
own fouls; do not consider who speaks, but what is
spoken, If it be possible, for one hour lay prejudice
alide ; give what is advanced a fair hearing. Consider

SE Bled. | imply

+44 4%

2. -- 2
---- --

- q -- --

-- -

Rr

. -- : --
-- -- , ‚--⏑ w------_
-- -
=> \

2 2 ---- *
-- --

|
:
}
.

s V

Again, when he had just brought them through the

156 A raxtuer APPEAL, Part II.

simply on each head, is this true, or is it false? Is it
1 or is it not? If you ask, © But in whose.
judgment? I answer, In your own; I appeal to
the light of your own mind. Is there not a faithful
witness in your own breast? By this you must stand
or fall, You cannot be judged by another man's conscience. - Judge for yoursels by the best light you have.
And the merciful God teach me and thee whatsoever
we know not !

Now, as I speak chiefly to those who believe the
scriptures, the method I propose is this, first, To observe what account is given therein of the Jews, the
ancient church of God, inasmuch as all these things
were written for our instruftion, who say, we are now
the visible church of the God of Israel, Secondly,
To appeal to all who profess to be members thereof, to
every one who is called a Christian, How far, in each
instance, the parallel holds? And how much we are
better than they ?

g. First, I am to observe what account the scriptures give of the 45 the antient church of God. I
mean, with regard to their moral character; their tempers and out ward behaviour. |

No sooner were they brought out of Egypt, than we
find them murmuring against God, (Exod. xiv. 12.)

Red Sea with a mighty hand and a stretched out arm,
(ch. xv. 24.) And yet again, quickly after, in the
wilderness of Zin, your murmurings (faith Moses) are
not against us, but against the Lord, (ch. xvi. 8.) Nay,
even while he was giving them bread from heaven,
they were {till murmuring and tempting God, (ch. xvin.
2, g.) and their amazing language at that season was, I.
the Lord among us or not ? (ch. xvil. 4.)

The same spirit they shewed, during the whole forty
years that he bore their manners in the wilderness: a
solemn testimony whereof, Moses spake in the ears of
all the congregation of Israel, when God was about to
take him away from their head: They have corrupted themselves (faith he) their spot was not of his children ; they are a perverse and crooked generation.
"The Lord led Jacob about; he instructed him; he kept

him

To Men of Reason and Religion. 157

him as the apple of his eye, (Deut. xxxii. 5.10.) He
made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he
might eat the increase of the fields: then he forsook
God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock
of his salvation,” (ch. v. 11, 13, 15.)

In like manner God complains long after this, Hear
O heavens, and give ear, O earth! I have nourished
and brought up children, and they have rebelled against
me. The ox N his owner, and the als his master's crib ; but Israel doth not know, my people do
not consider. Ah sinful nation, a people laden with
iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are corrupters, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked
the Holy One of Israel,” (Isa. i. 2, g, 4.) Can a
maid forget her ornaments, and a bride her attire ?
Yet my people have forgotten me, days without number,“ (Jer. ii. 32.

4. And as they did not like to retain God in their
knowledge, so they had small regard to the ordinances
of God, Even from the days of your fathers, (said
God by his \prophen) ye are gone away from my ordinances, and have not kept them, (Mal. iii. 7.) Ye
have said; It is in vain to serve God; and what profit
is it that we have kept his ordinances? ”? (ver. 1g.)
„Thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou
hast been weary of me, O Israel : thou hast not brought
me thy burnt-offerings, neither hast thou honoured me
with thy sacrifices,” (Isa. xliv. 22. 29.) And fo the
prophet himself confesses, © Thou meetest thofe that
remember Thee in thy ways----But there is none that
calleth upon thy name, that stirreth up himself to take
hold of Thee,” (Isa. Ixiv. 5, J.)

5. But they called upon his name by vain oaths, by
exjury and blasphemy. So Jeremiah, © Because of
wearing the land mourneth, (ch. xxiii. 10.) And

though they say, The Lord liveth, surely they swear
falsely,” (ch. v. 2.) So Hosea, „They have spoken
words, swearing falsely in making a covenant : ”” fo
Ezekiel, © They say the Lord seeth us not, the Lord
hath forsaken the earth.“ So Isaiah, Their tongue
and their doings are against the Lord, to provoke the
eyes of his glory, (ch, iii 8.) They say, Let him

make

\
' £1
=
1 1
_

a -- - *
- - _--_ -
-----_--_-- --_--___-- ⏑

=

138 © Aranxturx APPEAL, Part II.

make speed and hasten his work that we may see it,
and let the counsel of the Holy One draw nigh and
come that we may know it,” (ch. v. 19.) And fo
Malachi, ( Ye have wearied the Lord with your words;
ye say, Every one that doeth evil, is good in the sight of
the Lord, and he delighteth in them; and, where is the
God of judgment? (ch. ii. 17.)

6. And as they despised his holy things, fo they pro-

phaned his sabbaths, (Ezek. xxii. 8.) Yea, when God
sent unto them, saying, „Take heed unto yourlelves,

and bear no burden on the sabbath day, neither do ye

any work, but hallow ye the sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers : -- yet they obeyed not, neither

inclined their ear, but made their neck stiff, that they
might not hear, nor receive instruction.“ (Jer. xvu.
21, 22, 23.)

Neither did they honour their parents, or those whom
God, from time to time, appointed to be rulers over
them. * In thee (in Jerusalem, said the prophet) they
have set light by father and mother,” (Ezek. xxii. J.)

And from the very day when God brought them up
out of the land of Egypt, their murmurings, chiding,

rebellion and disobedience; against those whom he had
chosen to go before them, make the most considerable
part of their history. So that had not Moses stood in
the gap, he had even destroyed«them from the face of

the earth. |

7. How much more did they afterwards provoke
God, by drunkenness, sloth, and luxury? *© They
have erred through wine, (faith the prophet Isaiah) and
through strong drink they are gone out of the way;
(ch. xxviii. J.) which occasioned those vehement and
repeated warnings, against that reigning sin ; * Woe to

the drunkards of Ephraim, them that are overcome

with wine, (ver. 1.) the drunkards of Ephraim shall be

trodden under foot: (ver. g.) woe unto them that rise

up early that they may follow strong drink ; that continue until night, till wine inflames them. But they
regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the
operation of his hands, (ch. v. 11, 12.) woe unto them
that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to
mingle strong drink; (ver. 22.) woe to them that are

5 8 ; at

To Men of Reason and Religion. 159,

at ease in Zion, -- that lie upon beds of ivory, and
stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the
lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the
midst of the stall, that chant to the sound of the viol,
and invent to themselves instruments of musick, -- that
drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the
chief ointments ; but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph,” (Amos vi. 1, 4, 5, 6.) © Behold this
(faith Ezekiel to Jerusalem) was the iniquity of thy
sister Sodom: fulness of brcad and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters,“ (ch. xvi. 49.)

8. From sloth and fulness of bread, lewdness naturally followed, It was even while Moses was with
them, that the people began to commit whoredom with
the daughters of Moab : yea, of the daughters of Zion,
Ifaiah complains, „they walk with stretched- forth
necks and wanton eyes,” (ch. iii. 16.) And of his
people in general God complains by Jeremiah, When
I had fed them to the full, they assembled themselves
by troops in the harlot's house. They were as fed
horses in the morning, every one neighed after his
neighbour's wife, (ch. v. 7, 8.) they be all adulterers,
an assembly of treacherous men, (ch. ix. 2.) the land 1s
full of adulterers,” (ch. xxiii. 10.) |

Yea, and some of them were given up to unnatural
lusts. Thus we read, Judges xix. 22, The men of
Gibeah beset the house, wherein the stranger was, and
beat at the door, and spake to the master of the house,
laymg, bring forth the man that came into thine house,
that we may know him.” And there were also long
after, Sodomites in the land, in the days of Rehoboam
and of the following kings: The very shew of whose
countenance witnessed against them, and they declared
their sin as Sodom, they hid it not.” (Isa. in. 9.) |

9. This was accompanied with injustice in all its
forms, Thus all the prophets testify against them,
* The Lord looked for judgment, but behold oppreshon ; for righteousness, but behold a cry,” (Isa. v. 3.)
Thou hast taken usury and increase ; thou hast greedily gained of thy neighbour by extortion.--Behold, 1
have smitten my hand, at thy. dishonest gain which
thou hast made, (Ezzk, xxil, 12, 13.) * The 2 EE

| n | of ©

160 A rAATUEN APPEAL, Part IT.

of deceit are in Jacob's hand ; he loveth to opprels,”
(Hos. xii. J.) „Are there not yet the scant measure
that is abominable ; the wicked balances, and the bag
of deceitful weights? (Micah vi. 10, 11.) © He
that departeth from evil, maketh himself a prey,“ (Isa.
lix. 15.) And the Lord faw it, and it displeased him,
that there was no judgment. The wicked devoureth
the man that is more righteous than he. They take u
all of them with the angle, they catch them in their
net, and gather them in their drag, (Hab. i. 13, 14, 15.)
They covet fields and take them by violence, and -- 2
and take them away, (Mic. ii. 2.) they pull off the
robe with the garment, from them that pass by securely,
(ver. 8.) they have dealt by oppression with the stranger; they have vexed the fatherless and the widow,
(Ezek. xxii. J.) the people of the land have used oppression and exercised robbery; and have vexed the
poor and needy, yea, they have oppressed the stranger
wrongfully, (ver. 29.) their works are works of iniquity, and the acts of violence is in their hands, (Isaiah
lix. 6.) Judgment is turned away backward, and jus
tice standeth afar off; for truth is fallen in the street,
and equity cannot enter, (ver. 14.)
10. Truth indeed was fallen, as well as justice,
% Every mouth, faith Isaiah, speaketh folly, (ch. ix.
17.) this is a rebellious people, lying children, (ch.
XXX. 9.) their lips have {poken lies and muttered perverseness. None calleth for justice, nor any pleadeth
for truth; they trust in vanity and speak lies, (ch. lix.
3: 4-) This occasioned that caution of Jeremiah, Take
ye heed every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not
in any brother; for every brother will utterly supplant,
and every neighbour will walk with landers. And
they will deceive every one his neighbour, and will not
2 the truth; they have taught their tongues to
peak lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity,”
(ch. ix. 4, f-) | |
11. And even those who abstained from these grols
outward fins, were {till inwardly corrupt and abominable. The whole head was sick, and the whole heart
was faint ; yea, from the sole of the foot even unto the
head there was no soundness, but wounds and N
an

To Men of Reason and Religion. 161

and putrifying sores, (Isa. i. 3, 6.) All these nations
(faith God) are uncircumcised; and all the house of
Isracl are uncircumcised in heart, (Jer. ix. 26.) Their
heart is divided, (Hol. x. 2.) They have set up their
idols in their heart; they are all estranged from me
through their idols,” (Ezek. xiv. g, 4.) a

Their soul till clave unto the dust. They laid up
treasures upon earth. From the least of them, sait
Jeremiah, even unto the greatest, every one is given to
covetoulness, (ch. vi. 19.) They panted after the dust
of the earth, (Amos ii. 7.) They laded themsel ves with
thick clay, (Hab. iii. 6.) They joined house to house,
and laid field to field, until there was no place, (Isaiah
v. 8.) Vea, they enlarged their desires as hell: they
were as death, and could not be satisfied,” (Hab. ii. 5.)

12. And not only for their covetousness, but for
their pride of heart were they an abomination to the
Lord. The pride of Israel, saith Hosea, doth testify
to his face, (ch. vii. 10.) Hear ye, give ear, faith Jeremiah, be not proud -- Give glory to the Lord your
God, (ch. xii. 15.) But they would not be reproved ;;
they were still wile in their own eyes, and prudent in
their own light, (Isa. v. 21.) and continually saying to
their neighbour, Stand by thyself, come not near to me 3
for I am holier than thou!“ (Ta, Ixv. 5.) WT |

They added hypocrisy to their pride. This people, faith God himlelf, draw near me with their mouth,
and with their lips do honour me, but have removed
their heart far from me, (Isa. xxix. 13.) They have
not cried unto me with their hearts, when they howled
upon their beds, (Hof. vii. 14.) They return, but not
to the Most High; they are like a decenful bow, (ver.
16.) They did but flatter him with their mouth, and
dissemble with him in their tongue,“ (Psal. lxxviii. 36.)
so that herein they only prophaned the holiness of the
Lord. © And this have ye done again, faith Malachi,
covering the altar of the Lord with tears, with weeping, and with crying out, insomuch that he regarded
not the offering any more, (ch. ii. 11. 1g.

1. This God continually declared to those formal
worshippers. That their outside religion was but vain,
** 10 what purpole is the multitude of your sacrifices,

P lait

\

162 A zarTHeR APPEAL, Part II.

faith the Lord ? I am full of the burnt-offerings of
rams, and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of
lambs, or of he-goats. Bring no more vain oblations :
incense is an abomination unto me; the new moons and
sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with
it is iniquity, even the folemn meeting. When you
spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from
you ; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not
hear, (Isa. i. 11, 13, 15.) He that killeth an ox is as
if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a lamb, as if he
cut off a dog's neck, (ch. Ixvi. 3.) When they fast, I
will not hear their cry ; and when they offer an oblation, I will not accept it, (Jer. xiv. 12.) Go ye, serve
Hon idols, if ye will not'hcarken unto me ; but polute ye my holy Name no more with your gifts,” (Ezek,
xx. 39.
14. Vet all this time they were utterly careless and
secure; nay, confident of being in the favour of God.
They were at ease; they put far ay the evil day,
(Amos vi. 1. 3.) Even when God had poured his anger upon Israel, it set him on fire round ahout, yet he
knew eit not: it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart,
(Ifa. xlii. 25.) A deeeived heart had turned him afide,
that he could not say, Is there not a lie in my righthand ? (ch. xliv. 10.) So far from it, that at this ve
time they said, We are innocent, we have not sinned,
(Jer. ü. 35, 37.) We are wise, and the law of the
Lord is with us, (ch. viii. 8.) The temple of the
Lord! the temple of the Lord are we,” (ch. vii. 4.)
15. Thus it was that they hardened themselves in
their wickedness. * They are impudent children,
faith God, and stiff-hearted, (Ezek. ii. 4.) Were they
ashamed when they had committed abomination ? Nay
they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush,
(Jer. vi. 15.) I have spread out my hand all the day
to a rebellious people, that provoketh me to anger continually to my face, (Isa. lxv. 2, g.) They will not
hearken unto me, saith the Lord, for all the house of
Israel are impudent and hard-hearted, (Ezek. iii. J.)
Since the day that their fathers came forth out of the
land of Egypt unto this day, I have sent unto them all
wy servants the prophets, rising up early *
e 3 tnem;

To Men of Reason and Religion. 163

them; yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined
their ear, but hardened their neck; they did worse than
their fathers, (Jer. vi. 25, 26.) 7
| They were equally hardened against mercies and
judgments, When he gave them rain, both the former
and the latter in his season ; when he reserved unto
them the appointed weeks of the harvest, filling their
hearts with food and gladness, {till none of this revoltmg and rebellious people said, Let us now fear the
Lord our God,” (Jer. v. 29, 24.) © Nor yet did they
turn unto him when he imote them, (ch. ix. 9. 13.)
„ In that day did the Lord call to weeping and to
mourning : and behold joy and gladness, eating flesh
and drinking wine : Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we shall die,“ (ch. xxii. 11, 12.) © Although he
consumed them, yet they refused to receive instruction ;
they made their faces harder than a rock -- None re1 him, but every one turned to his course, as a
orse rusheth into the battle,“ (Jer. v. g. ch. viii. 6.)
„ have given you want of bread in al your places,
yet have ye not returned unto me, faith the Lord. 1
have also with-holden the rain from you when there
were yet three months unto the harvest I have
{mitten you with blasting and mildew ; your gardens
and your vineyards the palmer worm devoured. I
have sent among you the pestilence after the manner of
Egypt; your young men have I slain with the sword
I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew
Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand
plucked out of the burning ; yet have ye not returned
unto me, faith the Lord,” (Amos iv. 6--11.)
16. In consequence of their resolution not to return,
they would not endure strong doctrine, or those that
spake it. They “ faid to the seers, See not, and to the
prophets, prophesy not unto us right things--Speak
unto us smooth things--Cause the Holy One of Lfsrael
to cease from before us, (Isa. xxx. 10, 11.) But they
hated him that rebuked in the gate, and they abhorred
him that spake uprightly, (Amos v. 10.) Accordingly,
*thy prope: (said God to Ezekiel) still are talking against
thee, by the walls, and in the doors of the houles, (ch.
XXXU1, 30.) And Amaziah the priest {ent to Jereboam,

P 2 king

164 A Arn APPEAL, Part IT.

king of Istael, saying, Amos hath conspired against thes
in the midst of the house of Israel ; the land is not able
to bear all his words. Also Amaziah said unto Amos,
Go, flee thee away into the land of Judah, and prophesy
there. But prophely not again any more at Bethel,
for it is the king's chapel, and it is the king's court,”
(ch. vii. 10, 12, 13.) From the same spirit it was that
they faid of Jeremiah, „Come, and let us devise devices against him-----Come and let ns smite him with
the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his
words,” (ch. xvi. 18.) Hence it was that he was constrained to cry out, O Lord, I am in derision daily;
every one mocketh me. Since I spake, the word of
the Lord was made a reproach unto me, and a derision
daily: for I heard the 3 of many, fear on every
ide : Report, say they, and we will report it: all my
familiars watched for my halting ; saying, Peradventure
he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him,
and we shall take our revenge on him,” (ch. xx. 7, 8,
10.) And elsewhere, © Woe is me, my mother, that
thou hast borne me a man of strife, and a man of contention to the whole earth. I have neither lent on
usury, nor men have lent to me on ulury : yet every
one of them doth curse me, (ch. xv. 19.

17. But if a man walking in the spirit of false.
hood, do lie (said the prophet Micah) saying, I will
prophesy unto thee of wine and strong drink, he shall
even be the prophet of this people,” (ch. ii. 11.) And
God gave them pastors after their own hearts: such
were those sons of Eli, sons of Belial, who knew not
the Lord, (1 Sam. ii. 12.) rapacious, covetous, violent
men, (ver. 14, 15, 16.) by reason of whom men abhorxed the offering of the Lord, (ver. 17.) who not only
made themselves vile, (ch. iii. 1g.) but also made the
Lord's people to transgress, (ch. ii. 24.) while they
made themselves fat with the chiefest of all the offer_ ings of Israel, (ver. 29.) Such were those of whom
Isaiah says, the priest and the prophet have erred thro'
strong drink ; they are swallowed up of wine, (ch.
xxviii. 7.) Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and
we will fill ourselves with strong drink : and to-morxow shall be as. this day, and much more oo”

ch, lvi.

To Men of Reason and Religion. 163

(ch. lvi. 12.) Therefore, saith he, the Lord hath
poured out upon you the spirit of deep ** and hath
closed your eyes: the prophets and the seers hath he
5 and the vision of all is become unto you, as
the words of a book that is sealed, (ch. xxix. 10, 11.)
Such also were those of whom he said, His watchmen
are blind, they are all ignorant : they are all dumb dogs;
they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to
slumber. Greedy dogs, which can never have enough,
and they are shepherds that cannot understand, They
all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from
his quarter, (ch. lvi. 10, 11.) |

Little better were those of whom the prophets that
followed have left us so dreadful an account; “ both

rophet and priest are profane ; yea, in my house have
3 their wickedness, saith the Lord. And from
the prophets of Jerusalem, is profaneness gone forth
into all the land, Jer. xxiii. 11, 15. Her priests have
violated my law, and have profaned my holy things :
they have put no difference between the holy and the
profane, and I am profancd among them, Ezek. xxii.
26. If I be a father, where is mine honour ; and if I
be a master, where is my fear ? saith the Lord of Hoists
unto you, O priests, that despise my Name,” Mal. i. 6.
Lea some of them were fallen into the grossest sins,
© The company of priests, said Hosea, commit lewdness: there is whoredom in Ephraim, Israel is dehled,
ch. vi. 9, 10. I have seen allo in the prophets of Jerusalem (faith God by Jeremiah) a horrible thing; they
commit adultery and walk in hes,” ch. xxili. 14.

18. And those who were clear of this were deeply
covetous. Who is there among you that would shut
the doors for nought ? Neither do ye Kindle fire on
my altar for nought, I have no pleasure in you, faith
the Lord of Hosts, Mal. i. 10. The pricsts of Zion
preach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for
money, Yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say,
Is not the Lord among us? Mic. iii. 11. Thus faith
the Lord, The prophets bite with their teeth, and cry
peace : and he that putteth not into their mouths, they
even prepare war against him, ch. iii. 5. Therefore
the word of the Lord came unto Ezekiel, saying, Pro-

P 3 phely

156 A ranTHER APPEAL, Part II.

phesy against the shepherds of Israel, and say, Woe
to the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves :
should not the shepherds feed the flocks? Ye cat the
fat, and ye clothe you with the wool ; but ye feed not
the flock. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was fick ; -neither have
e bound up that which was broken, neither have ye
rought again that which was driven away, neither have
ye sought that which was lost ; but with force and with
cruelty have ye ruled them. And they were scattered
because there is no shepherd,” and they became meat to
all the beaste of the field, Yea, my flock was scattered
pon all the face of the earth, and none did search and
seek after them,” ch. xxxiv. 1--6.

19. To the fame effect do the other prophets declare,
Ve are departed out of the way, ye have caused many
to stumble, Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people, Mal. ii. 8, g.
From the prophet even unto the priest, every one
dealeth falsely. They have healed also the hurt of the
daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace,
when there is no peace, Jer. vi. 13, 14. They prophesy lies in my name, ch. xiv. 14. They fay {till
unto them that despise me, The Lord hath said, Ve shall
have peace; and they say unto every man that walketh
after the imagination of his own heart, No evil shall
come upon you, ch. xxui. 17. The prophets of Jerufalem strengthen the hands of the evil-doers, that none
doth.return from. his wickedness, ver. 14. They have
seduced my people; and one built up a wall, and lo,
others daubed it with untempered mortar, Ezek. Xii.
10. With lies they have made the hearts of the righteous sad, whom I have not made fad ; and strengthened
the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from
his wicked way, by promising him life, ver. 22. Many
pastors have destroyed my vineyard, they have trodden
my portion under foot; they have made my pleasant
portion a desolate wilderness, Jer. xxii. 10. There is a
conspiracy of her prophets in the midst of her, like a
roaring lion, ravening the prey. They have devoured
fouls, Ezek. xxii. 25, Thus faith the Lord, Feed the
flock of the laughter :. whose possessors slay a _

;
?

To Men of Reason and Religion. 1267

Hold themselves not guilty ; and they that sell them fay |

Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich; and their own

shepherds pitied them not,” Zach. xi. 4, 5.

II. 1. Such is the general account which the seriptures give of the Jews, the antient church of God,
And fince all these things were written for our inftruction, who are now the visible church of the God of
Israel, I shall in the next place appeal to all who profess this, to every one who calls himself a Christtan,
how far in each instance the parallel holds? and how
much we are better than they ?

And first, Were they discontented ? Did they repine
at the providence of God? Did they lay, Is the Lord
among us or not ? when they were in imminent danger,
or pressing want, and saw no way to escape? And
which of us can fay, I am clear from this ne I have
washed my hand and my heart in innocency? Have
not we who judge others, done the same things ? murmured and repined times without number ? yea, and
that when we were not in pressing want, nor distressed

with imminent danger? Are we not in general, (our

own writers being the judges) have we not ever been
from the earliest ages, a repining, murmuring, difcontented people, never long satished either with God or
man? Surely in this we have great need to humble

. ourselves before God; for we are in nowise better than

they.
But Fefturon forsook God which made him, and lightly
efteemed the Rock of his salvation. And did not England too? Ak ye of the generations of old, enquife
from the rising of the sun to the going down theled,
whether there was ever a people called by his name,
which had less of God in all their thoughts? Who in
the whole tenor of their behaviour shewed so light an
efleem for the Rock of our salvation &
Could there ever be stronger cause for God to cry
out, Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O earth ! For ha
he not nourished and brought us up as his children? And
yet, how have we rebelled against him ! If Vyrael of bid
did not know God ;. if his ancient people did not confider';;

268 A rARTHER APPEAL, Part II.

was this peculiar to them? Are not we also under the
very same condemnation? Do we, as a people, know
God ? Do we consider him as God ? Do we tremble
at the presence of his power? Do we revere his excellent Majesty? Do we remember at all times, God
is here? He is now reading my heart: he spieth out
all my ways: there is not a word in my tongue but he
knoweth it altogether : is this the character of us English Christians? The mark whereby we are known
from the Heathen? Do-we, thus know God ? Thus
confider his power, his love, his all-seeing eye? Rather, are we not likewise a finful nation, who have forgotten ham days without number A people laden with
iniquity, continually forsaking the Lord, and provoking.
the Holy One of Ifracl,

2. There is indeed a wide difference, in this respect,
between the Jews and us; they happened (if I may so
speak) to forget God, because other things- came in
their way: but we delign to forget him; we do it of
set purpose, because we do not like to remember him.
From the accounts given by Jeremia'1, we have reason
to beheve, that when that people was most deeply corrupted, yet the greatest men in the nation, the ministers
of state, the nobles and princes of Judah, talked of
God sometimes, perhaps, as frequently as upon any
other subject. But is it fo among us! Rather, is it
not a point of good breeding to put God far away, out
of their sight ? Is he talked of at all among the great?
The nobles or ministers of state in England? Among
any persons of rank or figure in the world? Do they
allow God any place in their conversation? From day
to day, from year to year, do you discourse one hour
of the wonders he doth for the children of men? If
one at a gentleman or a nobleman's table was to begin a
discourle, of the wisdom, greatness, or power of God,
would it not occasion (at least) as much astonishment,
as if he had begun to talk blasphemy ? And if the
unbred man persisted therein, would it not put all the
company into confusion? And what do you fincerely
believe the more favourable part would say of him when
he was gone? But that -- © He 1s a little touched

„2

To Men of Reason and Religion. 169

in his head! or, Poor man! he has not seen the
world.“ | ,

You know, this is the naked truth. But how terrible is the thought to every serious mind! Into what a
Rate is this Christian nation fallen! Nay the men of
eminence, of fortune, of education! Would not a
thinking foreigner, who should be present at such an
interview, be apt to conclude, that the men of quality
in England were Atheists ? That they did not believe
there was any God at all ; or, at best only an Epicurean God, who fat at ease upon the circle of the heavens, and did not concern himself about us worms of
the earth? Nay, but he understands every thought
now rising in your heart, And how long can pou put
him out of your fight? Only till this veil of flesh 1s
rent in sunder. For your pomp will not then follow
you. Will not your body be mingled with common
dust? And your soul stand naked before God? O
that you would now argquaint yourself with God, that
you may then be clothed with glory and immortality !

3- Did God complain of the Jews, even from the
days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and have not kept them? And how justly may
he make the same complaint of us? For how exceeding small a proportion do we find of those in any place
who call themselves Christians, that make a conscience
of attending them ? Does one third of the mhabitants
in any one parish throughout this great city, constantly
attend public prayer and the ministry of his word, as of
conscience towards God? Does one tenth of those
who acknowledge it 1s an institution of Christ, duly
attend the Lord's Supper? Does a fiftieth part of the

nominal members of the Church of England observe
the Fasts of the Church, or so much as the forty days
of Lent, and all Fridays in the year? Who of these
then can cast. the first stone at the Jews, for negletting
the ordinances of God ?

Nay, how many thousands are found among us, who
have never partook of the Supper of the Lord! How
many thousands are there, that live and die in this unrepented disobedience? What multitudes, even in

this Christian city, do not attend any public worship |
| at

170 A ATEX APPEAL, Part II.

at all? No, nor spend x single hour from one year to
another in privately pouring out their hearts before
God? Whether God meeteth him that remembereth him
in nis ways or not, is no concern of theirs : so the man

eats and drinks, and dies as a beast dieth, |
% Drops into the dark and disappears.”

It was not therefore of the children of Israel alone,
that the messenger of God might say, There ts none
(comparatively) that calleth upon thy name, that stryreth
himself up to take hold of Thee,

4. Ye have heard, that it was faid to them of old
times, becaufe of swearing the land mourneth, But if
this might be said of the land of Canaan, how much
more of this land? In what city or town, in what market or exchange, in what street or place of public refort, is not the holy Name whereby we are called taken
in vain, day by day? From the noble to the peasant,
who fails to call upon God, in this, if in no other
way? Whither can you turn, where can you go,
without hearing some praying to God for damnation,
either on his neighbour or himself ? Curling those,
without either fear or remoxse, whom Christ hath
bought to inherit a blessing! |

Are you one of these stupid, senseless, shameless
wretches, that call so earnestly for damnation on your
own foul? What if God should take you at your
word? Are you able to dwell with everlasting burnings ?
If you are, why should you be in haste, to be in the
lake of fire burning with brimstone ? God help you, or
you will be there soon enough, and long enough; for
that fire is not quenched But the smoke thereof ascend-
&th up, day _ night, for ever and ever.

And what is that important affair, concerning which
you was but now appealing to God? Was you calling
God to record upon your foul, touching your everlasting
salvation ? No; but touching the beauty of your
horse, the swiftness of your dog, or the goodness of
your drink! How is this? What notion have you
of God? What do you take him to be?
| Idcirco stolidam prabet tibi vellere barbam

1 bite ? |
; Jus What

To' Men of Reason and Religion. 171

What stupidity, what infatuation is this! Thus without either pleasure, or profit, or praise, to ict at nought
him that hath all power both in heaven and earth ! Wantonly to provoke the eyes of hes glory / |
Are you a man of letters, who are sunk fo low ? I
will not send you to the inspired writers (fo called:
rhaps you disdain to receive instruction by them) but
to the old, blind heathen. Could you only fix in your
mind the idea he had of God, (though it is not strictly
just, unless we refer it to God made man) you would
never thus affront him more,

H, na} xvarinow in" ogvor vevot K polo
Agb, dg Nd, ime” 6 wonile Lis.

Kare. a abararouo piyar ννν Ohvuror =

Shall not the very heathen then vie up in judgment
against this generation, and condemn it? Yea, and not
only the learned heathens of Greece and Rome, but the
savages of America. For I never remember to have
heard a wild Indian name the name of Sootaleicatee,
(him that sitteth in heaven) without either laying his
hand upon his breast, or casting his eyes down to the
ground, And you are a Christian! O how do you
caule the very name of Christianity to be blasphemed
among the heathen ! |

5. But is it ligt swearing only, (inexcusable as that
is) because of which our land mourneth ? May it not
also be said of us, Though they say the Lord liveth, surely
they swear falsely? Yea, to such a degree, that there
is hardly the like in any nation under heaven ; that almost every corner of the land is fillea with wilful, deliberate perjury. .

I speak not now of the perjuries which every com-

mon {wearer cannot but run into day by day. (And
indeed common “ {wearing notoriously contributes to
the growth of perjury. For oaths are little minded
when common use has sullied them, and every minute's
repetition has made them cheap and vulgar.””) Nor of
those which are continually committed and often detected in our open courts of justice. Only with regard
to the latter T must remark, that they are a natural consequence, of that monstrous, shocking manner, wherein

oaths

172 A rARTUER APPEAL, Part II.

oaths are usually administered therein: without any decency or seriousness at all; much less with that awful
solemnity, which a rational heathen would expect, in
an immediate appeal to the great God of heaven.

I had once designed to consider all the oaths which
are customarily taken by any set of men among us.
But I soon found this was a work too weighty for me:
fo almost in infinitum are oaths multiplied in England:
I suppole to a degree Which is not known in any other
nation in Europe.

What I now propose is, to instance only in a few,
{but those not of small importance) and to shew, how
amazingly little regard is had, to what is solemnly promised or affirmed before God,

6. This is done, in part, to my hands by a late author. So far as he goes, I shall little more than transcribe his words. (Mr. Disney's first Essay, p. 30.)

When a Justice of the Peace is {worn into the
commission, he makes oath -- That he shall do
equal right to the poor and to the rich, after his cunning, wit and power, and after the laws and- customs
of the realm and statutes thereof made, in all articles iii
the king's commission to him direftted.,--W hat those
articles are, you will find in the first Assignavimus of
the Commission : © we have assigned you and every
one of you, jointly and severally--to keep and cause to
be kept, all ordinances and statutes, made for--the quiet,
rule, and government of our people, in all and every
the articles thereof, according to the force, form, and
effect of the same, and to chastise and punish all persons, offending against any of them, according to the
form of those statutes and ordinances.” So that he is
solemnly sworn to the execution of all such statutes, as
the legislative power of the nation has thought fit to
throw upon his care, Such are all those (among others)
made against drunkenness, tipling, profane swearing,
blasphemy ; lewd and dyorderly practices, and profanation of the Hord's day.” And it is hard to imagine how
a Justice of Peace can think himself more concerned,
to suppress riots, or private quarrels, than he is to levy
twelve pence on a profane swearer, five shillings on a

«runkard, ten shillings on a public-house that suffers
tipling,

--

+

To Men of Reason and Religion. 173

tipling, or any other penalty which the law exacts of
vice and immorality. The same oath binds him both to
one and the other, laying an equal obligation upon his
conscience, How a magistrate, who neglects to punish
excels, profaneness and impiety, can excuse himself from
the guilt of perjury, I do not pretend to know. If he
reasons fairly, he will find himself as much forsworn, as
an evidence who being upon oath, to declare the whole
truth, nevertheless conceals the most confederable part of
it. And his perjury is so much the more infamous, as
the ill -- and effects of it will be mischievous.“

7. The same author (in the preface to his second essay)
goes on:

„VV ou gentlemen of the grand juries, take a solemn
oath, That you will diligently enquire, and true presentment make, of all such articles, matters, and things
as shall be given you in charge: as also, that you will
(not only present no person for envy, hatred, or malice,
but) not leave any unpresented, for fear, favour, or affeftion, Now, are not the laws against immorality and
profaneness given you in charge, as well as those against
riots, felony, and treason ? Are not presentment and
indiẽtment one method expressly appointed by the statutes, for the punishment of drunkenness and tipling ?
Are not the houses of bawdry and gaming, punishable in
the same courts, and consequently prefentable by you?
Is not the proclamation for the punishing of vice, profaneness, and immorality, always read before you as soon
as you are sworn? And does not the judge of assize, or
chairman of the bench, in the charge given immediately
after the reading it, either recite to you the particular
laws against such offences, or refer you for them to that

roclamation ? It 1s plain from all this, that you are
und upon your oaths, to present all vice and immorality,

as well as other crimes, that fall within your knowledge,
because they are expressly given you in charge. And this
you are to do, not only when evidence 15 offered before
you by the information of others, but with regard to all
{uch offences as you, or any of you are able of your own
© personal knowledge to present : all which you have sworn
to do impartially, without fear, favour, or affection.“
I leave it now with all reasonable men to consider,

«0 how

174 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part II.

how few grand juries perform this? And consequently,
what multitudes of them, throughout the nation, fall
under the guilt of wilful perjury !

8. The author proceeds, p. 8. * I shall next address
_ myself to you that are constables. And to you I must
needs say, That if you know your duty, it is no thanks
to us that are justices, For the oath we usually give
you is so short, and in such general terms, that it leaves
with you no manner of instruction in the particulars of
the office to which you are sworn, But that which
ought to be given you, recites part of your duty in the
following words : 8

* You shall do your best endeavour, that rogues,

vagabonds, 'and night-walkers, be apprehended ; and that
the statutes made for their punishment, be duly put in
execution : you shall have a watchful eye to such as shall
keep any house or place where any unlawful game 1s
used: as also to fach as shall frequent such places, or
shall use any unlawful games, there or eHewhere, You
shall present all and every the offences contrary to the
statutes made to restrain tipling in inns, alehouses, and
other victualling houses, and for repressing of drunkenness, You shall once in the year, during your office,
present all popish recusants. You shall well and duly
execute all precepts and warrants to you directed. And
you shall well and duly, according to your knowledge,
power, and ability, do and execute all other things belonging to the office of a constable, so long as you shall
continue therein.“ |
Upon this, I would observe first, That actors of
plays are expressed by name within the statute, to be
taken up for vagabonds, and punished accordingly ; and
that though a statute of queen Elizabeth's excepts such
companies as have a license under the hand and seal of a
nobleman, yet a later statute in the reign of king James
I. has taken away that protection from them; by declaring, That from henceforth no authority to be given by, any
peer of the realm, shall be available to free or discharge
them from the pains and punishments of that former statute. Every conitable therefore in those parishes, where
any of thele stroling players come, is bound by his oath,
to seize upon, corrett, and send them packing without
delay.” 6 The

To Men of Reason and Religion. 273

“ The next part of your oath obliges 7 to an A
watchful eye, on fuch houses as keep, and such persons
as use unlawful gaming. The statute directs you weekly,
or at least monthly, to search within your liberties, all
houses or places suspected of this offence, and upon discovering, to bring them to punishment. be e this article, I would oblerve, 1. That the law makes some allowance for artificers, husbandmen, apprentices, labourers and servants, to play in Christmas, but at no other
time of the year; and 2. That sports and pastimes whatsoever are made unlawful upon the Lord's day, by a
statute of king Charles II. You are therefore bound
upon oath, to bring to punishment {such as are guilty
of profaning that day by any sports or pastimes whatsoever.“

The following parts of your oath are, 1. That you
shall present all and every the offences of tipling
and drunkenness that come to your knowledge ;
2. That you shall once in the year present all poprsa
recusants, Nay, and by the statutes on which your
oath is grounded, you are obliged once a year to present in feffion, all those within your parishes, who (not
being Dissenters) come not once in a month, at least,
to Church. And g. That you shall well and duly
execute all precepts and warrants to you directed. 1
believe no constable will pretend to be ignorant of this.
How 1s it then, that when we send out warrants, to
levy on offenders for swearing, drunkenness, and the
like, those warrants are so ill obeyed? Are you not
{worn to execute these as well as any other, and that
duly too, according to the tenor of your precept ?
Your precept tells you, you shall demand such a sum;
and if the offender will not pay, you shall levy it by
distress of his goods: and if no distress can be taken,
you are then only to set him in the ftocks ; otherwile
you have no authority so to do: nor is the setting him
in the stocks, when you might have distrained, any
execution of you precept.“

The last part of your oath is in genetal terms,
That you shall well and duly, according to your knowledge, power, and ability, do and execute all other
things belonging to the office of a constable. I shall

| Q 2 instance

176 A raxTHER APPEAL, Part II.

instance in. some things which certainly belong to your
office, because you, and none else, can do them. 1. A
constable may, without x warrant, apprehend any persons, and carry them before a Justice,. who are driving
carts and horses, or cattle on the Lord's day: 2. He
may, do the fame, without a warrant, to such as he
may find at sports or pastimes on that day. g. To such
as he shall find tippling in the public houses: 4. Shopkeepers selling or exposing goods to sale on the Lord's
day; and lastly, to such as he shall find drunk or blaspheming, or profanely swearing or cursing.”

Thus I have shewn you, in part, what belongs to your
office it is well, if according to the tenor of your oath,
you duly to the best of your knowledge and ability, do and
execute all these things, But remember, that, if you
do not, if you neglect any of them, you are forsworn.

Now let all men judge, how many constables in England are clear of wilful perjury !

9. I will now (he goes on) address myself to
church-wardens, Your oath is, That you shall well
and truly execute the office of à church-warden, for

the ensuing year; and to the best. of your skill and

knowledge, present such persons and things, as are presentable, by the ecclesiastical laws of this realm.“ I
shall set down only a few of these. |

% The statute of king James I. obliges you to pre.
sent:once a year, all monthly Absenters from Church.“

„The goth Canon. enjoins you, first to admonish
and then, if they reform not, to present all your parishioners who do not duly resort to Church on Sundays, and there continue the whole time of divine service.
On this Article observe, 1. That a person's being absent
from Church, is ground sufficient for you to proceed.
2. That you are not only to present, those who do not
come to Church, but also thole that behave irreverently
or indecently there, either walking about or talking ;
all who do not abide there orderly and. foberly, the whole
time of Service and Sermon, and all that loiter away
any part of that time in the church-yard or in the
fields.” |
„ The 112th Canon enjoins you, within 40 days
after Easter, to exhibit to the Bishop or ax (pon.

8 ceuar,

-- nar ITE: >.
o l wy
a AK ad . -

i -- --„--
em

To Men of Reason and Religion. 177
cellor, the names of all above the age of sixteen, within your parish that did not receive the Communion.”

% Other statutes oblige you to present drunkenness,
tippling, and public houses suffering persons to tipple
in them.“ |

« And the 109th Canon binds you to present all
manner of Vice, Profaneness and Debauchery, requiring you faithfully to present all and every the offenders in Adultery, Whoredom, Drunkenness, profane Swearing, or any other Uncleanness and wicket
ness of life.“ It is therefore a part of that office to
which you are solemnly sworn, to prevent not only
Drunkenness and Tippling, but profane Swearing,
Lewdness, and whatsoever else is contrary to Christian
Piety, So that if you know any of your parishioners,
be his quality or circumstances what they will, that is
guilty of any of these, you are obliged to present him
at the next Visitation, or you are yourselves guilty of
Perjury. And the 26th Canon expresles such an abhorrence of a church-warden's negle& in this matter,
that it forbids the Minister, in anywise, to admit you
to the holy communion, who (as the words of the
Canon are) having taken your oaths to present all such
offence in your several parishes, shall notwithstanding your
faid oath, either in neglecting or refusing to present, wittingly and willingly, desperately and irreligiously incur,
the horrid guilt of perjury.”

And who. is clear? I appeal to every Minister of a
parish, from one end. of England to the other, How
many church-wardens have you known, in twenty,
thirty, forty years, who did not thus desperately and
irreg iously incur, the horried guilt of perjury ?

10. I proceed. to perjuries of another kind, The
Oath. taken by all Captains of ships, every time they
return from a trading voyage, runs in these terms:

* I do swear, that the entry above written, now
tendered and subscribed by me, is a just report of the
name of my ship, its burthen, built, property, number and country of mariners,. the present Master. and:
voyage: and that it doth farther contain a true account
of my lading, with the particular marks, numbers,
quantity, quality and consignment, of all the goods

Q 3 and

ä--n]UNT--ñ -------- ꝑꝗ́ --ęZA·-- -- ...a--_*--
-

18 A rARTuE R APPEAL, Part II.
and merchandizes in my said ship, to the best of my
knowledge; and that I have not broke bulk, or delivered any goods out of my said ship, since her loading
in. 80 help me God.“
These words are so clear, express, and unambiguous,

that they require no explanation. But who takes this

lam oath without being knowingly and deliberately
Een f Does one captain in fifty? Does one in
five hundred? May we not go farther yet? Are
there five captains of vessels now in London, who have
not at one time or another, by this very oath, which
they knew to be false when they took it, incurred the
guilt of wilful perjury ?

11. The oath which all officers of his Majesty's
customs, take at their admission into their office, runs
thas : |

« do swear to be true and faithful in the execution,

to the best of my knowledge and power, of the trust
committed to my charge and inspection, in the service
of his Majesty's Customs: and that I will not take or
receive, any reward or gratuity, directly or indirectly,
other than my falary, or what is or shall be allowed
me from the Crown, or the regular fees established by
law, for any service done or to be done in the execution

of my employment in the Customs, on any account

whatsoever, So help me God.“

On this it may be oblerved, 1. That there are regular
fees, established by law, for some of these Officers ;
2, That the rest - hereby engage, not to take or receiye any reward or gratuity, directly or indirectly,
other than their salary or allowance from the Crown,
on any account whatsoever, |

How do the former keep this solemn engagement ?
They whose fees are established by law? Do they take
those established fees and no more? Do they not receive any farther gratuity? Not on any account whatfoever? If they do they are undeniably guilty of
wilful perjury. |

And do the latter take no fees at all? Do they receive no reward or gratuity, for any service done, or

to be done, in the execution of their e ae: F

mp
irectly, ap

Do they not take any money, directly or i
| any
= bs eos Y * *˖ 1 4 --

* a as is " * = 2
5 Wl - N * F <a. q
2 * 1 * . ** 1 4 b . E * 1 --
y L * 1 191 0 . . * . an E * 2 * 8 5 --

x vi ap RY 26 3 Mo. 83 1 oh 8 * ve * 1 * 9 ws NOTES , oP r SE N * 5 .
N | ok A . 5 2 F OR . a Per, ee c i; . 1 | o Sc at - ane?
* \ 38 Go HS TORRE” > 26 n 82 re 3 r. ö . r

uam nt
a or tn be p FEY 2 4a -
Nn 8 |

7 1 K * ds OY

e *
tf.
3 3
4 +
r

*
"Mad
le * » (gh
44 | * "ys
mas Uh Fi

k
a

1 4 14.4

> 96 7 St Foe To «4s
% \. "x TR
% »
by
1 * 4 * 1 ns .

n ON FD

Bag 5 * We F >

Lac

p jr ©$4Y 3

,
* « o
* 3 n
* f . *” 2 2 *
mY £9 I» o p
* =

---- -- --------̃--
\
-- 1 *
4 ao. *
*

To Men of Reason and Religion. 199:
any account whatsoever? Every time they do receive
either more or less, they also are flatly forsworn. --

Vet who scruples either the one or the other?
Either taking a larger fee than the law appoints? Op
the taking any fee, large or small, which is off
even where the law appoints none at all? IF ty

What innumerable Perjuries then are here committed,
over and over, day by day! And without any remorse; without any shame! Without any fear either
of God or Man! |

12, I will produce but one instance more. The

oath of one who votes for a Member of Parliament is

this :

&« do swear, I have not received or had, by myself, or of any person whatsoever in trust for me, or
for my use and benefit, directly or indirettly, any sum
or sums of money, office, place or employment, gift
or reward, or any promise or security for any money,
office, employment or gift, in order to give my Vote
at this Election, and that I have not before been polled
at this Election. So help me God.”

We may observe here, 1. That this Oath is taken,

once in even years (if not oftner) by all the Free-

holders, in every county throughout England and

Wales, as well as all the Freemen in every City and

Borough-Town; and 2, That hereby every Voter

swears, in words liable to no evasion, That he has not

received, directly or indirectly, any gift or reward, or
romise of any.

But (to pass over those godless and fhameless wretches,
who frequently vote twice at one Elettion) How few
are there, who can take this Oath with a Conscience
void of offence? Who have not received, directly or
indirectly any gift or promise of any? No! have net
you? If you have received nothing else, have not
you received meat or drink? and did you pay for
the meat or drink you received? If not, that was a
gift; and consequently, you are as really perjured, as
the man that has received a hundred pounds.

What a melancholy prospect is then before us!
Here are almost all the common people of any subNance throughout the land, both in the city and

| country

|
|
|

fincerity ? And is not that very appeal an acknow-

laying your hand 7 the Gospel, declare, That you

this heavy curse, by kiffing the Book? How then dare

ing to whose minute Philosophy, the particular. Providence of Cod is utterly exploded, the hair of our

280 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part II.
country, calling God to record, to known, wilful false.
hoods ! / ITE" | =

1g. I shall conclude this head in the weighty words
of the Author before cited. ogy

% Most of these, I am afraid, look upon their Oaths
as things of course, and little to be regarded, But can
there be any thing in the world more sacred than an
Oath? Is it not a solemn Appeal to God for your

ledgement, that he will surely, punish falschood ? Nay
farther, is it not a calling down the vengeance of God
upon yourselves if you are false? Do you not, by

hope for no Salvation by Chrift, if you perform not what
you then promise, or, if what you then affirm, is not
true? And do not the words, So help me God, sufficiently prove, that the intention of your oath is so?
And that if you {wear false, you are to expect no mercy
from God, either in this world or the next? And do
you not personally and expressly give your consent to

any of you to venture to play with so awful an engagement? Is it that you think the oath of a Grand
Jury- man, or Parish-Officer, (of a Captain, an Officer
of the Customs, or a Voter in Elections) © is not as
acred and binding as that of an Evidence at the Bar ?
What is it can make the difference? Both of them
are equally Appeals to God, and Imprecations of his.
Vengeance upon wilful Perjury.” |

14. If there be then a God that is not mocked, what
a weight of sin lies on this nation? And fin of no
common dye ; for Perjury has always been. accounted
one of the deepest stain, And how will any one attempt to excuse this? By adding Blasphemy thereto.?
So indeed some have done; saying, like those of old,
Tush, thou God carest not for it. The Lord seeth Ci. e.
regardeth us not. The Lord hath forsaken the earth.
He hath left second causes to take their course, and man
in the hand of his own counsel.

How many are they who now speak. thus; accord-

heads

r *

To Men of Reason and Religion. 181

heads are no longer numbered: and not only a fparrow,
but a city, an empire, may fall to the ground, without
the will or care of our heavenly Father, You allow then
only a general Providence, I do not understand the
term. Be so kind as to let me know, what you mean
by a © General Providence, contradistinguished from a
particular one?” 1 doubt you are at a loss for an
answer ; unless you mean some huge, unwelldy thing,
(1 suppose resembling the Primum Mobile in the Ptole«
maick System) which continually whirls the whole
Universe round, without affecting one thing more than
another, I doubt this Hypothesis will demand more
proof, than you are at present able to produce; beside
that it is attended with a thousand difcultics, such as
you cannot readily solve. It may be therefore your
wisest way for once to think with the vulgar, to acquiesce in the plain, scriptural account. This informs
us, that although God dwelleth in heaven, yet he {till
ruleth over all : That his Providence extends to every
individual in the whole system of Beings which he
hath made: that all natural Caules of every kind, depend wholly upon his will; and he increases, lessens,
luspends or destroys their efficacy, according to his own
good pleasure: that he uses preternatural Causes at his

will, the ministry of good or of evil Angels: and that

he hath never yet precluded himself from exerting his
own immediate power, from speaking: life or death into
any of his creatures : from looking a world into being,
or into nothing.

4 Thinkest thou then, O man, that thou shalt escape
the judgment of this great God?” O no longer
© treasure up unto thyself wrath, against the day of
wrath!” Thou canst not recal what is past ; but now
keep thyself pure, even were it at the price of all that
thou hast ; and acknowledge the goodness of God, in
that he did not long since cut thee off, and send thee
to thy own place. |

15. The Jews of old were charged by God, with
profaning his Sabbaths also. And do we Christians
come behind them herein? (1 speak of those wha
acknowledge the obligation.) Do we * call the sabbath

2 Delight, the holy ot the Lord, honourable? Not do-

ing

182 A rARTER APPEAL, Part II.

ing our own ways, not finding our own pleasure, nor
speaking our own words?” Do our © men-servants and
maid-servants rest” thereon? And the “ stranger that
is within our gates?” Is no business, but what is
really necessary, done within our house? You know
in your own conscience, and God knoweth, that the
very reverse of this is true. |
But fetting aside these things which are done as it
were by stealth, whether by mean or honourable men ;
how many are they, in every city, as well as in this,
who profane the Sabbath with a high hand? How
many in this, that openly defy both God and the King,
that break the laws both divine and human, by working at their trade, delivering their goods, receiving their
pay, or following their ordinary business, in one branch
or another, and wiping their mouth and saying, 1 do
no evil? How many buy and fell on the Day of the
Lord, even in the open streets of this city? How
many open or (with some modesty) half open their
shops? And when they have not the pretence of
perishable goods ; without any pretence at all, money
15 their god, and gain their godlinels, But what
are all these droves in the skirts of the town, that well
nigh cover the face of the earth ? Till they drop one
after another into the numerous receptacles prepared
for them in every corner. What are these to gain
by profaning the Day of the Lord? Nothing at all.
They drink in iniquity like water. Nay many of them
pay for their fin; perhaps great part of what should
sustain their family the ensuing week. I know not
what is finding our own pleasure, or doing our own ways,
if this is not. What then shall we plead in your excuse? That Many others do it as well as you?”
Nay number is so far from extenuating your fault, that
it aggravates it above measure. For this is open war
against God. A whole army of you join together,
and with one consent, in the face of the Sun, run upon the thick bosses of his buckler.
16. It is once mentioned in the Prophets, In thee
( Jerusalem) they have set light by father and mother.”
But frequent mention is made of their setting light by
their civil parents, of their murmurings and rebellings
agaznst

To Men of Reason and Religion.“ 18g

against their governors. Yet surely our boasting against
them is excluded, even in this respeft. For do not all
our histories witness such a series of mutinies, seditions,
factions and rebellions, as are scarce to be paralleled in
any other kingdom, since the world ed And has
not the wild, turbulent, ungovernable spirit of our
countrymen, been continually acknowledged and lamented, (as abundance of their writings testify to this
day) by the cool, rational part of the nation? Terrible effects whereof bave been seen and felt, more or
' lefs, in every generation.

But did this spirit exist only in times past ? Blessed
be God, it is now restrained it does not break out ;*
but the traces thereof are {till easy to be found. For
whence springs this continual speaking evil of dignitzes ?
Of all whe are at the helm of public affairs? Whence .
this speaking evil of the ruler of our people, fo common
among all orders of men? I do not include those
whose province it is to inspect all the public administerations. But 1s not almost every private Gentleman in
the land, every Clergyman, every Tradesman; yea
every Man or Woman that has a Tongue, a Politician,
a Setler of the State? Is not every Carman and
Porter abundantly more knowing than the King, Lords
and Commons together? Able to tell you all their
foibles, to point out their faults and mistakes, and how
they ought to proceed, if they will fave the nation?
Now all this has a natural, undeniable tendency to
mutiny and rebellion, O what need have we above
any nation. on earth, of his continual care and protection, who alone is able to rule the raging of the sea,
and ftill the madness of the people ! |

17. But to proceed. Were there © drunkards in
Ephraim, mighty to drink wine, men of {strength to
mingle strong drink?“ And are there not in England ?
Are they not the growth of every county, city and
town therein? These do not indeed, or not often
« rife up early, that they may follow strong drink ;”
and fo “ continue till night, till wine inflame them,”
They have found a readier way! namely, to begin at
night, and continue following their wine or strong

N. B. This was wrote a year ago.

drink

184 A rAATEEN APPEAL, Part 11.

drink till the morning: And what numbers are there
of these throughout the land? Lost to Reafon and
Humanity, as well as to Religion: so that no wonder
© they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands.“

Nor indeed have our drunkards need to continue
from morning to night, until wine inflame them: see-

ing they have found a far more compendious method

of casting aside all sense and reason, and disencumbering themselves from all remains, either of Con-
{science or Understanding. So that whatever work of
darkness is speedily to be done, and that without any
danger of being mterrupted, either by Fear, Com8 or Remorse, they may be in a few moments,
by one draught as effectually qualified for it, as if they
could {wallow a legion of devils. Or, (if that be all
their concern) they may at a moderate expence, destroy
their own body as well as foul, and plunge through

this liquid fire, into that “' prepared for the devil and

his angels.“

Friend! Stop! you have the form of a man still.
And perhaps some remains of understanding. O may
the merciful God lay hold of that! Unto him all
things are possible. Think a little for once. What
is it you are doing? Why should you destroy yourfelf? I could not use the worst enemy I have in the
world, as you use yourself, Why should you murder
yourself inch by inch? Why should you burn yourself alive? O {pare your own body at least, if you
have no pity for your soul! But have you a foul then?
Do you really believe it? What, a soul that must
live for ever! O spare thy foul! Do not destroy thy
own soul with an everlasting destruction! It was made
for God, Do not give it into the hands of that old
murderer of men! Thou canst not stupify it long.
When at leaves the body, it will awake and sleep no
more. Yet a little while, and it launches out into the
great deep, to live and think, and feel for ever. And
what will cheer thy spirit there, if thou hast not“ a
drop of water to cool thy tongue? But the dye is
not yet cast, Now cry to God, „and iniquity shall
not be thy ruin,”

18, Of

r --
„** _ --

* ing ere y 6 * x" --_----
Iz” S's +1
* 2 *
*

Gr 4

2 * * oc . |
3 4 * 1 - » U 1 * d ”
e

"re = E

ö
*
To Men of Reason and Religion, 183

18. Of old time there were also those that were at
ease in Zion, that lay upon beds of ivory, and stretched
themselves upon their couches, that eat the lambs out of the
flock, and calues out of the 1 But how inelegant
were these ancient Epicures! Lambs out of the flock,
and calves out of the fl Were these the best dainties
they could procure? How have we improved, since
Jeroboam's time? Who can number the varieties of
our tables; or the arts we have *© To enlarge the pleasure of tasting ?” And what are their couches, or
beds of ivory, to the furniture of our apartments ?
Or their chains and bracelets, and mantles, and changeable
suits of apparel, to the ornaments of our eng ?
What comparison is there between their diversions and
ours? Look at Solomon in all his glory : and yet may
we not question, whether he was not an utter stranger
to the pleasures of the Chase? And notwithstanding
his 40,000 horses, did he ever see a Race in his life ?
He made gardens and orchards, and pools of water ;
he planted vineyards and built houses. But had he one
theatre among them all? No. This is the glory of
later times. Or had he any conception of a Ball, an
Assembly, a Masquerade, or a Ridotto? And who
imagines that all his instruments of music put together,
were any more to be compared to ours, than his or his
father's rumbling Hebrew verses,

* To the soft Sing-song of Italian lays.”

In all these points our pre-eminence over the Jews, is
much every way! |

Vea, and over our own ancestors as well as theirs.
But 1s this our glory or our shame? Were Edward
the IIId, or Henry the Vth to come among us now,
what would they think of the change in their people ?
Would they applaud the elegant variety at the Old
Baron's table ? or the costly delicacy of his furniture
and apparel ? Would they listen to these instruments
of music ? Or find pleasure in those diversions ?
Would they rejoice to Ee the Nobles and Gentry of
the land, lying at ease, stretching themselves on beds
of down ? Too delicate to use their own limbs, even
in the streets of the city: to bear the touch of the

Gigs R people,

*

186 A ranT EN APPEAL, Part II.

people, the blowing of the wind, or the shining of
the fun! O how would their hearts burn within
them! What indignation, sorrow, shame, must they
feel, to see the ancient hardiness lost, the British temperance, ar. and scorn of superfluities, the rough,
indefatigable industry, exchanged for softness, idleness,
and fulness of bread ! Well for them, that they were
esel unto their fathers, before this exchange was
made |
19. To prove at large, That the luxury and sensuality, the sloth and indolence, the softness and idleness,
the effeminacy and false delicacy of our nation are without a parallel. would but be lost labour, I fear we
may say, the lewdness too; for if the Jews, as the Prophet speaks, ** assembled themselves y troops in the
| can he houses,“ so do the English, and much more abundantly. Indeed, where is male chastity to be found?
Among the Nobility? Among the Gentry ? Among
the Tradesmen ? or among the common people of England? How few lay any claim to it at all? How few
desire so much as the reputation of it? Would you
yourlelf account it an honour or a reproach to be
ranked among those of whom it is said, ** These are they
which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins?” And how numerous are they now, even among
tuch as are accounted men of honour. and probity,
« who are as fed horses, every one neighing after his
neighbour's wife? U 301 |
But, as if this were not enough, is not the sin of
Sodom too, more commen among us than ever it was
in Jerusalem? Are not our streets beset with those
monsters of uncleanness, who * burn in their Iust one
toward another,” whom God hath * given up to a rerobate mind, to do those things which are not convement ?” O Lord, thy compassions fail not: therefore
we are not consumed, Kg |
20. Neither do we yield to them in injustice any more
than in wncleanness. How frequent are open robberies
among us? Is not the act of violence even in our
streets? And what laws are sufficient to prevent it?
Does not 4eft of various kinds abound in all parts of
the land, even though death be the punishment of it ?

And

To Men of Reason and Religion. 187
And are there not among us, who * take usury and increase,” who © greedily gain of their neighbour by extortion ? Yea, whole trades which subsist by such extortion, as was not named either among the Jews or Heathens 7 *© Is there not yet the scant measure, the
wicked balances, and the bag of deceitful weights P“
Beside the thousand nameless ways of over-reaching and
defrauding, the craft and mystery of every trade and ;
profession. It were an endless task to descend to poriiculars, to point out in every circumstance, how not
only sharpers and gamesters, {those public nuisances,
those scandals to the English nation) but high and low,
rich and poor, men of character and men of note, in
every station of public or private life, have corrupted
i themselves, and generally applaud themselves and count
| it policy and wisdom so to do: so that if gain be at
| hand, they care not, though zuftice stand afar of : fo
| that he © which departeth from evil,” which cometh.
not into their secret, still “ maketh himself a prey;
and “ the wicked {till devoureth the man that is more
righteous than he,” Ft | |
And what redress? Suppose a great man to oppress
the needy? Suppose the rich grinds the face of the
oor : what remedy against such oppression can he find
in this Christian country ? If the one is rich and the
other poor, doth not justice stand afar off? And is
not the poor under the utmost improbability, (if not
impossibility) of obtaining it ? Perhaps the hazard is
greater among us, than either among Jews, Turks, or
Heathens. | |
For Example. Suppose a great man, with or without form of law, does wrong to his poor neighhour.
What will he do? Sue his Lordship at common law?
Have the cause tried at the next Sessions or Assizes ?
Alas! your own neighbours, those who know the
Whole case, will tell you, + You are out of your
senses.” © But twelve good men and true will do me
Justice.” Very well: but where will you find them:
men unbiassed, incapable of corruption, superior both
to fear and favour, to every view whether of gain or
loss? But this is not all; they must not only be good
and true, but wise and understanding men, Else how
R 2 caly

A FARTHER APPEAL, Part II.

wy is it for a, skilful pleader to throw, a. mist before
eir eyes ? 1 su Tupposing too the judge to be quite
impartial, and p against all corruption. And
should all these be Rode ont concur, (of which I fear
there are not many precedents) supposing a verdift is
given in your favour, still you have gained nothing.
The suit is removed into a higher Court, and you have
all your work to begin again. Here you have to
struggle with all the fame difficulties as before, aud
perhaps many new ones too. However, if you have
money enough, you may succeed : but if that fails,
your cause is gone. Without money, you can have
no more law; poverty alone utterly shuts out justice.

But, * cannot an honest Attorney procure me justice?” An honest Attorney! Where will you find
one ? Of thole who are called exceeding A Attornies, Who is there that makes any scruple, |

1. To promote and encourage needless suits, if not
unjust ones too? _ |

2. To defend a bad Cause, knowing it so to be :.

By making a Demur, and then withdrawing it :

By pleading some falle Plea, to the Plaintiff's Declaration:

By putting an evasive Answer to his Bill :

By 0 the Suit, if possible, till the plaintiff
is ruined:

To carry a Cause not amounting to ten shillings
into Westminster-Hall, by layiug it in his Declaration
as above forty :

4. To delay his own Client's Syit knowingly and
wilfully, in order to gain thereby:

. To draw himself the Pleadings or Conveyances
of his Client, instead of giving them to be drawn. by
able Counsel.

6. To charge his Client with the Fees which should
have been given to such Counsel, although they were
not given :

J. To charge for drawing fair Copies, where none
were drawn :

8. To charge Fees for expedition given to Clerks,

when not one farthing has been given them
9. To

To Men of Reason and Religion. 189

9. To fend his Clerk a journey (longer or shorter,)
to do business with or for different persons ; and to
charge the horse-hire and expence of that journey to
every person severally :

10. To send his Clerk to Westminster, on the business of ten (it may be) or twenty persons, and to charge
each of those twenty for his attendance, as if he had
been fent on account of one only :

11. To charge his own Attendance in like manner :
And, {
12, To fill up his Bill with Attendances, Fees, and
Term-fees, though his Client is no whit forwarder in
his cause. |

This is he that is called an honest Attorney ! How
much honester is a pick-pocket ?

But there is a Magistrate whose peculiar office it is,
to redress the injured and oppressed. Go then, and
make trial of this remedy ; go, and tell your case to
the Lord Chancellor. Hold; you must go on regu»
larly : you must tell him your case, in form of law,
or not at all. You mult therefore file a Bill in Chancery, and retain a Lawyer belonging to that Court,
« But you have already spent all you have ; you have
no money.“ Then I fear you will have no justice,
You stumble at the threshold. If you have either lost.
or spent all, your Cause is naught : it will not even
come to a hearing. So, if the oppressor has secured
all that you had, he is as safe as if you was under the
earth. |
21. Now what an amazing thing is this! The ver
N of the villainy makes it beyond redress But

ppose he that is opprest, has some substance left, and
can go through all the Courts of Justice, what parallel
can we find among Jews, Turks, or Heathens, for
either the delays: or the expences attending it? With
regard to the former, how monstrous is it, that in a suit
relating to that inheritance, which is to furnish you and
your family with food and raiment, you must wait
month after-month, perhaps year after year, before it is
determined, whether it be yours or not? And what
are you to eat, or to wear in the mean time 7 Of that
the Court takes no cognizance! Is not this very delay,

err R 3 suppose

.

mo A raxtutr APPEAL, Part II.
(suppose there were no other grievance attending the
English course of law) wrong beyond all expression ?
Contrary to all Sense, Reason, Justice, and Equity ?
A capital Cause is tried in one day; and finally decided
at once. And, is the life less than meat? Or the
body of less concern than raiment ? What a shameful mockery of Justice then, is this putting off Pe-
/ _--_ Causes from Term to Term, yea, from Year to

car |

With regard to the latter. A man has wronged
me of a' hundred pounds, I appeal to a Judge for
the recovery of it. How astonishing is it, that this
Judge himself cannot give me what is my right, and
what evidently appears so to be, unless I first give, perhaps one half of the sum, to men I never saw before in
my life ! ph 155

22, I have hitherto supposed, that all Causes when
they are decided, are decided according to justice and
equity. But is it fo? Ye Learned in the Law, is no
unjust sentence given in your Courts? Have not the
same Causes been decided quite opposite ways? One
© way, this Term, just the contrary, the next? Perhaps
one way in the morning (this I remember an instance
of) and another way in the afternoon : How is this ?
Is there no Justice left on earth ? No regard for right
or wrong? Or have Causes been -puzzled fo long,
that you know not now what is either wrong or right?
What is agreeable to law or contrary to it? I have
heard some of you frankly declare, that it is in many
cales next to impossible to know, what is law, and
what is not. So are your Folios of Law multiplied
upon you, that no human brain is able to contain
them: no; nor any consistent Scheme, or Abst ract of
them all. | | 1 13 n 9,
; But is it really owmg to ignorance of the Law, (this
is the most fayourable supposition) that fo few of you
{cruple taking Fees on either fide, of almost any Cause
that can be conceived ? And that you generally plead
in the manner you do on any side of any Cause ?
Rambling to and fro, in a way so abhorrent from
common sense, and so utterly - foreigi to the: question ?

1 have been amazed at hearing the pleadings of some

| | | Eminent

To Men of Reason and Religion. 291
eminent Counsel : and when it has fallen out that the
Pleader on the other fide understood only the common
Rules of Logic, he has made those eminent men appear,
either such egregious knaves, if they could help it, or
such egregious block heads, if they could not, that one
would have believed, they would shew their face
there no - par au: time, * _ be a God that
1 th righteously, what horrid insults upon him are
d « Shall Tot visit for these 8 saith the
Lord? Shall not my foul be avenged on such a nation
as this?

There is one instance more of (I know not what to
term it) injustice, oppression, sacrilege, which hath long
cried aloud in the ears of God. For among men who
doth hear ? I mean the management of many of those
who are intrusted with our Public Charities. By the
pious munificence of our forefathers, we have abundance of these, of various kinds. But is it not glarangly true, (to touch only on a few generals) that the
managers of many of them, either 1. Do not apply
the benefattion to that use for which it was designed by
the bene factor, or 2. Do not apply it with fuch care
and -frugality, as in such a cafe are indispensibly re-

uired ; Or 3. Do not apply the whole of the benefaction to any charitable use at all; but secrete part
thereof, from time to time, for the use of themselves
and their families. Or, lastly, by plain, barefaced op-

ression, exclude those from having any part in such
-- who dare (though with all possible tenderness and respett) set before them the things that they
have done: -- 1 |

Vet Brutus is an honourable man: |
Ss are they all: all honourable men!“

And some of them, had in esteem for religion; accounted patterns both of honesty and piety! But God
eth not as man feeth.. He fhall repay them to their
face. Perhaps, even in the present world. For that
{cripture is often still sul filled, „This is the curse that
goeth forth over the face of the whole earth.” I will
bring it forth, saith the Lord of Hosts, and it snall
atuct into the hause of the thick, (ach is he and no
( 1637 e 300 Ill way 3h! To ; Naw! en

ob

192 A rAR TER APPEAL, Part II.
better, in the eyes of God, no whit honester than 2

highwayman) and it shall remain in the midst of the
house, and shall consume it, with the timber thereof,
and the stones thereof (555 ten
224. And is not Truth, as well as Justice, fallen in
our streets ? For who fspeaketh the truth from his heart f
Who is there, that makes a conscience of speaking the
thing as it is, whenever he speaks at all? Who scru.
ples the telling of officious lies? The varying from
truth, in order to do good? How strange dots that
saying of the ancient Fathers sound in modern ears, I
would not tell a lie, no not to save the souls of the
whole world.“ Yet is this strictly agreeable to the
word of God; to that of St. Paul in particular, if any
say, Let us do evil that good may come, their dam=
nation is just,” ' © „AN, in G's
But how many of us do this evil, without ever considering whether good will come or no? Speaki
what we do not mean, merely out of custom, --
it is fashionable so to do? What an immense quantity
of falschood does this ungodly fashion occafion day by
day ? For hath it not over-run every part of the nation? How is all our language swoln with compliment ? So that a well-bred person is not expected to
speak as he thinks: we do not look for it at his hands;
nay, who would thank him for it? How few. would
suffer it? It was said of old, even by a Warrior and
a King, He that telleth lies shall not tarry in my
sight: but are we not of another mind? Do not
we rather say, He that telleth not lies shall not tarry
in my fight ? ” Indeed the trial seldom comes; far
both speakers and hearegs are agreed, that Form and
Ceremony, Flattery and Compliment, should. take
place, and Truth be banished from all that know the
world, ot mood: ai ben mod! de de bk
And if the rich and great bave so small regard for
truth, as to lie even for lying-sake, what wonder can it
te that men of lower rank will do the fame thing or
gain? What wonder that it should obtain, as by common consent in all kinds of buying and selling ? ls it
not an adjudged case, that it is no harm to tell hes in the
way of Trade? Ty say, that is the lowest price which
is got the lowest ; or that you will not take *

wwe -- *

Te Men of Reason and Religion. 193
do take immediately ? Insomuch that it is a proverh
even among the Turks, when asked to abate of they
price, What do you take me to be a Christian 7
So that never was that caution more needful than it is
at this day, © Take ye heed every one of his neighbour,
and trust ye not in any brother; for every brother will
utterly supplant, and they will deceive every one. his
neighbour.” r f 2

25. And as for those few who abstain from outward
sins, is their heart right with God? May he not say
to us also (as of the Jews) © This people is uncircumcised in heart? Are not you? Do you then, © love
the Lord your God, with all your heart, and with all
your strength?” Is he your God and your all? The
desire of your eyes? The joy of your very heart ?
Rather, do you not set up your idols in your heart ?
Is not your belly your god? Or your diverhons ? Or
your fair reputation? Or your friend? Or wife?
Or child? That is plainly, do not you delight in some
of these earthly g more than in the God of heaven? Nay; perhaps you are one of those grovelling
souls that pant after the dust of the earth! Indeed,
who does not? Who does not get as much as he can?
Who of those that are not accounted covetous, yet does
not gather all the money he can fairly, and perha
much more? For are they those only whom the world
rank among misers, that use every art to increase their
fortune? Ioiling early and late, spending all their
strength in loading themselves with thick clay ? How
= Until the very hour when God calleth them;
when he saith unto each of them, Thou fool ! this
night shall thy soul be required of thee! And whose
shall those things be which thou hast prepared?“

26. And yet doth not our Pride, even the pride of
those whole soul cleaves to the duit, testify against us ?
Are they not wise in their own eyes, and prudent in
their own conceit ? Have not writers of our own remarked, That there is not upon earth a more self- conceited nation than the English ; more opinionated both
of their own national and personal wisdom, and ftrength ?
And indeed, if we may judge by the inhabitants of
London, this is evident to a demonstration : for, are

5 N not

294 A raxrturk APPEAL, Part II.

not the very meanest of them able to instru both the

King and all his Counsellors? What Cobler in London is not wiser than the Principal Secretary of State ?

What Coffee-houle disputant is not an abler divine than

his Grace of Canterbury? And how deep a contempt

of others is joined with this high opinion of ourselves?
] know not whether the people of all other nations are
greater masters of dissimulation; but there does not

appear in any nation whatever, such a proneness to de-

spise their neighbour : to despise not only foreigners,

(near two thousand years ago they remarked, Britannos
Hofpitibus feros ) but their own countrymen ; and that
very often for such surprising reasons, as nothing but
undeniable fact could make credible, How often does
the gentleman in his coach despise those dirty fellows
that go on foot? And these, on the other hand, despise full as much those lazy fellows that loll in their

coaches ? No wonder then that those who have the.

Form of Godliness should despise them that have not:

that the faint of the world fo frequently says to the
gross finner, in effect, if not in terms, Stand by thy-

self z come not near unto me; for I am holier than
thou! R |

Vet what kind of holiness is this? May not
God justly declare of us also, This people draw near
to me with their mouth, but they have removed their
hearts far from me. They do but flatter me with their

mouth, and difsemble with me in their tongue.” Is it
not so with you? When you yt to God do your
lips and your hearts go together? Do you not often
utter words by which you mean just nothing? Do
not you say and unsay ? Or, fay one thing to God,

and another to man? For instance, you say to God,

* Vouchlafe, O Lord to keep me this day without fin.”
But you say to man, This cannot be done; it is all folly
and madness to expect it. You ask of God, That you

% may perfectly love, and worthily magnify” his holy

Name: But you tell man, There is no perfect Love

upon earth; it is only a madman's dream. 'You pray
God, to © cleanse the thoughts of your heart, by the
inspiration of his Holy Spirit.” But you assure your

neighbour, There is no such thing as Inspiration 5

ä

n *
he * -
_-- Sie es .
k 3 --
--_-- 1

- N 74 hu * 4 %” 2 --

_ n * r
9 n pd bo > n Ra

8 I a”
.
ro IT

To Men of Reason and Religion. 193
and that none pretend to it but Enthusiasts, What
gross hy pocrisy is this! Surely you think there is no
& knowledge in tlie Most High. O be not deceived,
God is not mocked. But whatsoever ye sow, that also
shall ye reap!“ dee 9 |

28. Such at present is the Religion of this Christian

nation! - So do we honour. Him by whose Name we

are called! And yet was theie ever a nation more
careless and secure? More unapprehensive of the
wrath of God! How can a man more effectually expole himself to the ridicule of those who are esteemed
men of understanding, than by shewing any concern,
as if the judgments of God were hanging over our
heads? -* Surely then, a deceived heat hath turned
us aside, that we caannot say, Is there not a lie in my
right-hand ? Surely this our confidence is not of
God : It is rather a judicial infatuation ; a stupid insensibility ; a deep sleep, the forerunner of heavy vengeance, | "ot

« Ruin behind it stalks, an empty Desolation.”

Surely never was any people more fitted for destruction! © Impudent children are they, and stiff-hearted,
Are they ashamed when they have committed abomination ? When they have openly prophaned the day
of the Lord? When they have committed lewdness ?
Or when they have uttered such curles and blasphemies,
as are not heard of among the heathens? Nay, © They
are not at all ashamed, neither can they blush,” And
though God send unto them all his servants, rifing up
early and sending them, yet will they not hear;
they harden their neck! They do worse than their
fathers.”* - . | | | + |

What then can God “ do more for his Vineyard
which he hath not done?“ He hath long tried us
with mercies, © giving rain and fruitful seasons, filling us
with the flour of wheat.” We have had plenty of
all things; and while War roared around, * Peace has
been in all our borders.” But still “ this revolting and

* N. B. This was wrote 3 year ago, but 1 am afraid it js too
true, even at this day, n a

tebellious

196 A rAATNER APPEAL, Part II.
rebellious people say not, Let us now fear the Lord our
God.“ ihe. they gave him no thanks for all his mercies; they did not even acknowledge them to be his
gift. They did not see the hand of God in ariy of
these things; they could account for them another way.
O ye unwise, when will ye understand? Know ye
not yet, there is a God that ruleth the world ? What
did ye see with your eyes? Was the race to the swift,
or the battle to the strong ? Have ye forgotten Dettingen already? Does not England know that God
was there ? -- Or suppose your_ continuance in peace,
or success in war, be the mere result of your own
wisdom and strength; do ye command the sun and
he clouds also? Can ye pour out or stay the bottles
of heaven? But let all be Nature, Chance, any
thing----so God may have no hand in governing the
earth ! | ah | |
29. Will his judgments bring us to a better mind?
Do we * hear the rod, and him that has appointed
it ?”” Let us observe: What fruit do we find in those
who are even consume> by means of his heavy
hand? Let any that desires to be clearly fatisfied
herein, visit the Hospitals of this City. Let him judge
for himself, how the patients there receive God's fatherly visitation ; especially there, because mercy also
is mixed with judgment; fo that it is evident that the
Lord loveth whom he chasteneth.“ Go into any ward,
either of men or women, look narrowly from one end
to the other: are they humbling themselves under 2
sense of his anger? Are they praising him for his
love? Are they exhorting one another not to faint
when they are rebuked of him? How do nine in ten
of them spend the time, that important time from morning to evening? Why m such a manner, that you
would not easily learn, from thence, whether they were

Christians, Pagans, or Mahometans,
© Is there any deeper distress than this to be found?
Is there a greater affliction than the loss of health“
Perhaps there is, the loss of liberty, especially as it is
sometimes circumstanced. You may ealily be convinced
of this, by going into either Ludgate or Newgatc.
What a scene appears, as soon as you enter! Ihe very
place

To Men of Reason and Religion. 197
place strikes horror into your soul. How dark and
dreary! How unhealthy and unclean! How void of
all that might minister comfort! But this is little,
compared to the circumstances that attend the being
confined in this shadow of death. See that
wretch, who was formerly in want of nothing, and
encompassed with friends and acquaintance, now cut
off, perhaps by an unexpected stroke, from all the
cheerful ways of men; ruined, forsaken of all, and
delivered into the hands of such masters and such companions! I know not, if to one of a thinking, senible turn of mind, there could be any thing like it on
this fide hell. 5

What essect then has this heavy visitation of God,
on those who lie under it for any time? There 1s per2 haps an exception here and there; but in general, they
| are abandoned to all wickednels, utterly divested of all
z fear of God, and all reverence to man: insomuch, that
| they commonly go out of that school compleatly fitted
| for any kind or degree of villainy, perfectly brutal and
devilish, thoroughly furnished for every evil word and:
| work,
£ 30. Are your countrymen more essectually reclaimed
when danger and distress are joined? If fo, the Army,
especially in time of war, must be the most religious
part of the nation. But is it so indeed? Do the Soldiery walk as those who see themselves on the brink of
eternity? Redeeming every opportunity of glorifying
God, and doing good to men, because they know not
the hour in which their Lord will require their souls
of them? So far from it, that a soldier's religion is 2
by-word, even with those who have no religion at all!;
that vice and prophanenels in every shape reign among
them without control; and that the whole tenor of their
behaviour speaks, ** Let us eat and drink, for to- moi row
we die.“ |
Have those who are exposed to still more danger, the
English sea- forces, more religion than those at land ?
It 1s faid they were once remarkable for this : and it 1s
certain Sir Francis Drake feared God, as did most off
his Commanders; and we have reason to believe, his
mariners and sailors too. But what shall we fay of the
8 Navy

_
CE CEL e ̃ͤ ! TO ee --

thing, in some of the Prophets of this land also, even,

198 A raxTueR APPEAL Part II.
Navy. that now is, more particularly of the ships of
war? Is religion there? Either the power or the
form ? Is not almost every single man of war a mere
floating hell? Where is there to be found more consummate wickedness, a more full, daring contempt of
God, and all his laws, except in the bottomless pit ?
But here description fails: and the goedness of God
endureth yet daily! But “ shall I not visit for these
things, faith the Lord? Shall not my soul be avenged
on such a nation as this? O that the prospect of national judgments may suffice! That we may remember
ourlelves, and turn unto the Lord our God, before his
long-suffering mercy is at an end, and he pours out the
vials of his wrath upon us !

But how small ground have we as yet to hope for
this? For who will now suffer the word of exhortation ?
How few will endure found doctrine, and the honest,
close application of it? Do they not “ say unto the
seers, see not; and unto the prophets, prophely {mooth
things?” And if a man will do thus, if he will “ sew

illows to all arm-holes, and cause the Holy One of 4

srael to cease from before them; if he will prophesy Ml
of wine and strong drink, he shall even be the prophet al
of this people.”

31. J am sensible how nice a subject this is, and how
extremely diflicult it is to speak, as neither to say too
little nor too much, neither more nor less than the cause
of God requires. I know allo, that it is absolutely impossible so to speak as not to give offence. But who-
{ocver is offended I dare not to be silent ; neither may I
refrain from plainness of speech : only I will endeavour
to use all the tenderness I. can consistently with that
plainness. 2

In tender love then, I ask, Are there none among us
(1 ipcak to you, my brethren, who are priests and prophets of the Lord, set apart to minister in holy things,
and to declare the word of the Lord) are there none
among us who commit lewdnels, as did those by whom

Tjfrael was defiled ? Hath not the Lord seen a horrible
*
”m
%

=

7 4
L : l *
ff 1 »
8 *s

_--

by a 1

--

that they commit adultery, and (to conceal it) walk in
lies? Cod forbid that I should affirm this. I only
E pPropose

To Men of Reason and Religion. 199

propose (not maintain) the question, If there be such
awretch, I pray God to strike him to the heart, and to
lay, Thou art the man! I's

Are there none of you like them, mighty to drink
wine, men of strength to mingle strong drink? Yea,
are there none that err through strong drink, that are
{wallowed up of wine?” Are there not found those
who fay, I will fetch wine, and we will 61! ourselves
with strong drink : and to-morrow shall be as this day,
and much more abundant ? ”

Alas, my brother ! - Is this the voice of a Minister
of Christ? A Steward of the mysteries of God ? Suppose you find at any time trouble and heavinels, is there
no help for you in your God Is not the God whom
you serve able to deliver you from any plague or trouble? Is the being drunk with wine a vetter relief,
than being filled with his Spirit? Do you not understand this? Do you not know the Lord? Take
heed you do not destroy both your own soul and them
that hear you ! O beware! If you know not his
love, fear his power! Make haste to flee from the
wrath to come, lest he {mite you with a curse great as
your fin, and {weep you away from the face of the
earth, ; ts

32. Can such as you be said to honour or fear Cod,
any more than those spoken of by Malach ? May
not God complain, ** ihele priests have violated m
law and prophaned my holy things? Yea, Whensoever you presume with those unballowed hands, to
touch the mysteries of God: Whensoever you utter his
name or his word with those unhallowed lips! But is
it on this account only that God may lay, Both prophet
and priest are prophane ? May he not add, © They
have put no difference between the holy and the prophane ; therefore I am prophaned among them,” For
15 it not so? Do you put a difference between the holy
and the prophane, him that feareth God, and him that
feareth him not? Do you put an eslectual difference
between them, even in the molt folemn office of your
religion? At the table of the Lord, do you take care
to separate the precious from the vile? To receive all
thole who (as you may reasonably believe) draw near
8 2 with

+ꝙ-- I a : =
CO” --ů CO RG ꝗ q. --
200 AraxTHeEeR APPEAL, Part IT,

with penitent hearts, and lively faith, and utterly to rezett thole who testify against themselves. that they are
without hope and without God in the world ?

Nay, who dares repel one of the great men in his
parish from the Lord's table? Even though he be a
drunkard or a common {wearer ?. Yea, though he
openty deny the Lord that bought him ? Mr. StoneHouse did this once. But what was the event? The

entleman brought an action againft him, for the terror
of all such insolent fellows, in succeeding times. And
who was able and willing to espouse the cause? He
alone who took it into his own hand: and before the
day when it should have heen tried here, called the
plaintiff to answer at a higher bar,

33. O my brethren, is it not for want of your making this difference, as well as for many other abominations, that, with regard to some among us, (how ma
God knoweth !) that scripture is now also fulfill
« His watchmen are blind, they are ignorant, they are
shepherds that cannot understand, -- The Lord hath

ured out upon them the spirit of deep fleep, and
hath closed their eyes : the prophets and the seers hath
he covered. And the vifion of all is become unto
you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men
deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray
thee ; and he faith, I cannot; for it is sealed.”

If you ask what those other abominations are ? I will
fpeak in love and in the spirit of meekness. There are
found among us covetous men, men who mind earthly
things, who seek themselves and not Chrift crucified,
who love the world, and the things of the world men in
whom these words are {till fulfilled, * Who is there
among you that would shut the doors for nought ?
Neither do ye kindle fire on my altar for nought. I
have no pleasure in you, faith the Lord of Hosts.”
Yea, are there not those at this day, (O that I might
be found to fear where no fear is!) who © make themselves fat with the chiefest of all the offerings of Israel ? ”
Are there not those, who now *© enlarge their defires as
hell, who are as death and cannot be fsatished ?*” Who
though they want neither food to eat nor raiment to

put on, yet seek more and more preferment ? Who
are
* * *

|
|
|
|

To Men of Reason and Religion. 201
are continually studying to “ join house to ,house, and
to lay field to field? To grow rich in the service of

that Master, who himself had not where to lay his
head ?”” Is it not to these that those dreadsul words

belong, enough to cause the ears of him that heareth
to tingle, They are greedy dogs which can never

have enough ; they all look to their own way, (not the
way of their Lord) every one for his gain, from his
quarter.“

Is it strange, if among these, there should be some
who are cruel, oppressive men? Inasmuch as cove--
tousness knows no mercy, nor can a lover ef money be
a lover of his neighbour. Have not some been known
even to grind the face of the poor? To strip, rather
than clothe the naked? Some, who while they cried
out, as the horse-leech, give, give, would take, if it was
not given; like those of old, who said, © Thou shalt
give it me now, and if not I will take it by force:
Or those spoken of by Micah, „The Prophets bite
with their teeth, and cry peace: and he that putteth
not into their mouths, they even declare war agaiunst
him.“ Very great is the lin of these men before the
Lord. If there be ten such now in the land, may God
{mite them this day with terror and astonishment, that
they may have no rest in their bones till their fin is done
away!

34. Are you as watchful and zealous to gain souls,
as thole are to gain the gold that perisheth ? Do you
know, by experience, what that meaneth, “The
zeal of thine house hath eaten me up? Or are you
one of those watchmen who do rot watch at all ?P
Who neither know nor care when the {word cometh ?
Of whom the prophet saith, ** They are dumb dogs
that cannot bark, fleeping, lying down, loving. to
slumber.” | |

Can it be supposed, that such shepherds will * feed
the flock ?” Will © give to every one his portion of
meat in due season? Will thele warn every man,
that they may present every man perfect in Christ
Jelus??? Will they take care to know all their flock
by name, not forgetting the men-lervants and the women servants 7 Will they enquire into the state of

8 3 every
„

202 ArAAN THEN APPEAL, Part II. :

every soul committed to their charge ? And watch
over each with all tenderness and long-fuffering, as they
that must give account? Marking how they either fall
or rise? How these wax weary and faint in their mind ;
and those grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ ? Who can do this,
unless his whole heart be in the work ? Unless he defire nothing but to spend and be spent for them; and
count not his life dear unto himself, so he may present them
blameless in the day of the Lord Jesus,

Can any shepherd do this (and if he do it not, he
will never give an account with joy) who imagines, he
has little more to do, than to preach once or twice a
week ? That this is the main point, the chief part of
that office, which he hath taken upon himself before
God? What grols ignorance is this? What a total
mistake of the truth? What a miserable blunder
touching the whole nature of his office? It is indeed
a very great thing, to speak in the name of God; it
might make him that 1s the stoutest of heart tremble,
if he considered, that every time he speaks to others,
his own soul is at stake, But great, inexpressibly great
as this is, it is perhaps the least part of our work. To
seek and to save that which is lost,” to bring souls from
Satan to God, to instruct the ignorant, to reclaim the
wicked, to convince the gainsayer; to direct their feet
mto the way of peace, and then keep them therein ; to
follow them step by step, lest they turn out of the way,
and advise them in their doubts and temptations; to lift
up them that fall, to refresh them that are faint, and to
comfort the weak-hearted ; to administer various helps,
as the variety of occasions require, according to their
several necessities. These are parts of our office; all
this we have undertaken at the peril of our own soul,
A sense of this made that holy man of old cry out, I
marvel if any Ruler in the Church shall be faved : ”
and a greater than him says, in the fulness of his heart,
% Who is sufficient for these things ?“

35. But who is not sufficient for these things, for the
taking care of a parish, though it contain twenty thoufand souls, if this implies no more than the taking care
to preach there, once or twice a week ; and to procure

one

%

To Men of Reason and Religion. 20g
one to read prayers on the other days, and do what is
called the parish-duty ? Is any trade in the nation so |
ealy as this ? Is not any man sufficient for it, without |
any more talents, either of nature or of grace, than a
small degree of common understanding ? But O!
what manner of shepherds are those, who look no far-
| ther into the nature of their office, who fink no deeper |
1 into the importance of it than this! Were they not
| such as these concerning whom the word of the Lord

came unto Ezekiel, saying, ** Woe be to the Shepherds
that do feed themselves : should not the shepherds feed
the flock ? Ye cat the fat, and ye clothe you with the
wool ; but ye feed not the flock. The diseased have ye |
not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which
Was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was |
broken, neither have ye brought again that which was
driven away, neither have ye sought that which was
lost. And they were scattered, because there was no
shepherd, and they became meat to all the beasts of
the field. Yea, my flock was scattered upon all the
face of the earth, and none did search or seek after them.”

I conjure you, brethren, in the name of the Lord
Jesus, the great Shepherd of the sheep, who hath bought
them and us with his own blood, apply this each to his
own soul. Let every man look unto God and say,
Lord, 1s it 1? Am J one of- these idle, careless, indolent shepherds, that feed mylelf, not the flock? Am
1 one that cannot bark, slothful, sleeping, lying down,
loving to {lumber ? One of thole who have not
strengthened that which was diseased, neither healed
that which was fick ? © Search me, O Lord, and

rove me; try out my reins and my heart. Look well
if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me
in the way everlasting ? ”?

36. Have I not, at least, healed the hurt of thy people slightly? Have I not said, Peace, Peace, when there
was no peace ?*---- How many are they also that do this ?
Who do not {tudy to speak. what is true, especially to
the rich and great, so much as what is pleasing? Who

flatter honourable finners, instead of telling them plain,

6 How can ye escape the damnation of hell?” O

What an account have you to make, if there be a God
that

--_-- -- e ne or

204 A raxTHeR APPEAL, Part II.

that judgeth the earth? Will he not require at your
hands the blood of all these souls, of whom ye are the

betrayers and murderers? Well spake the prophets of

your fathers, in whose steps ye now tread, ** They
have. seduced my people, and one built up a wall,
and another daubed it with untempered mortar. They
strengthen the hands of the evil-doers, that none doth
return from his wickedness. They prophely lies in my

name, faith the Lord. They say unto them that despise

me, ye shall have peace, and unto them that walk after
the imagination of their own heart, no evil shall come
upon you. AN
How great will your damnation be, who destroy
souls, instead of saving them? Where will you apear, or how will you stand, in that great and terrible
day of the Lord ! How will ye lift up your head,
when “ the Lord shall descend from heaven in flaming
fire, to take vengeance on his adversaries !*” More elpecially on those who have so betrayed his cause, and
done Satan's work under the banner of Christ! With
what voice wilt thou say, * Behold me, Lord, and the

theep whom thou hadst given me, whom I gave to the

Devil, and told them they were in the way to heaven,
till they dropped into hell?“

Were they not just such shepherds of souls as you
are, concerning whom God spake by Jeremiah ? © Many pastors have destroyed my vineyard, they have trodden my portion under foot; they have made my pleasant portion, a desolate wilderness:“ by Ezekiel,“ There
is a conspiracy of her prophets, like a roaring lion, ravening the prey, they have devoured fouls : * and by
Z7.cchariah, ** Thus faith the Lord, feed the flock of the
{laughter, whole possessors flay them, and hold themselves not guilty ! and they that flay them say, Blessed
be the Lord, for I am rich; and their own shepherds
pity them not.”

37. Is not this the real ground, the principal reason,
of the present contempt of the Clergy? And long
fince was it assigned as such, by Him who cannot lie.
The fame men of old, who made the Lord's people to
transgrels, thereby made themselves vile. They were
despised both as the natural effect, and the judicial punillment of their wickednels, And the same caule

the

* s .
. 4 „ %o

--
s N N -- | F
* 1 oY TORS , WY a 3 . * 9 me. 1 *
* ha 4 : wap p 1 - TS”
s «ot 1d A. 5 d Et 22 TELE LT * A an a T
+ yy Fd I a * eee : 4 8
* 5 2 2 a.” n : n
-- _ g £ 4 * e E b 2 X © #5 1 -

* . nn
8 kts W

1 a *. Wy " k 1 4
IX KY AS on St; OE e e
r W Pre, N

e

1 as A
4 3-4, -- 10 p ” -- 1
* 3 A 8 * % wu 4 q - 2
-- -- *
RT ot e
4 8 a
-- 834 * Jy a,
\ g N * 2 * &

2 1 v * ----

l
: *
|
To Men of Reason and Religion, 205

the prophet observes to have produced the same effect,
many hundred years after this. Ye are departed out of
the way, faith the Lord: ye have caused many to stumble--Therefore have I also made you contemptible, and
base before all the people.“ |

I have now, brethren, delivered my own soul, and in
so doing, I have (as I proposed at first) used great plainness of speech, as not studying to please men, but the
Lord. Ihe event I leave to him in whose name I have
spoken, and who hath the hearts of all men in his hand.

I have brought you heavy tidmgs this day, and yet I
cannot but be persuaded, that some of you will not
count me your Enemy, becaule I tell you the Truth.
O that all of us may taste the good word which we declare! May receive that knowledge of salvation, which
we are commanded to preach unto every creature, thro?
the remission of fins! My heart's defire is, That all of
us to whom is committed the ministry of reconciliation,
may ourselves be reconciled to God, through the Blood
of the everlasting Covenant : That he may be henceforth unto us a God, and we may be unto him a poop'ey
that we may all know as well as preach the Lord, from
the least unto the greatest : even by that token, „I am
merciful to thy unrighteousness : thy fins 1 remember
no more!“

III. 1. I have hitherto spoken more immediately to
those, who profels themselves members of the Church
of England. But inasmuch as I am a debtor allo to
those who do not, my design is now to apply to them
also ; and briefly to shew, wherein (1 fear) they are
severally inconsistent with their own principles.

I begin with those who are at the imallest distance
from us, whether they are termed Presbyterians or Independants. Of whom in general I cannot but have a
widely different opinion, from that I entertained some
years ago: as having since then conversed with many
among them, in whom, the Root of the Matter is undeniably found : and who labour © to keep a conscience void
of offence both towards God and towards man,” 1

cannot therefore doubt, but every serious man, of either

one or the other denomination, does utterly condemn

all that inward as well as outward unholinels, which has
been above described, But

206 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part II. 2

But do you, as a people, avoid What you condemn ꝯ

Are no Whoremongers or adulterers found among you 9
No children disobedient to their parents? No servants
that are slothful or careless? That a» swer again? That
do not honour their masters as is meet in the Lord? Are
there none among you that censure or speak cuil of the
Ruler of their people ? Are there. no Drunkards, no
Gluttons, no luxurious men, no regular Epicures, none
whose belly is their god, who, as their fortune permits,
fare sumptuously every day? Have you no difhonest
dealers, no unfair Traders, no Usurers, or Extortioners ?
Have you no Liars, either for gain or for good manners, so called? Are you clear of Ceremony and Compliment? Alas, you are sensible, in most, if not in
all these respects, you have but small nee
over us.

How much more sensible must you be of this, if
Gn do not rest on the surface, but enquire into the

ottom of Religion, the religion of the heart ? - For,
what inward unholiness, what evil tempers are among
us, which have not a place among you also? You
likewise bewail that ignorance of God, that want of
faith and of the love of God and man, that inward
idolatry of various kinds, that Pride, Ambition and Vanity, which rule in the hearts even of those who {till
have the form of godliness. You lament before God,
the deep covetoulness that rats fo many Jouls as doth a
gangrene ; and perhaps are sometimes ready to cry out,
„ Help, Lord, for there is scarce one godly man left,”
Lay to thine hand; “ for the faithful are minished
from the children of men ! ”

2. And yet you, retain the truth that is after god!i.

ness, at least, as to the substance of it. You own what
is laid wn. in {cripture, both touching the nature and
condition of Fusftification and Salvation. And with regard to the Author of Faith and Salvation, you have always avowed, even in the face of your enemies, That
& it is God which worketh in us, both to will and to do,
of his good pleasure: That it is his Spirit alone who
teacheth us all things, all we know of the deep things of
God: That every true believer has an Unction from the

Holy One to lead him into all necessary Truth : That
6 becauic

Py » hit,
< a .& me « 0
nf 8 5 7 7 n 2 ;
W a
* 22 E . ba _
ATSC A. * al ao S nn * ER. 2

--
*

- 4 1 *
--
Nx ORE Cd
Sun. © x 0 i *

1 1 1
1+ dra

r

. . . 1
5 e 1 A
ad * [4

Net Ke *

Een
$3.4 1 a 2 PX
*
=»
*

We

e

* * =y
. e a
4 4
* .
* at

Pal Log i od”

To Men of Reason and Religion. 207
«-because we are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of
his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father; and
that this Spirit “ beareth witness with our spirit, that
we are the children of God.” 2 11

How 1s it then, my brethren, (so I cen call you now,
although 4 could not have done it heretofore ;) how is
it, that the generality of you also are fallen from your
stedfastness? In the times of persecution ye stood as a
rock, though all the waves and storms went over you.
But who can bear ease and fulness of "bread! How are
you changed, fince these came upon you! Do not
many of you now (practically I mean) put something
else, in the room of Faith that worketh by love? Do
not some of you suppole that gravity and composedness
of behaviour, are the main parts of Christianity? Efpecially, provided they neither swear nor take the Name
of God in vain, Do not others imagine, that to ab-

lain from idle songs, and those fashionable diversions

commonly used by persons of their fortune, is almost
the whole of religion? To which if they add family
prayer, and a slrict observance of the Sabbath, then
doubtless all is well! Nay, my brethren, this is well,
lo far as it goes: hut how little a way does it go toward
Christianity ? All these things, you cannot but fee, are
merely external; whereas Christianity is an inward
thing ; without which the most beautiful outward form
is lighter than vanity, EO I

Do not others of you rest in Conviction? Or good
Desires? Alas what do these avail ? A man may be
convinced he is sick, yea deeply convinced, and yet
never recover. He may desire food, yea, with earnest
desire, and nevertheless perish with hunger. And thus
I may be convinced I am a sinner ; but this will not
Juitify me -before God. And I may defire salvation
(perhaps by fits and starts for many years) and yet be
lost for ever. Come close then to the point, and keep
to your principles. Have you received the Holy Ghost ;
the Spirit which is of God, and is bestowed by him on
all believers, “that we may know the things which re
freely given to us of God? The time is short. Do
you experience now that Unction from the Holy One p
Without which you confels outward religion, whether

| | negative

-- Ä -- i _
© Ce . -- We _-- - oct welt -- ---- -- ---- ---- --

gregations also: men that profane either the Name or

then neither ought any who has them not, to continue,

208 A raxTHER APPEAL, Part II.

negative or positive, is nothing, Nay, and inward
Conviction of our wants is nothing, unless those wants
are in fact supplied. Good desires also are nothing, un- |
less we actually attain what we are stirred up to desire.
For still, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ,
whatever he desires, he is none of his. O my brother,
beware you stop not short ! Beware you never account
yourself a Christian, no not in the lowest degree, till
God “ hath sent forth the Spirit of Christ into your
heart,” and that Spirit bear witnels with your spirit,
that you are a child of God.” |

3. One step farther from us, are you who are called
(though not by your own choice) Anabaptists. The
smallness of your number, compared to that either of
the Presbyterians, or those of the Church, makes it
easier for you to have an exact knowledge of the behaviour of all your members, and to put away from among
you every one that © walketh not according to the doctrine you have received.” |

But is this done? Do all your members adorn the
golpel? Are they all © holy as he who hath called us
is holy ?“ I fear not. I have known some instances
to the contrary : and doubtless you know many more.
There are unholy, outwardly unholy men in your con-

the Day of the Lord ; that do not honour their natural
or civil parents; that know not haw to posless their bodies in sanctifcation and honour ; that are mtemperate
either in meat or drink, gluttonous, sensual, luxurious ;
that variously offend against Justice, Mercy, or Truth,
in their intercourse with their neighbour, and do not
walk by that royal Law, © Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.!“ |

But how 1s this consistent with your leading principles, that no men ought to be admitted to baptism,
till he has repentance whereby we forsake fin, and
living faith in God through Christ ? ”?

For if no man ought to be admitted into a Church or
Congregation, who has not attual Faith and repentance,

in any congregation. And conlequently an open sinner cannot remain among you, unless you practically
renounce your main principle. I refer

„

* 4 8

--

To Men of Reason and Religion. 209

4. U refer it to your own serious consideration, hether one reason, Why unholy men are still suffered to
remain among you, may not be this: that many of you
have unawares put Opinion in the room of Faith and

Repentance ? But how fatal a mistake is this ? Sup-

posing your opinion to be true, yet a true opinion concerning repentance is wholly different from the thing
itself, And you may all your life have a true opinion
concerning faith, and yet die an unbeliever.

Supposing then the 1 of Particular Redemption true, yet how little does it avail towards salvation ?
Nay were we to suppose, That none can be saved who
do not hold it, it does not follow that all will be saved
who do. So that if the one proved a man to be in
ever so bad a state, the other would not prove him to
be in a good one. And consequently, whosoever
leans on this opinion, leans on the staff of a broken reec,
' Would to God that ye would mind this one thing, to
make your calling and election sure! That every one
of you (leaving the rest of the world to him that made
it) would himself repent and believe the gospel! Not
repent alone, (for then you know only the baptism of
John) but believe, and be © baptized with the Holy
Ghost and with fire.“ Are you still a stranger to that
inward baptism, wherewith all true believers are baptized? May the Lord constrain you to cry out, © How
am I straitened till it be accomplished ? ”” Even till the
love of God inflame your heart, and consume all your
vile affections. Be not content with any thing less than
this! It is this loving faith alone which opens our way
into * the general church of the first-born whose names
are written in heaven!“ Which giveth us to © enter
within the veil, where Jesus our Forerunner is gone before us!“ F

5. There is still a wider difference in some points,
between us and the people usually termed Quakers,
But not in these points. You, as well as we, condemn * all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men;

all those works of the devil which were recited above,

and all those tempers from which they spring.
You agree, that we are all to be taught of God ;
and to be led by his Spirit: that the Spirit alone reveals

all

ö
|
:

--

--
-- -- pv O--W--U-- --U--)ꝗ ---- ---- q
-- --
Fas AN

-- --U-- U --ð ---- ꝛ E -- TEES _

. -- -- Tz

------

210 A FARTHER APPEAL; Part II.
all Truth, and inspires all Holiness : that by his inspiration men attain perfect love, the love which purihes

them as he is pure: and that through this knowledge

and love of God, they have power to do always such
things as please him ; to worship God, a Spirit,
according to his own will, that is, in spirit and in
truth,

Hence you infer, that formal Worship is not acceptable to God, but that alone that springs from God in
the heart: you infer also, that they who are led by him,
will use great plainnels of speech, and great plainness of
dress, lecking no outward adorning, but only the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit.” |

I will look no farther now, than simply to enquire,
whether you are consistent with these principles ?

To begin with the latter; © He that is led by the

Spirit will use great plainness of speech.”

You would have said, “will use the plain language.”
But that term, * the plain language,” naturally leads
vou to think of one particular way of speaking ; as if
plainness of speech implied no mote than the ule of that
particular form, |

Ales! my brethren! Know ye not that your an-

cestors designed this, only as a specimen of plain language? And is it poslible that you should mistake the
lample for the whole bale of cloth?
Consult the light God has given you, and you must
see that plainnels of speech does not he in a single point,
but implies an open, undisguised fincerity, a child-like
simplicity in all we speak.

I co not defire you to refrain from saying thou or thee,
1 would not spend ten words avout it. But I desire
vou, whenever you spcak at all, to speak the truth, and
nothing but the truth. I desire your words may be
always the picture of your heart, This is truly plain
language.

Either do not pretend to plain speech at all, or be
uniformly plain. Are you so ? I pray, consider. Do
you never compliment? I do not suppose you lay,
« Sir, your very humble servant.” But do you say no
civil things? Do you never flatter? Do you not

commend any man or woman to their face? Perhaps
farthcr

"a - 2 G
2 S Lo 3 .
4 . „ * * LO? 1b . Wu .

To Men of Reason and Religion. 211

farther than you do behind their back. Is this plainnefs
of speech? Do you never dissemble? Do you speak
to all persons, high or low, rich or poor, just what you
think, neither more nor less, and in the shortest and
clearest manner you can? If not, what a mere jest is
your plain language ? You carry your condemnation in
your own breast,

6. You hold also, That “ he which is led by the
Spirit, will use great plainness of dress, seeking no outward adorning, but only the ornament of a meek and
quiet spirit.”

And that, in particular, “ he will leave gold and cossly
apparel to those who know not God,”

Now I appeal to every serious, reasonable man among
you, Do your people act consistently with this principle? Do not many of your women wear gold upon
their very feet? And many of your men use ornaments of gold? Are you a stranger to thele things ?
Have you not seen with your eyes (such trifles as will
scarce bear the naming) their canes and snuff- boxes
glitter, even in your solemn assembly, while ye were
Waiting together upon God? Surely, they are not yet
so lost to modesty, as to pretend, That they do not use
them by way of ornament. If they do not, if it be
only out of neceslity, a plain oaken-stick will supply
the place of the one; and a piece of horn or tin will
unexceptionably answer all the reafonable ends of the
other, |

To speak freely, (and do not count me your enemy
for this) you cannot but observe upon cool reflection,
That you retain just so much of your ancient practice,
as leaves your prelent without excuse; as makes the inconsistency between the one and the other, glaring and
undeniable, For mstance : this woman is too strict a
Quaker, to lay out a shilling in a Necklace. Very
well!: but she is not too strict to lay out fourscore guineas in a Repeating Watch. Another would not for
the world wear any Lace, no, not an Edging round her
cap. But she will wear Point: and fees no harm in it
at all, though it should be of twelve times the price.
In one kind of Apron or Handkerchief she dares not
lay out twenty shillings ; but in another sort, lays out

T 2 twenty

212 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part IT.

twenty pounds. And what multitudes of you are very
Jealous, as to the colour and form of your apparel, the
least important of all the circumstances that relate to it,
while in the most important, the expence, they are
without any concern at all? They will not put on a
Scarlet or Crimson Stuff, but the richest Velvet, so it
be black or grave, They will not touch a coloured
Ribband ; but will cover themselves with a {tiff Silk
from head to foot. They cannot bear Purple: but
make no {cruple at all of being clothed in fine Linen;

yea, to such a degree, that the Linen of the Quakers is

grown almost into a proverb.

Surely you cannot be ignorant, that the sinfulness of
fine apparel hes chiefly in the ex pensiveness. In that it
is robbing God and the Poor; it is defrauding the fatherless and widow ; it is wasting the food of the hungry,
and with-holding his raiment from the naked, to consame it on our own lusts,

7. Let it not be said, That this affects only a few
among you, and those of the younger and lighter sort,
Yes at does; your whole body : for why do you, who
are elder and graver, suffer such things? Why do ye
not vehemently reprove them ? And if they repent
not, in spite of all worldly considerations, expel them
out of your Society? In conniving at their sin, you
make it your own ; you, especially who are Preachers,
Do you say, They cannot bear it; they will not
hear: alas, into what state then are ye fallen! But
whether, they will bear it or not, what is that to thee ?
Thou art to speak, Whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear.” To say the very truth, I am
afraid you rather strengthen their hands in their wickedness. For you not only “ do not testify against it in
the congregation, but even sit at their table and reprove

them

® You say, „We do testify against it in the congregation.”
Against what ? „ Against gay and gaudy apparel.” I grant it. But
this is not the thing I forek of, You quite mistake my mark,
Do you testify againit the Costliness of their Apparel, however
plain and grave it may be? Against the price of the Velvet, the
Linen, the Silk, or Raiment of whatever kind ? If you do this
frequently and explicitly, you are clear. If not, own and amend
the fault. | | =

10 b
*

To Men of Reason and Religion. 213
them not. Why then, thou also art one of * the dumb

dogs that cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to

slumber.” | Eb rn |
I fix this charge upon every Preacher, in particular
upon those who saw a young woman, daughter to one
of the Quakers in London, going to be married in apparel suitable to her diamond buckle, which cost'a hundred guineas, Could you see this, and not call heaven
ard earth to witness against it? Then I witness against
thee, in the Name of the Lord, Thou art a blind Leader
of the Blind : thou strainest at a gnat, and swallowest a
cam:l,

Verily the sin both of teachers and hearers is herein
exceeding great, And the little attempts towards plainness of apparel which are {still oblervable among you,

(I mean in the colour and form of your clothes, and the

manner of putting them on) only testify against you,
that you were once, what you know in your hearts you
are not now. .

8. I come now to your main Principle, © We are all
to be taught of God, to be inspired and led by his Spirit.
And then we shall worship him, not with dead form,
but in spirit and in truth.“

These are deep and weighty words. But many hold
fast the words, and are utterly ignorant of their meaning. Is not this an exceeding common cale ? Are not
you conscious, abundance of your friends have done

so? With whom the being taught of God and led by

It is easy to discern how your people {ell into this snare of the
devil. You were at first a poor, despised, afflicted people. Then,
what some of you had to spare, was litile enongh to relieve the
needy members of your own Society, In a few years you increase d
in goods, and were able to relieve more than your own poor,
But you did not bestow all that you had to spare from them, on the
poor belonging to other Societies. It remained either to lay it up,
m to expend it in superfluitics. Some chose one way, and some the
other. |

Lay this deeply to heart, ye who are now a poor, despised, afIicied people. Hithento ye are not able to relieve your own poor.
But it ever your substance wicrease, fee that ye be not straitenéd in
your own bowels, that ye fall not into the same snare of the devil.

Before any of you either lay up treasures or earth, or indulge need-

lels expence of any kind, I pray the Lord God to scatter you to.
the corners of the earth, and blot out your name from under heaven |

3-3 | his

214 A rARTHERX APPEAL, Part II.

his Spirit are mere words of course, that mean just nothing. And their crude and indigested accounts, of the
things they did not understand, have raised that deep
prejudice against these great Truths, which we find in
the generality of men.

Do some of you ask, © but dost thou acknowledge

would to God every one of you acknowledged it as
much. I fay, all Religion is either empty Shew, or
Perfection by Inspiration ; in other words, the obedient
Love of God, by the supernatural knowledge of God :
yea, all that which is not of Faith, is fin : all which
does not fpring from this loving knowledge of God ;
which knowledge cannot begin, or subsist one moment,
without immediate inspiration : not only all public worship, and all private prayer, but every thought, in common life, and word and work, What think you of
this? Do you not stagger ? Dare you carry the inward Principle so far? Do you acknowledge it to be
the very Truth? But alas! what is the acknowledging
it; dost thou experience this principle in thyself; what
faith thy heart? Does God dwell therein? And doth
it now echo to the voice of God? Hast thou the continual inspiration of his Spirit, filling thy heart with
his love, as with a well of water, springing up into
everlasting life ?

9. Art thou acquainted with the leading of his Spirit,
not by notion only, but by living experience ? I sear
very many of you talk of this, who do not so much as
know what it means. How does the Spirit of God
lead his children, to this or that particular action? Do
you imagine, it is by blind impulse only? By moving
you to do it, you know not why? Not so, He leads us
by our Eye, at leait as much as by the Hand ; and by
Light as well as by Heat. He shews us the way wherein
we should go, as well as incites us to walk therein.
For example, Here is a man ready to perish with hunger. How am I led by the Spirit to relieve him ?
First, by his convincing me, it is the Will of God I
should : and secondly, by his filling my heart with love
towards him. Both this light and this heat are the gift
of God; are wrought in me by the same Spirit; *

leads

the Inward Principle? I do, my friends: and I

To Men of Reason and Religion. 213
| leads me, by this Conviction as well as Love, to go and
feed that man. This is the plain, rational account of
the ordinary leading of the Spirit, But how far from
4 that which some have given!

E Art thou thus led by the Spirit to every good word
| and work? Till God hath thereby made thy faith
perfect? Dost thou know what Faith is? It is a
Ri. obedient sight of a present and reconciled
God. Now, where this is, there is no dead form;
neither can be, so long as it continues. But all that is
laid or done is full of God, full of spirit, and life, and
power. |

10. But perhaps, as much as you talk of them, you
do not know the difference between Form and Spirit;
or between worshipping God in a formal way, and worshipping him in spirit and in truth. |

The Lord is that Spirit. The seeing, and feeling, and
loving him is spiritual Life. And whatever is said or
-Y done in the fight and love of God, that is full of spirit
£ and life. All beside this is form, mere dead form ;
- whether it be in our public addresses to God, or in our
private ; or in our worldly business, or in our daily
conversation,

But if so, how poor, and mean, and narrow have
your views and conceptions been! You was afraid of
formality in public worship. And reason good. But
was you afraid of it no where else? Did not you consider, that formality in common life, is also an abomination to the Lord ? And that it can have no place in
any thing we say or do, but lo far as we forget God P
O watch against it in every place, every moment, that
you may every moment see and love God; and conse-

uently, at all times and in all places, worship him in
Hit and in truth. |

My brethren, permit me to add a few words, in tender
love to your fouls. Do not you lean too much on the
spirit and power which you believe rested on your
| ; forefathers? Suppose it did ; will that avail you, if
| you do not drink into the fame spirit ? And how evi2 dent is this! That whatever ye once were, ye are
| now shorn of your strength. Ye are weak and become

like other men. The Lord is well nigh departed from
you.

216 | A raxTHER APPEAL, Part II.

you. Where is now the spirit, the life, the power ?
Be not offended with my plain dealing, when I beseech
you who are able to weigh things calmly, to open your
eyes and see multitudes even in the Church, pursuing,
yea, and attaining the substance of spiritual life, and
leaving unto you the shadow, Nay, a {till greater evil
is before you; for if ye find not some effectual means to
prevent it, your rising generation will utterly cast off
the shadow as well as the substance.

11. There is an abundantly greater difference still,
according to your own account, between us who profess ourselves members of the Church of England, and
you who are members of the Church of Rome. But
notwithstanding this, do you not agree with us in condemning the vices above recited? Profaneness, Drunkenness, Whoredom, Adultery, Theft, Disobedience to
Parents, and such like? And how unhappily do you
agree with us in prattziing the very vices which you
condemn ? |

And yet you acknowledge, (nay, and frequently contend for this with a peculiar earnestnels) that every
Christian is called to be zealous of good works, as well
as to deny himself and take up his cross daily, How
then do you depart from your own principles, when
you are gluttons, drunkards, or epicures? When you
live at your ease, in all the elegance and voluptuousnels
of a plentiful fortune! How will you reconcile the
being adorned with gold, arrayed in purple and fine
linen, and faring sumptuously every day, with the denying yourself and taking up your cross daily? Surely,
while you indulge the dere of the flesh, the desire of
the eye, and the pride of life, the excellent Rules of
Self-denial that abound in your own W riters, leave you
of all men most inexcusable.

12. Neither can this self-indulgence be reconciled
with the being zcalous of good works, For by this
needless and continual expence, you disable Yourself
from doing good. You bind your own hands. You
make it impossible for you to do that good which otherwile you might. So that you injure the poor in the
same proportion as you poison your own soul. You
might have clothed the naked ; but what was due to

| them,

*

$
To Men of Reason and Religion. 217
them, was thrown away on your costly apparel. Vou
might have fed the hungry, entertained the stranger,
relieved them that were sick or in prison. But the superfluities of your own table swallowed up that whereby they should have been profited. And so this wasting of thy Lord's goods, is an instance of complicated
wickedness ; since hereby thy poor brother perisheth for
whom Christ died. |

I will not recommend to you either the writings or
examples of those whom you account Heretics, (altho'
some of these, if you could view them with impartial
eyes, might provoke you to jealousy.) But O ! that
God would write in your hearts the rules of self-denial
and love, laid down by Thomas a Kempis ! Or that
you would follow, both in this and in good works, that
burning and shining light of your own Church, the
Marquis de Renty! Then would all who knew and
loved the Lord, rejoice to acknowledge you as the
Church of the living God : when ye were zealous of
every good word and work, and abstained from all appearance of evil: when it was hereby shewn that you
were filled with the Holy Ghost, delivered from all
unholy tempers : when ye were all © unblameable and
unrebukable, without spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing ; a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy
nation, a peculiar people, shewing forth *”” | to all,
Jews, Infidels, and Heretics, by your active, patient,
spotless love of God and man, ]“ the praises of him
oo had called you out of darkness into his marvellous
ight.”

13. Men and brethren, children of the stock of
Abraham, suffer me to speak a few words to you allo ;
you who do not allow, That Messiah the Prince 1s al-

ready come and cut off. However you fo far hear

Moses and the Prophets, as to allow, 1. That * it is
the inspiration of the Holy One, which giveth man
understanding,” and that all the true children of God,

are taught of God. 2. That the substance both of the

Law and the Prophets, is contained in that one word,

Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy

heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength,
and thy neighbour as thyself,” And g. That the fure
h fruit

218 A TAARATHER APPEAL, Part HM.
fruit of love is obedience, „ ceasing from evil, and doing good.” 5 | Bes.

And do you walk by this Rule? Have you yourself that inspiration of the Holy One? Are you taught
of God? Hath he opened your understanding? Have
you the inward knowledge of the Most High ? I fear
not, Perhaps you know little more, even of the meaning of the words than a Mahometan.

Let us go a little farther. | Do you © love the Lord
your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with
all your strength ? *”* Can you fay, © Whom have I in
heaven but thee ; and there is none upon earth that 1
desire hesides thee ? Do you desire God at all? Do
you desire to have any thing to do with him, till you
can keep the world no longer ? Are you not content,
io you enjoy the good things of the earth, to let God
stand afar off? Only calling upon him now and then,
when you cannot do well without him. Why then
you do not love God at all, though you will sometimes
condescend to use him. You love the world. This
possesses your heart. This therefore is your god.
You renounce the God of your fathers, the God of IfTael ; you are still uncircumcised in heart. Your
own conscience bears witness, you in this no more
hear Moses and the Prophets, than you do Jesus of
Nazareth. |

14. From Moses and the Prophets it has been shewn,
that your forefathers were a faithless and stubborn generation; a generation which set not their hearts aright,
and whose spirit cleaved not stedfastly unto God.”
And this you acknowledge yourselves. If you are
asked, how is it that the promise is not fulfilled ?2 Seeing the sceptre is long since departed from Judah, why
is not Shiloh come? Tour ulual answer is, © Because
of the sins of our Fathers, God hath delayed his coming.” Have you then reformed from the fins of your
fathers? Are you turned unto the Lord your God ?
Nay, do ye not tread in the same steps? Except that
single point of outward idolatry, what abomination
did they ever commit, which you have not committed
also? Which the generality. of you do not commit
All, according to your power ? If therefore the

NI. coming

*
.
:
k

To Men of Reason and Religion, 219

coming of the Messiah was hindered by the fins of your
fo:efathers, then by the same rule, your continuance
therein will hinder his coming to the end of the
world. |

*- Brethren, my heart's defire, and prayer to God
15, that he would gather the outcasls of Israel. And J
doubt not, but when the fulnels of the Gentiles is come
in, then all Israel shall be saved, But mean time, is
there not great cause that ye should say with Daniel,
© O Lord, righteousness belongeth unto thee, but unto
us confusion of face, as at this day, to the men of Judah, and unto all Israel. O Lord we have sinned, we
have rebelled against thee, neither have we obeyed the
voice of the Lord our God. Yet O our God, incline

thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes, and behold

our desolations; for we do not prelent our supplica-

tions before thee for our righteousnesses, but for thy
great mercies. O Lord hear! O Lord forgive! O
Lord, hearken and do! Defer not, for thine own
fake; for thy city and thy people that are called by thy
name.” |

15. I cannot conclude without addressing myself to you
also, who do not admit either the Jewish or Christian
Revelation. But still you desire to be happy: you
own the essential difference between Vice and Virtue :
and acknowledge, (as did all the wifer Greeks and Romans) that Vice cannot consist with Happiness. You
allow likewise, that gratitude and benevolence, selfknowledge and modesty, mildness, temperance, patience, and generosity, are justly numbered among Virtues : and that ingratitude and malice, envy and illnature, pride, insolence and vanity, gluttony and luxury, covetousness and discontent, are Vices of the highest kind. |

Now let us calmly enquire, how far your life is consistent with your principles.

You seek happiness. But you find it not. You
come no nearer it with all your labours. You are not
happier than you was a year ago. Nay, I doubt you
are more unhappy. Why is this, but because you
look for happinels there, where you own it cannot be
found? Indecd, what is there on earth which can

long

220 A TARTHER APPEAL, Part II.

long satisfy a man of understanding ? His foul is
too large for the world he lives'in, He wants more
room.

AHstuat infelix angusto limite Mundi,
Ut brevibus clauses Gyaris, parvaque Seripho,

He has already travelled through all which is called
Ie | ; diversions and entertainments of every kind,

ut among these he can find no enjoyment of any
depth ; they are empty, shallow, superficial things :
they pleased for a while, but the gloss is gone ; and
now they are dull and. tasteless, And what has he
next? Only the fame things again. For this world
affords nothing more. It can supply him with no
change. Go, feed again: but it is upon one dish still.
Thus,

Occidit miseros crambe repetita.

Yet what remedy under the Sun!

16. The sounder judgment, the stronger understanding you have. The sooner you are sated with the
world, And the more deeply convinced, all that
cometh is vanity ; foolish, insipid, nauseous. You
see the foibles of men in so much clearer a light, and
have the keener sense of the emptiness of life. Here
you are, a poor, unsatisfied inhabitant of an _
world ; turning your weary eyes on this lide, and on
that fide ; seeking rest, but finding none. You seem
to be out of your place: Neither the persons nor
things that surround you are such as you want. You
have a confused idea of something better than all
this; but you know not where to find it, You are
always grasping for something which you cannot attain, no, not if you range to the uttermost parts of the
earth.

But this 1s not all. You are not only negatively unhappy, as finding nothing whereon to {tay the weight
of your soul ; but 2 so, because you are unholy: you are miserable, because you are vicious.
Are you not vicious? Are you then full of gratitude
to him, who giveth you life and breath, and all

| things? Not so; you rather spurn his gifts, and murmur

To Men of Reason and Religion. 221

mur at him that gave them. How often has your
heart said, God did not use you well? How often
have you questioned either his wisdom or goodness P
Was this well done? What kind of gratitude is
this? It is the best you are master of. Then take
knowledge of yourself. Black ingratitude is rooted in
your inmost frame. You can no more love God tha
you can see him; or than you can be happy without
that love. *
Neither (how much soever you may pique yourself
upon it) are you a lover of mankind, Can love and
malice consist ? Benevolence and Envy? O do not,
put out your own eyes. And are not these horrid tems in you? Do not you envy one man, and bear
malice or ill will to another ? I know you call these
dispositions by softer names; but names change not the
nature of things. You are pained that one should enjoy what you cannot enjoy yourself, Call this what
you please, it is rank Envy. You are grieved, that a
second enjoys even what you have yourself ; you reJoice in seeing a third unhappy. Do not flatter yburself: this is malice, venemous malice, and nothing else,
And how could you ever think of being hap y, with
malice and envy in your heart? Just as well might”
you expett to be at ease, while you held burning coals
in your bosom, n IFN
17. I intreat you to refleF, whether there are not
other inhabitants in your breast, which leave no room
for happiness there. May you not discover through a
thousand disguises, Pride? Too high an opinion of
yourlelf ? Vanity, thirst of praise, even (who would,
believe it ?) of the applause of knaves and fools? Unevennels or soreness of temper ? Pronenels to anger or
revenge? Peevishnels, fretfulnefs, or pining discontent? Nay, perhaps, even covetousness. -- And did
you ever think happiness could dwell with thele p
Awake out of that senseless dream. Think not of reconciling things incompatible, All these tempers are
essential miscety, So long as anv of thele are harboured
in your breast, you must be a flranger to mward peace.
What avails it you, if there be no other hell? When.

222 AxrARTHERN APPEAL, Part II.

ever these fiends are let loose upon you, you will be
constrained to own, |

Hell is where'er I am: myself am hell!”

And can the Supreme Being love those tempers,
which you yourself abhor in all but yourself ? If not,
they imply guilt as well as misery. Doubtless they do.

nly enquire of your own heart. How often in the
mid career of your vice have you felt a secret reproof,

which you knew not how to bear, and therefore stifled

as soon as possible ? |
18. And did not even this point at an hereafter ! a
future state of existence? The more reasonable among
you have no doubt of this! you hardly suppose the soul
once disengaged, will dwell again in a house of clay.
But how will your soul subsist without it? How are
you quahfied for a separate state? Suppose this earthly
covering, this vehicle of organized matter, whereby you
hold commerce with the material world, were now to
drop off! Now, what would you do in the regions of
immortality? You cannot eat or drink there, You
cannot indulge either the desire of the flesh, the defire
of the eye, or the pride of life, You love only worldly
things ; and they are gone, fled as {moke, driven away
for ever. Here is no possibility of sensual enjoyments ;
and you have a relish for nothing else, O what a separation is this, from all that you hold dear! What a
breach is made, never to be healed !
But beside this, you are unholy : full of evil tem3: for you did not put off these with the body,
You did not leave Pride, Revenge, Malice, Envy,
Difcontent behind you, when you left the world. And
now you are no longer chcered by the light of the sun,
nor diverted by the various objects: but those dogs of
hell are let loose to prey upon your soul, with their whole,
unrebated strength. Nor 1s there any hope that your
tpirit will now ever be restored to its original purity :
not even that poor hope of a purging fire, so elegantly
described by the Heathen Poet some ages before the
notion was revived among the doctrines of the Romish

Church.
Aliæ

N. 4 - ru

0 n " 8 f EET...
-- s * * " a oy 8
4.7 3 * A 4 - a

To Men of Resson and Religion, 223

Aliæ tenduntur inanes

Suppen sæ ad ventos ; aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectuni eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igui
Donec longa dies, exacto temports orbe,
Concretam exemit labem, purumque reliquit
Athereum sensum atque aurai simplicis ignem.

19. What a great gulph then is fixed between you
and happiness, both in this world and that which 1s to
come 7 Well may you shudder at the thought! More
especially when you are about to enter on that untried
state of existence, For what a prospect is this, when
you stand on the verge of life, ready to launch out into
eternity ? What can you then think ? You fee nothing
before you. All is dark and dreary. On the very best
fupposition, how well may you address your parting
foul in the words of dying Adrian :

% Poor, little, pretty, fluttering thing,
Must we no longer live together ?
And dost thou prune thy trembling wing,
| To take thy flight thou know'!t not whither ?

Thy pleasing vein, thy hum'rous folly
Is all negleQed, all forgot ;
And pensive, wavering, melancholy,
Thou hop'ft, and fear'st thou know'st not what,”

„Thou knowest not what!“ Here is the sting,
suppose there were no other. To be thou knowest not
what! Not for a month, or year, but through the
countless ages of eternity! What a tormenting uncertainty must this be? What racking unwillingness
must it occasion, to exchange even this known vale
of tears, for the unknown valley of the shadow of
death ?

% And is there no cure for this ? ” Indeed there is
an effectual cure; even the knowledge and love of God.
There is a knowledge of God which unveils eternity,
and a love of God which endears it. That knowledge
makes the great abyss visible; and uncertainty vanishes
away. That love makes it amiable to the soul, so that

U 2 fear

224 A rarTHER APPEAL, Part II.

fear has no more place]! But the moment God says,
by the welcome Angel of Death, (Come up hither,”
She

N Claps the glad wing and towers away,
And mingles with the blaze of day.“

20. See ye not, what advantage every way, a Christian has over you? Probably the reason you saw it
not before was, becaule you knew none but nominal
Christians ; men who profess to believe more (in their
way of believing) but had no more of the know ledge
and love of God than yourselves. So that with regard
to real, inward Religion, you stood upon even ground,
And, perhaps, in many branches of inward Religion,
the advantage was on your fide,

May the Lord, the God of the Christians, either reform these wretches, or take them away from the earth!
That lay this grand stumbling-block in the way of those
who desite to know the will of God!

O ye who desire to know his will, regard ihein
not! If it be possible blot them out of your remembrance,

They neither can nor will do you any good. O
suffer them not to do you harm. Be not prejudiced
against Christianity by those who know nothing at all
of it, Nay, they condemn it, all real, substantial Chri!-
tianity ; they speak evil of the thing they know not,
They have a kind of cant word for the whole Religion
of the heart. They call it Enthusiasm.

I will briefly lay before you the ground of the matter, and appeal to you yourselves for the reafonablenels
of it.

21, What a miserable drudgery 1s the service of God,
unless I love the God whom I ferve ? But I cannot
love one whom 1 know not, How then can I love
God till I know him? And how is it possible I should
know God, unless he makes himself known unto me?

By Analogy or Proportion? Very good. But where

is that proportion to be found? What proportion
does a creature bear to his Creator ? What 1s the pro-

portion between Finite and Infinite ?
I grant

a As. * .
GH --_ 1 ä 22 - 2 Z FF ma nA"

n

a”

8 11285 8 %
yd dc...

* 1 bY
The. FYT
Safes

*

To Men of Reason and Religion. 225

I grant the existence of the creatures demonstratively
shews the existence of their Creator. The whole creation speaks, that there is a God, But that is not the

oint in question, I know there is a God. Thus far
is clear. But who will shew me what that God 1s ?
The more I reflect, the more convinced I am, that it
is not possible for any or all of the creatures, to take
off the vail which is on my heart, that I might discern
this unknown God ; to draw the curtain back which
now hangs between, that I might see him which is invisible.

This vail of flesh now hides him from my sight. And
who is able to make it transparent ? So that I may

erceive through this glass, God always before me, till
I fee him face to face, |

I want to know this great God who filleth heaven
and earth: who is above, beneath, and on every fide,
in all places of his dominion, who just now besets me
behind and before, and lays his hand upon me. And
yet I am no more acquainted with him, than with one
of the inhabitants of Jupiter or Saturn.

O my friend, how will you get one step farther,
unless God reveal himself to your soul ?

22, And why should this seem a thing incredible to
you? That God, a Spirit, and the Father of the spirits
of all flesh, should discover himself to your irit,
which is itself the breath of God. Drvine Particula
Aura Any more than that material things should
discover themselves to your material eye. Is it any
more 1 to Reason, that spirit should influence
spirit, than that matter should influence matter ? Nay,
is not the former the more easily intelligible of the two p
For there 15 the utmost difficulty in conceiving, how
matter should influence matter at all. How that which
is totally passive should act. Neither can we rationally
account either for Gravitation, Attraction, or any natural motion whatsoever, but by supposing in all the
Finger of God, who alone conquers that Vis inertiæ
which 1s essential to every particle of Matter and worketh in all, | | |

Now if God should ever open the eyes of your understanding, must not the Love of God be the immeU 3 diate

226 A rARTER APPEAL, Part II.

diate consequence ? Do you imagine you can see God
without loving him? Is it poslible in the nature of
things? Si virtus conspiceretur oculis, said the old Heathen, mirabiles amores excitaret sui, How much more
if you see him who is the original Fountain, the great
Archetype of all Virtue, will that sight raise in you a
love that is wonderful, such as the gay and busy world
know not of !

23. What benevolence also, what tender love to
the whole of human kind, will you drink in, together
with the love of God, from the unexhausted source of
love? And how ealy 1s it to conceive, that more and
more of his Image will be then transfused into your
foul ? That from disinterested love, all other divine
tempers will, as it were, naturally spring? Mildnels, gentleness, patience, temperance, justice, sincerity, contempt of the world ; yea, whatsoever things
are venerable and lovely, whatsoever are justly of good
report, |

And when you thus love God and all mankind, and
are transformed into his likeness, then the commandments of God will not be grievous ; you will no more
complain, that they destroy the comfort of life, So
far from it, that they will be the very joy of your
heart; ways of pleasantness, paths of peace! You
will experience here that solid happiness, which you had
else where {ought in vain, Without servile fear or anx>
ious care, so long as you continue on earth you will

ladly do the will of God here, as the angels do it in
1 And when the time is come that you shoulg
depart hence, when God says, © Arise, and come
away,” you will pass with joy unspeakable out of the
body, into all the fulness of God. 3

Now does not your awn heart condemn you, if you
call this religion Enthusiasm ? O leave that to those
blind zealots, Who tack together a set of Opinions and
an outside worship, and call this poor, Full lifeless
thing, by the sacred name of Christtanity, Well might
you account such Christianity as this, a mere piece of
empty pageantry, fit indeed to keep the vulgar in awe,
but beneath the regard of a man of eo Pang. |

| Ty ut

; &

To Men of Reason and Religion. 22
But in how different a light does it now appear? If
there be such a religion as I have sketched out, must
not every reasonable man see, there is nothing on earth
to be desired in comparison of it? -- But if any man
desire this, let him ask of Cod: he giveth to all men
liberally and upbraideth not.

24. May you not ask, quite consistently with your

rinciples, in some manner resembling this ?

O thou Being of Beings, thou Cause of All, thou
seest my heart ; thou understandest all my thoughts,
But how small a part of thy ways do I understand !
I know not what is above, beneath, on every fide,
I know not my own foul. Only this I know, 1 am
not what I ought to be, I see and approve the Virtue which I have not. I do not love thee, neither
am I thankful, I commend the love of mankind ;
but I feel it not. Thou hast seen hatred, malice,
envy in my heart. Thou hast seen anger, murmuring,
discontent. These uneasy passions harrow up my soul,
I cannot rest, while I am under this yoke. Nor am I
able to shake it off, I am unhappy, and that thou
knowelt,

Have compassion upon me, thou whole years do not
fail! On me, who have but a short time to live. I rise
up, and am cut down as a flower, I flee as it were a
shadow. Yet a little while, and I return to dust, and
have no more place under the sun.

Yet I know thou hast made my soul to live for ever.
But I know not where ; and I am unwilling to try,
I tremble, I am afraid to go thither, whence I shall not
return, I stand quivering on the edge of the gulph ;
for clouds and darkness rest upon it. O God! Must
I go always * creeping with terrors, and plunge into
eternity with a peradventure ! ”?

O thou Lover of men, is there no help in thee? I
haye heard (what indeed my heart cannot _--
that thou revealest thyself to thole that seek thee, an
2 thy love into their hearts: and that they who
know and love thee, walk through the shadow of death
and fear no evil. O that this were so! That there
were such an unspeakable gift, given to the children of
men! For then might I hope for it, O God, if

there

228 A raxzTHeR APPEAL, Part II.

there be, give it unto me! Speak that I may see thee !
Make thyself known unto me also in the manner that
thou knowest! In any wise let me know thee and
love thee, that I may be formed after thy likeness !
That I may be love, as thou art love ; that I may now
be happy in thee ; and when thou wilt, fall into the
abyss of thy love, and enjoy thee through the ages of
eternity ! |

END or PART II.

( 229 )

1. N OW, what can an impartial prov think

concerning the present state of Religion in
England? Is there a nation under the sun which is so
deeply fallen from the very first principles of all Religion? Where is the country, in which is found so
utter a disregard to even Heathen Morality ? Such
a thorough contempt of Justice and Truth, and all
that should be dear and honourable to rational creatures ?

What species of Vice can possibly be named, even of
those that Nature itself abhors, of which we have not
had for many years, a plentiful and still increasing harvest? What sin remains either in Rome or Constantinople, which we have not imported long ago (if it
was not of our own native growth) and improved upon
ever fince? Such a complication of villanies of every
kind, considered with all their aggravations, such a
scorn of whatever bears the face of Virtue, such intice, fraud, and falsehood ; above all, such perjury, and
such a method of law, we may defy the whole world to

roduce, Sha ;

What multitudes are found throughout our land,
who do not even profess any Religion at all? And
what numbers of those who profess much, confute

their

*

230 ArARTRER APPEAL, Part III.
their profession by their practice? Yea, and perhaps,

by their exorbitant pride, vanity, covetousness, rapaciousness, or oppression, cause the very name of Religion
to * in the nostrils of many (otherwise) reasonable
men
2. However we have many thousands still, of
truly virtuous and religious men.” Wherein does their
pig pu const ? In Righteousness and true Holiness ?
In Love stronger than Death ? Fervent Gratitude to
God? And tender Action to all his Creatures? Is
their Religion, the Religion of the Heart? A Renewal of the Soul in the Image of God? Do they
resemble him they worship ? Are they free from Pride,
from Vanity, from Malice and Envy, from Ambition
and Avarice, from Passion and Luft; from every
unealy and unlovely Temper ? Alas, I fear neither
they (the greater part at least) nor you, know what
this Religion means; or have any more notion of it,
than the peasant that holds the plough, of the Rebgion
of a Gymnosophist.
It is well if the genuine Religion of Christ has any
more alliance with what you call Religion, than with
the Turkish Pilgrimages to Mecca, or the Popish worship of our Lady of Loretto. Have not you substituted in the place of the Religion of the Heart, something (I do not fay equally sinful, but) equally vain,
and foreign to the worshipping of God in spirit and in
truth 2 What else can be said even of Prayer (public
or private in the manner wherein you generally perform it? As a thing of cour/e, running round and
round, in the same dull track, without either the knowledge or love of God? Without one heavenly temper,
either attained or improved? O what mockery of
God is this!
And yet even this Religion, which can do you no
good may do you much harm. Nay, it is plain it
oes : it daily increases your Pride, as you measure your
goodness by the number and length of your performances,
It gives you a deep contempt for thole who do not come
up to the full Tale of your Virtues, It inspires men
with a zeal, which is the very fire of hell, furious,
bitter, implacable, unmerciful ; often to a degree that
1 extinguishes

-- K4„ ----ů

To Men of Reason and Religion. 231

extinguishes all comp ssion, all good nature and humanity. Insomuch that the cxecrable feercenefs of spirit,

Which is the natural fruit of such a Religion, hath many

times, in {pite of all ties, divine and human, broke out.
into open violence, into rapine, murder, edition, rebellion, civil war, to the desolation of whole cities and
countries.

Tantum hæc Religio potuit suadere mdlorum !

3. Now if there be a God, and one that is not a
mere idle spectator of the things that are done upon
earth, but a Rewarder of men and nations according to
their works, what can the event of these things be ?
It was reasonable to believe, that he would have risen
long ago, and maintained his own cause, either by.
{ending the Famine or Pestilence among us, or by
pouring out his fury in blood. And many wile and

oly men have frequently declared, that. they daily
expected this; that they daily looked for the patience
of God to give place, and judgment to' rejoice over
mercy.

4. Just at this time, when we wanted little of filling
up the measure of our intquittes, two or three Clergymen of the Church of England began vehemently to
cad Sinners to Repentance. In two or three years they
had sounded the alarm, to the utmost borders of the
land. Many thousands gathered together to hear them;
and in every place where they came, many began to.
shew luch a concern for Religion, as they never had

Gone before. A stronger imp resson was made on their

minds, of the importance of things eternal, and they
had more earnest defures of serving God, than they had
ever had from their carliest childhood. Thus did God
begin to draw them toward himself with the cords of ,
love, with the bands of a man.

Many of these were in a short time deeply convinced
of the number and keinoufness of their fins, They were
also made thoroughly sensible of thole Tempers, Which
are justly hateful to God and man, and of their utter
z2norance of God, and entire inability, either to know,
love, or {erve him. At the same time, they {aw in the
trongest light, the infigntficancy of their outfide Reti-

gion 2

232 A raxTHeER APPEAL Part III.

gion : nay, and often confessed it before God, as the
most abominable hypocrisy. Thus did they fink deeper
and deeper into that Repentance, which must ever precede Faith in the Son of God.
And from hence sprung Fruits meet for Repentance.
The drunkard commenced sober and temperate ; the
whoremonger abstained from adultery and fornication ;
the unjust from oppression and wrong, He that had
been accustomed to curse and to swear, for many years,
now {wore no more. The sluggard began to work with
his hands, that he might eat his own bread, The miser
learned to deal his bread to the hungry, and to cover
the naked with a garment. Indeed the whole form of
their life was changed. They had left off doing evil and
learned to do well, |
5. But this was not all, Over and above this outward change, they began to experience inward religion.
The love of God was shed abroad in their hearts, which
they continue to enjoy to this day. They love him,
because he first loved us, and with-held not from us his
Son, his only Son. And this love constrains them to
love all mankind, all the children of the Father of heaven and earth, and inspires them with every holy and
heavenly temper, the whole mind that was in Christ.
Hence it is that they are now uniform in their behaviour, unblameable in all manner of conversation. And
in whatsoever state they are, they have learned therewith to be content: insomuch that now they can in
every thing give thanks they more than patiently acquiesce, they rejoice and are cxceeding glad in all God's
dispensations towards. them. For as long as they love
God (and that love no man taketh from them) they
are always happy in God. Thus they calmly travel on
through life, being never weary nor faint in their minds,
never repining, murmuring, nor dilatisfied, casting all
their care upon God, till the hour comes that they
should drop this covering of earth and return unto the
great Father of Spirits. Then especially it is, that they
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, You
who credit it not, come and see, See thele living, dying Christians. |
% Happy

;

To Men of Reason and Religion. 233
© Happy while on earth they breathe ; ö
Migntier joys ordained to know,
Trampling on Sin, Hell, and Death,
To the third heaven they go?

| Now if these things are so, what reasonable man can
deny (supposing the Scriptures to be true) that God is
now viliting this nation, in a far other manner than we

had cause to expect? Instead of pouring out his fierce

displeasure upon us, he hath made us yet another tender
of mercy: so that even when Sin did most abound, Grace
hath much more abounded.

6. Yea, the Grace of God which bringeth salvation,
present salvation from inward and outward fin, hath
abounded of late years in such a degree, as neither we
nor our fathers had known. How extensive is the
change which has been wrought on the minds and lives
of the people! Know ye not that the sound 1s gone
forth into all the land? That there is scarce a city or
considerable town to be found, where some have not
been roused out of the sleep of Death, and constrained
to cry out, in the bitterness of their fouls, What must 7
do to be saved? That this religious concern has spread
to every age and sex ! to most orders and degrees of
men? To abundance of those in particular, who in
time past, were accounted monsters of wickednels,
drinking in iniquity like water, and committing all uncleanness with greediness, |

7. In what age has such a work been wrought, considering the swiftness as well as the extent of it? When
have such numbers of sinners, in so short a time, been
recovered from the error of their ways? When hath
Religion, I will not say since the Reformation, but since
the days of Constantine the Great, made so large a progress in any nation, within so {mail a space? I believe,
hardly can either ancient or modern History, supply us
with a parallel instance,

8. Let understanding men observe also the depth of

the work, so extenfively and swiftly wrought. It is not

a {hight or superhcial thing: but multitudes of men

have been so thoroughly convinced of n, that their bones

were smitten asunder, as it were with a sword dividing th:
| x very

3 >. amd 2 go ey 6+-- -- -- -- -- 4 ee - -- -- --
” © * 1 5 ---- > -- - -- -- --

234 A TARTUER APPEAL; Part III.

very joints and marrow. Many of these have been
shortly after 4o filled with peace and joy in believing,
that whether they were iu the body, or out of the body
they could scarcely tell, And in the power-of this
faith they have trampled under foot whatever the world
accounts either terrible or desirable; Having evidenced
in the severest trials, so fervent a love to God, so invariable and tender a good-will to mankind, particularly
to their enemies, and such a measure of all the fruits of
holiness, as were not unworthy the Apostolic Age.
Now so deep a repentance, so firm a faith, fo fervent
love and unblemished holiness, wrought in so many persons, within so short a timg, the world has not seen for
many ages, |

9. No lels remarkable is the Purity of the Religion
which has extended itself fo deeply and swiftly, I speak
particularly, with regard to the dottrines held by those,
among whom it is so extended. Those of the Church
of England, at least, must acknowledge this. For
where is there a body of people in the Realm, who,
number for number, so closely adhere to what our
Church delivers as pure dottrine ? Where are there
those who have approved and do approve themselves
more orthodox, more sound in their opinions? Is there
a Socinian or Arian among them all? Nay, ESI
to recite the whole catalogue of Heresies, enumerated by
Bishop Pearson, it might be asked, Who can lay any
one of these to their charge?

Nor 1s their Religion more pure from heresy, than it
is from superstition, In former times, wherever an unusual concern for the things of God had appeared, on
the one hand, strange and enormous Opinions continually
sprung up with it; on the other, a Zeal for things
which were no part of Religion, as though they had
been essential branches of it. And many have laid as
great (if not greater) stress on trifles, as on the weightier matters of the law. But it has not been so in the
present case. No stress has been laid on any thing, as
tho? it were necessary to salvation, but what is undeniably. contained in the word of God. And of the things
contained therein, the stress laid on each, has been in

proportion to the nearness of its relation; to what 3
there

;

|

-- -- ------ nr Ce, -- --

To Men of Reason and Religion, 234

there laid down as the sum of all, the love of God and
our neighbour. So pure srom superstition, so thoroughly

feriptural is that Religion, which has lately spread in

this nation. |
10. It is likewise rational as well as scriptural ; it is
ITT from Enthuftasm, as from Superstition. It is
e, the contrary has been continually armed. But
to afirm is one thing, to prove is another. Who will
prove, that it is Enthusiasim to love God? Even though
we love him with all our heart? To vejoice in the sense
of his love to us? To praise him, even with all our
strength ? Who is able to make good this charge,
against the love of all mankind ? Or, laying Rhetorical flourishes aside, to come close to the Question,
and demonstrate, that it is Enthufiasm, in every state we
are in, therewith to be content? I do but just touch
on the general heads, Ye men of reason, give me a
man, who, setting raillery and ill names apart, will
maintain this by dint of Argument, If not, own this
Religion is the thing you seek ; sober, manly, rattonal, divine : however exposed to the censure of thole,
who are accustomed to revite what they understand
not. | | |
11. It may be farther observed, the Religion of those
we now speak of, is entirely clear from Bigotry. (Perhaps this might have been ranked with Superstition, of
which it seems to be only a particular species.) They
are in no wise bigotted to Opinions. They do indeed
hold right opinions. But they are peculizrly cautious,
not to rest the weight of Christianity there. They
have no such overgrown fondness for any opinions, as
to think those alone wil make them Christians, or to
confine their affeftion and estcem to those who agree
with them therein. There is nothing they are more
fearful of than this, lest it shonld steal upon them unawares, Nor are they 6:gotted to any particular branch
even of practical Religion. They detire indeed to be
exact in every jot and tittle, in the very smallest points

of Christian Practice. But they are not attached to one

point more than another ; they aim at uniform, universal

Obedience. They contend for nothing tri/{ing, as if it

was important; for nothing circumstantial, as if it were
X 2 ellential

236 A TAN TEX APPEAL, Part III.
essential to Christianity; but for every thing in its own

order. , 5 :
12. Above all let it be observed, that this Religion
has no mixture of Vice or Unholiness, It gives no, man
of any rank or profession, the least licence to fin, It
makes no allowance to any person for ungodliness of
any kind, Not that all who follow after, have attained
this, either are already perfect. But however that be,
they plead for no sin, either inward or outward,
They condemn every kind and degree thereof, in themselves, as well as in other men. Indeed most in themselves; it being their constant care, to bring those
words home to their own case, Whosoever shall keep
the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty
of all.” |

113+. Yet there is not found among them that bitter
Zeal, in points either of small or of great importance,
that spirit of Persecution, which has so often accompanied the spirit of Reformation. It. is an idle conceit,
that the spirit of persecution is among the Papists only ;
it is whereloever the devil, that old murderer works;
and he still worketh in all the, children of disobedience.
Of consequence, all the children of disobedience, will
on a thousand different pretences, and in a thousand
different ways, so far as God permits, persecute the
children of God. But what is still more to be lamented
is, that the children of God themselves, have so often
used the same weapons and persecuted others, when the
power was in their own hands. be 3-4

Can we wholly excuse those venerable men, our great
Reformers themselves, from this charge ? I fear not,
if we impartially read over any History of the Reformation, What wonder is it then, that when the tables
were turned, Bishop Bonner or Gardiner should make
reprisals? That they should measure to others (indeed
good measure, shaken together) what had before been
measured to them? Nor is it strange, when we consider
the single case of Joan Boucher, that God should suffer
those (otherwise) holy men, Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Ridley, and Bishop Latimer, to drink of the lame
cup with her,

14. But

To Men of Reason and Religion, 237

14. But can you find any tincture of this in the case
before us? Do not all who have known the love of
God, know what spirit they are of ? And that the Son
of Man is not come to destroy men's lives but to suve them?
Do they approve of the using any kind or degree of
violence, on any account or pretence whatsoever in matters of Religion? Do they not hold the right every
man has to judge for himself, to be sacred and inviolable ? Do they allow any method of bringing even
those who are the farthest out of the way, who are in
the grossest errors, to the knowledge of the truth, except the methods of Reason and Persuasion ? Of Love,
Patience, Gentleness, Long-suffering? Is there any
thing in their practice which is inconfistent with this
their constant profeion / Do they in fact hinder their
own relations or dependents from worshipping God according to their own conscience © When they believe
them to be in error, do they use force of any kind, in
order to bring them out of it? Let the instances, if
there are such, be produced. But if no such are to be
found, then let all reasonable men, who believe the
Bible, own, that a work of God 1s wrought in our
land: and such a work (if we survey in one view the
extent of it, the swiftness with which it is spread, the
depth of that Religion which was fo swiftly diffused, and
its purity from all corrupt mixtures,) as it must be acknowledged, cannot easily be parallelled, in all these
concurrent circumstances, by any thing that is found in
the English Annals, since Christianity was first planted
in this island.
* H. 1. And yet those who can discern the face of the
fy, cannot difcern the figns 1 times. Yet those who
are estcemed wise men, do Hot know that God is nowreviving his work upon earth. Indeed concerning fome
of these the reason is plain; they know not, because
they think not of it. Their thoughts are otherwise employed ; their minds are taken up with things of quite
a different nature. Or, perhaps they may think of it'
a little now and then, when they have nothing. elle to
do!] but not seriously, or deeply; not with any closenels or attention of thought, They are too much in
haste to weigh the facts whereof we speak, and to draw
| A 3 | the

238 A raxTazR APPEAL, Part III.
the just inference therefrom 5 nor is the conviction
which they may sometimes feel suffered to fink into their
hearts ; but things that have a larger share in their affections soon destroy the very traces of it. |
2. True it is, that there are some who think more
deeply, who are accustomed to consider things from the
foundation, and to lay circumstances together, that they
may judge of nothing before they have full evidence :
and yet even some of these appear to be in doubt, concerning the present work. Now, supposing it to be a
work of God, how can this be accounted for? That
they who so diligently enquire concerning it, do not
know the time of their visitation? Perhaps because of
the deeply rooted prejudice which they brought with
them to the enquiry ; and which still hangs on their
minds, makes it scarce poshble for them to form an impartial judgment. Perhaps, even a slight prepofsefion
might occasion their stumbling on some of those rocks
of offence, which by the wise permission of God, always did and always will attend any Revival of his
Work. Nay, it may be, their very caution was
carried to excess, They would not judge before they
had such evidence as the nature of the thing would not
admit, or, at least, God did not think fit to give.

g. All this is very easy to conceive, But it may at
first appear surprising, to find men of renown, men
lupposed to be endowed with knowledge, and with abilities of every kind, flatly, openly, peremptorily denying, that there has been any unusual work of God at
all! Yea, a late eminent Writer goes farther yet, accounts it an instance of downright Enthusiasm, to imagine, that there is an extraordinary work now wrought
upon the earth,* _ by
It avails not to say, „No he does not deny this,
but he denies it to be the work of God.” This is
palpably trifling : for the work under consideration,
is of such: a nature (namely, the conversion of men
from all manner of fin, to holiness of heart and life)
that if it be at any time wrought at all, it must be
the work of God: seeing it is God alone, and not

| * Observation, Part III.

any

-- -- '

To Men of Reason and Religion, 239

any child of man, who is able to destroy the 'works of
the Devil. 5 | | »

Vet neither is this difficult to be accounted for, if
we consider things more closely : tor the same prejudice
which keeps some in doubt, may eafily be conceived so

to influence others, as to make them wholly deny the

work of God. And this it may do in several ways: it
may either bring to question the facts related, and hinder
their endeavouring to be more fully informed ; or prevent their drawing the inferences from those facts, as
they would otherwise see to be plain and undeniable.
Yea, and it will give ten-fold weight to the offences

which must come, so as to over-balance all evidence

whatsoever. |
4. This also may account for the behaviour of those,

who not content to suspend their judgment, or to deny
the work of God, go farther still, even to the length
of contradicting and blaspheming, Nay, some of these
have expressed a deeper abhorrence, and shewn a stronger
enmity against this, than they were ever known to do
against Popery, Infidelity, or any Heresy whatsoever.
Some have persecuted the Instruments whom it pleased
God to ule herein, only not to the death and others

have treated in the same manner, all those whom they

termed their Followers. A few instances of this it may
be proper to mention, out of the very many which
might be recited, |

5. On the 20th of June, 174, a great multitude of
people gathered together, chiefly from Walsal, Darleston, and Bilston, in Wensbury Church-yard, Stafford»
shire, They went from thence (after by sounding a
horn they had gathered their whole company together)
to Mr, Eaton's house,: in the middle of the town, who
was at that time Constable, He went to the door with
his Constable's staff, and began reading the Act of Parlament against Riots; but the stones flew fo thick about
his head, that he was forced to leave off reading and
retire, They broke all his windows, the door of his
house, and a large clock in pieces. They went then to
above fourscore other houses, in many of which there

were not three panes of glals left,

„ n
„

240 A TrARTRER APPEAL, Part III.

6. About Whitsuntide, 1743, a mob arose at Darlefton, (near Wensbury) and broke all the windows (besides spoiling many of their goods) of Joshua Coristable,
John Cotterel, Thomas Butler, Thomas Wilkinson,

Aaron Longmore, William Powell, Ann Evans, Walter
Carter, Samuel Carter, and Thomas Wilks.

Edward .Martin, Ann Low, Joan Fletcher, Edward
Horton, Mumford Wilks, Joshua Yardly, and Robert
Deacon, had all their windows broke twice.

James Foster, Widow Hires, and Jonathan Jones
had their windows broke, and money | extorted to fave
their houses,

James Foster and Joice Wood had their windows
broken, and their goods broken and spoiled.

Jos. Spittle had his windows broke, his house broken
open, some goods spoiled, and some taken away.

William Woods had his windows: broke twice, and
himself compelled to go along with the rabble.

Elizabeth Lingham, a widow with five children, had
her goods spoiled, her spinning wheel (the support of
her family) broke ; and her Parish Allowance reduced
from 25s. and 6d. to 1s. and 6d. a week.

Valentine Ambersley had his windows broke twice;
and his wife, big with child, beaten with clubs.

George Wynn had his windows and goods broken,
and to fave his house, was forced to give them drink.

Thomas Day had his windows and goods broken, and
was forced to remove from the town.

Joseph Stubbs had his windows broke twice, and his
wife so frightened, that she miscarried,

J. On June 20, 1743, John Baker, at the head of
a large mob came to the house of Jonas Turner, at
West-Bramwick, near Wednesbury, and asked him,
« whether he would keep from these men that went
preaching about, and go to the Church? He an-
{wered, I do go to the Church. But I never see any
of you there.” Presently ene Daniel Oniens with a
great club, broke great Dare of the' window at one

blow, Others laid hold of him, and dragged” him
about sixty yards, before he could get loose from
-- his windows, and

threw.

them, N e they brok

To Men of Reason and Religion. 241
thre into his house abundance of stones, to break his
, About four in the afternoon they came to the house
of Widow Turner of West-Bramwick. They threw
in the bricks and stones so fast, that she was forced to
open the door and run out among them. One of the
daughters cried out, my mother will be killed!” On
which they fell to throwing stones at her. She ran in-
| to a neighbour's house, but before she could shut the
| door, they broke the bottom off with a brick end.

They followed her other daughters with stones, and one
with a great stake, She ran into another house much
frightened, expecting to. be murdered. The Widow
asked, © How can you come and abuse us thus? On
which, one came with a large club, and swore, if she”
spoke another word, he would knock her on the head,
and bury her in the ditch.” Then he went and broke
all the glass that was left. The same they did to many
of the neighbouring houses, 7
8. On the 19th of June, James Yeaman, of Walsal
saw Mary Bird in her father's house at Wensbury, and
swore, by G-- you are there now, but we will kill
you to-morrow.” Accordingly he came with a mob
the next day; and after they had broken all the windows, he took up a stone, and said, © Now by G--1I
will kill you,” He threw it, and struck her on the
side of the head. The blood gushed out, and she drop-
| ped down immediately, rs ee? aer
| The same day they came to John Turner's house, and
| after they had broke the windows, casements, and ciel-
| ing, one of them cried out, © I suppose now you will
go to your dear Jesus's wounds and see them opened for
you.“ | N
Another of them took Mr. Hands of Wensbury, by
the throat, swore he would be the death of him, gave
| him a swing round, and. threw him upon the ground,
| As soon as he rose, one Equal Baker gave him a blow
| on the eye, and knocked him down again. In about
; half an hour the mob came to his house, and broke all
the windows, except about twenty panes. The kitchen
windows they cleared, lead, bars and all, broke the
window-posts, and threw them into the . The
op

.
|
ö
|
--

24% A'ranrnex APPEAL, Part III.

shop way shut up (he being an Apothecary :) but they
quickly? roke it open, broke all the pots and bottles in
pieces, and destroyed all his medicines. They broke
also the shelves and drawers in the shop to pieces, and
many of his household' goods,
In the latter end of June, John Griffiths, of Wensbury, and Francis Ward, went to Mr. D. Justice of
the Peace. They told him the condition they and their
neighbours were in, their houses broken, and their
goods spoiled. He replied, © I suppose you follow
these parsons that come about, I will neither meddle
nor make,”

g. On January 13, 1743-4, the 250 rose again at
Dalleston, broke all the windows of all who followed
thts Way, (except two or three who bought themselves
off) broke open several houses, and took what they
liked, the people belonging to them having fled for
their lives.

About the same time, the Rev. Mr. E. -- came to
Darleston; and meeting some others at Thomas Forshew's they drew up a writing, and Nicholas Winspur,
the Crier of the town, gave public notice, “that all the
people of the Society must come to Mr. Forshew's, and
sign it; or else their houses would be pulled down immediately.“ It was to this effect, © that they would
never read, or sing, or pray together, or hear these Parsons any more.

Several signed this through fear. They made every
one who did, lay down a penny -- To make the moo
drink,”

About Candlemas, the wife of Joshua Constable, of
Darleston, was going to Wenfbury, when a mob met
her in the road, threw her down several times, and
abused her in a manner too horrible to write. A Warrant was procured for some of these. But one of them
only was carried before Mr, G , who came back
and told his companions, that the Justice said, “ that
they might go home about their business.“ On this the
mob role again, came to Joshua's ' house, and destroyed
all the goods therein. They likewise broke and spoiled
all his shop tools, threw the tiles off the roof of the
Houle, and pulled down one room, the joists of _

oy

To Men of Reason and Religion? 24%,
they carried away with them, All his gunlocks they
took away; they tore in pieces all his wife's linen, cut
the bed and bedstead, so that it was good for nothing,
and tore her Bible and Common-Prayer Book all to
pieces. .She and her husband retired to another house,
But one telling the mob they were there, they swore,
„ they would tear it down immediately, if the man
let them stay any longer.“ So they went out into
Move nd and snow, not knowing where to lay their
hea

10. On Tuesday, January g, 1743-4, Henry Old
came to John Griffith's house, saying, * If he did not
leave following this Way, he had a hundred men at
his command, who should come and pull his house
down.” Soon after he brought some with him, but
the neighbours gave him money, and sent him away for
that time, | |
Monday Feb. 6. Between seven and eight at night,
came part of the same company. Hearing them afar
off, John and his wife fastened the door, and left the
house, Some of the neighbours going in soon after,
found them destroying all they could, Two chairs
and several bundles of linen were laid upon the fire,
After they had destroyed what they could, they loaded
themselves with cloaths and meat, and went their
Way. ;

The same day public Notice was given at Walsal
by a paper fixt up there, That all who designed
to assist in breaking the windows, and plunderin
the houles of the Methodists at Wensbury, should be
ready at ten o'clock, the next morning, on the ChurchHill.” |

11. The next morning, February 7, (being ShroveTuesday) about half an hour after ten, great number
of men were gathered together on the Church-Hill.
Ihence they marched down, {ume armed with {words,
{ome with clubs, and some with axes. They first fel]
upon Benjamin Watson's house, and broke many of the
tiles, and all the windows. Next they came to Mr,
Addingbrook's, broke a fine clock, with many of his
goods, and stole all the things they could carry away.
Ihe next houle was Jane Smith's, whose windows they

e
#14 Aranrursx APPEAL, Part III.

broke, with what little goods she had. The next was
Mr. Bird's, where they destroyed every thing th
found, except what they carried away; cutting the beds
in pieces, as they did all the beds which they could any
where find, Thence they went to Mr. Edge's house :
he was ill of a fever; so, for a sum of money, they
ast it over. The next house was Mr, Hand's. They
broke all his counters, boxes and drawers, and all
(except some bedsteads) that axe or hammer could
break. They spilt all his drugs and chymical medicines, and stole every thing they could carry, even all
his and his wife's wearing apparel, beside what they
had on, TY
12. Mr. Eaton's house was next. They broke all
his windows, and all his inside doors in pieces, cut the
lead off his house, destroyed or stole whatever they
could lay their hands on. Some Gentlemen offered to
stop them, if he would sign a paper implying, 4 That
he would never hear these Parsons more. But he told
them, He had felt already what a wounded conscience
was; and by the grace of God he would wound his
conscience no more.”

After they had done at Mr, Eaton's, they plundered
several other houses in Wensbury and West-Bramwick. It is scarce possible to describe the outrages
they committed, Only they left them they plundered
alive.

While they were plundering John Turner's house,
he waded through the brook, to try if he could fave
some of his goods, which one David Garrington was
carrying away. Upon which Garrington told him, © It
would the same here as it was in Ireland, for there
would be a Maslacre very quickly, And he wished it
Was now.“

13. About eleven o' clock, Sarah, the wife of John
Sheldon, being told, the mob was coming to her house,
went and met them at the gate. She asked John Baker,
their Captain, What they were come for ? He
answered, if she would have nothing to do with those
People, not a pennyworth of her goods should be hurt.”

he made no reply. Then they broke the door open,
and began breaking and plundering the goods. One

e coming

To Men of Reason and Religion. 245

eoming out with a fire-shovel, she begged him, © not to
take that away.“ He (wore, * if she spoke another Word
he would beat her brains out.“ |
John Sheldon was this while helping Thomas Parkes
to hide his goods, though he knew by the noise. they
were breaking his own to pieces. Between two and
three he came to his house with William Sitch. William asked Sarah, How she did? Saying, © For his
part, he took joyfully the spoiling of his goods, 'She
answered, that © seeing so much wickednels, she could
not rejoice ; but she blessed God she could bear it patiently, and sound not the least . in her.“ John
Sheldon seeing the spoil they had made, smiled and
faid, „Here is strange work.” His wife told him, “if
she had complied with their terms, not one pennyworth would have deen hurt.“ He replied, © That if
she had complied to deny the Truth, and he had found
his goods whole on that account, he should never have
been easy as long as he lived 5 but he blessed God that
she had rather chosen to suffer wrong.“
The mob continued to rise for fix days together, The
damage they did in and about Wensbury, at the very
lowest computation, amounted to five hundred and four
pounds, seventeen shillings. |
Wednesday, October 19, 1743, I came to Birmingham, in my way to Newcastle. Thursday, October
20. several persons from Wensbury earnestly desired
me to call there, I yielded to their importunity, and,
went, I was fitting and writing at Francis Ward's, in
the afternoon ; when the cry arose, © That the Darlefton mob had beset the house.” 1 called together those
that were in the house, and prayed, that God would
scatter the people that delight in war, And it was fos
one went one way, and one another ; so that in half an
hour the house was clear on every side. But before five,
they returned with greater numbers, The cry of all.
was, “Bring out the Minister ! ??
1 defired one to bring the Captain of the mob into
the house, After a few words mterchanged, the lion
was as a lamb. I then desired him to bring in one or twa
more of the most angry of his companions.” Tlediditoi;
aud, in twe ming, their mind was, changed too. I.
| * theu.

2:6 A raxTner APPEAL, Part III.

then bade them who were in the room make way, that
I might go out among the people. As soon as I was
in the midst of them, I faid, © Here I am: what do
you want with me?” Many cried out, We want
you to go with us to the Justice,” I told them,
„ That I will with all my heart.“ So I walked before, and two or three hundred of them followed, to
Bentley-Hall, two miles from Wensbury. But a servant came out, and told them, “ Justice Lane was not
to be spoken with.” Here they were at a stand, till
one advised to go to Justice Persehouse, at Wallsal.
About seven we came to his house; but he also sent
word, “ That he was in bed, and could not be spoken
with.!“ | | 5
All the company were now pretty well agreed, to
make the best of their way home ; but we had not gone
a hundred yards, when the mob of Walsal came pouring in like a flood, The Darleston mob stood agaiuft
them for awhile ; but, in a short time, some being
knocked down, and others much hurt, the rest ran
away, and left me in their hands. |
Io attempt to speak was vain, the noise being like
that of taking a city by storm : so they dragged me along
till they came to the town, at a few hundred yards dil.
tance ; where, seeing the door of a large bout Bpen, I
endeavoured to go in: but a man catching me by the
hair, (my hat having been caught away at the beginning)
pulled me back into the middle of the mob; who were
as so many ramping and roaring lions. They hurried
me from thence, through the main street, from one end
of the town to the other. I continued speaking all
the time to thole within hearing, feeling no pain or
wearinels, :
At the west end of the town, seeing a door half
open, I made towards it, and would have gone in, but
a gentleman in the shop would not suffer me, saying,
„They would pull the house down, if I did.“ However, here I stood, and asked, © Are you willing to
hear me speak ? Many cried out, No, no; knock
His brains out.” Others said, © Nay ; but we will
hear ham speak. first.“ I began asking, * What hurt
have I done you?. Whom among you have I wronged
Es os in

[|
|
|

To Men of Reason and Religion. 247

in word or deed ? ** And continued speaking till my
voice failed, Then the floods hfted up their voice
again; many crying out, Bring him away, bring him
away!“

Feeling my strength. renewed, I spoke again, and
broke out aloud into prayer. And now, one of the
men who had headed the mob before, turned, and said,
ie Sir, follow me: not a man shall touch the hair of
your head.” Two or three more confirmed his words.
At the same time the Mayor (for it was he that stood in
the shop) cried out, © For shame, for shame 5; let him
go.” An honest butcher spoke to the same effect: and
seconded his words by laying hold of four or five one
after another, who were running on, the most fiercely.
The people then dividing to the right and left, those
three or four men who had spoken before, took me between them, and carried me through the midst ; bitterly protesting, © They would knock down any that
touched him.” But on the bridge the mob rallied
again: we therefore went on one side, over a Mill-dam,
and thence through the meadows, till a little after ten,
God brought me lafe to Wensbury, having lost only a
put * my waistcoat, and a little {kin from one of my

ands. | |

I believe every reasonable man will allow, that nothing
can possibly excuse these proceedings; seeing they are
open, bare-faced violations, both of justice and mercy,
and of all laws divine and human. 4

III. I suppose no Protestant will undertake to defend
such proceedings, even towards the vilest miscreants.
But abundance of excuses have been made, if not for
oppofing it thus, yet for denying this work to be of God,
and for not acknowledging the time of our visitation.

1. Some alledge, that the Dofrines of these men are
false, erroneous, and enthufiasiic ; that they are new, and

unheard of till of late; that they are Quakerism, Fa-

naticism, Popery,

This whole pretence has been already cut up by the
roots; it having been shewn at large, that every branch,

of this Doctrine, is the plain Doctrine of Scripture, "2
interpreted by our own Church, Theresoge, it cannot

\ 1
s 5 . ©
* l 1
Y mm
%
7 i
ä :
by *

Fry 1 *
+ «>» f
928 ö

248 A rARAT NEX APPEAL, Past III.
either false or erronegus, provided the Scripture be true.
Neither can it be enthufiastic, unless the same epithet
belongs to our Articles, Homilies, and Liturgy. Nor
yet can these Doctrines be termed new no newer, at
least than the reign' of Queen Elizabeth; not even
with regard to the way of expression, or the manner
wherein they are proposed. And as to the substance,
they are more ancient still ;\ as ancient not only as the
Gospel, as the times of Isaiah, or David, or Moses,
but as the first Revelation of God to man, If therefore
they were unheard of till of late, in any that is termed
a Christian country, the greater guilt is on those, who,
2 Ambassadors of Christ, ought to publish them day
day. | |
" Renakicifin if it means any thing at all, means the
fame with enthufrasm, or religious madness, from which
was oblerved before) these doctrines are distant as
far as the East from the West. However, it is a convenient word to be thrown out, upon any thing we do not
like; because scarce one reader in a thousand, has any
idea of what it means. If any part of this doctrine
is held by the Quakers, there is the more reason to rejvice. I would to God they held it all: though the
Doctrine itself, would be neither better nor worse for
this.

Popery, m the mouth of many men, means just noching; or at most, © Something very horrid and bad.“
But Popery, properly speaking, is, the distinguishing
Doctrines of the Church of Rome. They are summed
up in the Twelve Articles which the Council of Trent
added to the Nicene Creed. Now who can find the
least connexion between any of these, and the doctrines
whereof we are speaking ? |

2. Others alledge, Tr Doctrine is too strict.
They make the way to heaven too narrow.” And this
is in truth the original objection, (as it was almost the
only one for some time) and is secretly at the bottom
of a thousand more, which appear in various forms.
But do they make the way to heaven any narrower,
than our Lord and his Apoftles made it ? Is their
Doctrine stricter than that ef the Bible? Confider

B only a few plain texts, © Thou shalt love the Lord thy

God

ere » 002, 6364 -- = --

-- 28

ö
|
.

saved, but those of their own way,” Most surely they
do. For as there is but one heaven, so there is but one

To Men of Reason and Religion. 249

God with all thy heart, and with all thy mind, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy strength.-- For every idle
word which men shall speak, they shall give an account
in the day of judgment. Whether ye cat or drink, or.
whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God.“ If
their Doctrine is stricter than this, they are to blame.
But you know in your conscience, it is not. And
who can be one jot less strift, without corrupting the
word of God ? Can any Steward of the Mysteries of
God be found faithful, if he change any part of that
sacred Depositum No. He can abate nothing;
he can sojten nothing. He is constrained to declare
to all men, I may not bring down the Scripture to.
your taste; You must come up to it, or perish for
ever,” 15 |
g. This is the real ground of that other popular cry,
concerning the Uncharitableness of these men.” Uncharitable are they? In what respect? Do they not
feed the hungry and clothe the naked? No, that is not
the thing. They are not wanting in this. But they
are so uncharitable in judging ! They think none can
be saved, but those of their own way. They damn all
the world beside themselves, | .
What do you mean?; They think none can be

way to it: even the way of faith in Christ, (for we

speak not of Opinions, or outward modes of worship, -

the way of love to God and man, the Highway of Holiness. And is it uncharitable, to think or say, that
none can be saved, but those who walk in this way ? A
Was he then uncharitable, who declared, * He that believeth not shall be damned? Or he that said, „Fol-

low holiness, without which no man shall fee the
Lord ?” And again: © Tho? I bestow all my goods

to feed the poor, and tho' I give my body to be burned,

yet if I have not (ayamy,) Charity, Love, all this profiteth me nothing.“ . | |

But they damn all,“ you say, © beside themselves.” .
Damn all! What kind of word is this? They damn
no man. None is able to damn any man, but the Lord
and Judge of all, What you probably mean by this
| Y 3 strange

250 AvARTUurx APPEAL, Part III.
strange expression is, they declare that God condemns
all, beside those who believe in Jesus Christ, and love
him, and keep his commandments. And so must you
also, or you fin against God, and your neighbour, and
your own soul. But is there any uncharitableness in
this? In warning finners to flee from the wrath to
come? On the contrary, not to warn a poor, blind,
stupid wretch, that he is hanging over the mouth of
hell, would be so inexcusable a want of charity, as
would bring his blood upon our head.

4. But there is no room sor dispute, touching these
doctrines in general, seeing our Lord gives you so plain
a rule, by which you may easily and infallibly know,
whether they be of God. The tree is known by its
fruit ; either therefore make the tree good, and its fruit
good; or else make the tree corrupt, and its fruit corrupt,” (Matt. xii. 3g.) Now what fruit does the tree
before us bring forth? Look and see ; believe your
own eyes and ears. Sinners leave their sins, The ser.
vants of the devil become the servants of God. Is this
good or evil fruit? That Vice loses ground, and Vir.
tue, practical Religion, gains? O dispute no more,
Know the tree by its fruit. Bow, and own the finger

5. But many who on these doctrines to be of God,

et cannot be reconciled to the instruments he hath
made use of, A very common exception taken against
these is (and was from the beginning) © that they are fo
young.” Therefore (abundance of men have readily
inferred) © This work cannot be of God,” |

Perhaps they are not so young as you conceive, Mr,
Whitekeld is now upwards of thirty; my brother is
thirty-seven years of age. I have lived above forty-two
years. And a gentleman in Cornwall, for whom I often
preach, has the merit of having lived threescore and
seventeen years. EN ITS bs

But, supposing the antecedent true, what a conse-

uence is this? What shadow of Scripture have you
to lupport it p Doth not God send by whom he will
fend? And who shall fay to him, What doest thou f
Thele are too young; fend elder men.” What shadow! of reason ? Is it not pollible, that a person of

thirty
/ 1 f

-- Ig > * * --
-- --

--

-- -- 2 --
-- r

--

= --
oo --

--

%

Wy /

--_--
--

7.
*

To Men of Reason and Religion. 251
thirty or forty may have as true a judgment in the
things of God, and as great a blessing attending his
preaching, as one of fifty or fourscore ?

I wish you would explain yourself a little on this
head 3 | 7+)

Scire velim, verbo, pretium quotus arroget annus ?

How old do you require a man to be, before God shall
have leave to speak by his mouth P--O my ' brethren,
who could have believed any serious man would once
bave named such an argument as this? Seeing both
- Scripture and Reason teach, that God herein giveth account to none of his ways. But he worketh by whomsoever he will work; he sheweth mercy by whom he
will shew mercy, e

6. But there are only a few young heads.” I
cannot but obizrve here, what great pains have been
taken, what diligence shewn, to make and to keep them
few. What arts have not been uled, to keep back
those of the Clergy in particular, who have been clearly
convinced from time to time, that they ought to join
hearts and hands in the work? On this occasion, it
has been accounted meritorious to say all manner of evil
of us fallcly : to promise them whatever their hearts
desired, if they would refrain from these men: and,
on the other hand, to threaten them with heavy things,
if ever they went among them- more. So that how
fully soever they were convinced, they could not act
according to their conviction, unless they could give
up at once all thought of preferment, either in Church
or State, nay, all hope of even a Fellowship, or poor
Scholarship in either University, Many allo bave in
threatened, that if they went on in this way, what
| Jittle they had should be taken from them. And many
have, on this very account, been difowned by their
dearest friends and ncarest relations. So that there was
no possibility the number of these labourers should ever
be increased at all, unless by those who could break
through all these ties, who desired nothing in the preient world, who counted neither their fortunes, nor
friends, nor lives, dear unto themselves, so they might
only keep a conscience void of offence towards G
and towards men.

7. But

ES, yy b
8 * <n--_rs
=> ----_--
*

ff E La
= <= * ----

-- -- -- . *

--
-- -- _

o --
> --

Bom ED TH ̇ 2

_ --
.
--Z-- -- -- , __ 5égl! --

= * -- =. >
*

* 2
6 *
* ö
4 : :
' =
.
* :
*
£
\ *
.
-
i" 9
-- 4 6 *
= n
|
:
"i |
:
bn f
:
if
.
it

--

282 A rART HTR APPEAL, Part III.
7. But what do you infer from their fewness? That
because they are few, therefore God cannot work by
them? Upon what Scripture do you ground this? I
thought it was the same to him to save by many or by
few. Upon what reason? Why cannot God fave ten
thousand souls by one man, as well as by ten thousand ?
How little, how inconsiderable a circumstance is number
before God? Nay, is there not reason to believe, that
whensoever God is pleased to work a great deliverance, .
spiritual or temporal, he may first say, as of old, . The
people are too many for me to give the Midianites into
their hands P' May he not purposely chuse few as well
as inconsiderable instruments, for the greater manifestation of his own glory ? Very few, I grant, are the
instruments now employed ; yet a great work is wrought,
already, And the fewer they are by whom this large
harvest hath hitherto been gathered in, the more evi-

dent must it appear to unprejudiced minds, That the

work is not of man, but of God. t
8. But they are not only few, but unlearned also.“
This is another grievous offence ; and is by many esteemed a sufficient excuse, for not acknowledging the
work to be of God. | 3
The ground of this offence is partly true. Some of
those who now preach are unlearned. They neither
understand the ancient languages, nor any. of the
branches of philosophy. And yet this objection might
have been spared, by many of those who have frequently
made it: because they are unlearned too (tho? accounted -
otherwise.) They have not themselves the very thing
*they require 1n others, 8 5
Men in general are under a great mistake with regard
to what is called, The Learned World.” They do
not know, they cannot easily imagine, how little learning there is among them. I do not speak of abstruse
learning; but of what all Divines, at least of any note,
are supposed to have, viz, The knowledge of the
Tongues, at least Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and. of
the common Arts and Sciences. |
How few men of learning, so called, understand
Hebrew? Even so far as to read a plain chapter in
Genelis? Nay, how few underitand Greek? Make
an

a -

To Men of Reason and Religion, 238

an easy experiment. Desire that grave man, who 1s
urging this objection, only to tell you the English of
the first paragraph that occurs in one of Plato's Dialogues ? I am afraid we may go farther still, How
few understand Latin? Give one of them an Epistle
of Tully, and fee how readily he will explain it without his Dictionary. If he can hobble through that, tis
odds but a Georgick in Virgil, or a Satire of Persius
sets him fast,

And with regard to the Arts and Sciences : how few
understand so much as the general principles of Logic ?
Can one in ten of the Clergy (O grief of heart !) Or
of the Masters of Arts in either University, when an
argument is brought, tell you even the Mood and Figure wherein it is propoled ? Or compleat an Enthymeme ? Perhaps, you do not so much as understand
the term: supply the premiss which is wanting, in
order to make it a full Categorical Syllogism. Can one
in ten of them demonltrate a Problem or Theorem in
Euclid's Elements? Or define the common terms used
in Metaphysics ? Or intelligibly explain the first Principles of it? Why then will they pretend to that
learning, which they are conscious to themselves they
have not? Nay, and censure others who have it not,
and do not pretend to it ? Where are Sincerity and
Candour fled ?

It will easily be observed, that I do not depreciate
Learning of any kind. The knowledge of the Languages is a valuable talent; so is the knowledge of the
Arts and Sciences. Both the one and the other may
be employed to the glory of God, and the good of men.
But yet I ask, Where hath God declared in his Word,
that he cannot, or will not make use of men that have
it not? Has Moses, or any of the Prophets affirmed
this? Or our Lord? Or any of his Apostles? You
are sensible all these are against you. You know the
Apoltles themlelves, all except St. Paul, were argperg
afEZuꝛm i xa anwru common, unphilosphical, unlet-
* terred men. |
9. © What! Then you make yourselves like the
Apostles.” Because this filly objection has so often
been urged, I will for once spend a few words upon it,

though
% AAT APPEAL, Part III.

- © though it does not deserve that honour, Why, must
not every man, whether Clergyman or Layman, be in
some respects, like the Apostles, or go to hell? Can
any man be saved, if he be not holy, like the Apostles ?
A follower of them, as they were of Christ? And
ought not every Preacher of the Gospel, to be in a
peculiar manner like the Apostles, both in holy tem3 in exemplariness of life, and in his indefatigable
abours for the good of fouls? Woe unto every Ambassador of Christ, who is not like the Apostles in this!
In holiness; in making full. proof of his ministry ; in
spending and being spent for Christ! We cannot, and
therefore we need not be like them in working outward
miracles. But we may and ought, in working together
with God for the salvation of men. And the same
God who was always ready to help their infirmities, is
ready to help ours also. He who made them workmen
that needed not to be ashamed, will teach us also rightly
to divide the word of truth. In this respett likewise,
in respect of his having help from God, for the work
whereunto he is called, every Preacher of the Gospel
is like the Apostles, Otherwile he is of all men most
miserable. 3 e .
10. And I am bold to affirm, that these unlettered
men have help from God for that great work, the saving souls from death; seeing he hath enabled, and doth
enable them still, to turn many to righteousness. 'Thus
hath he * destroyed the wisdom of the wise, and brought
to.nought the understanding of the prudent.” When
they imagined they had effectually shut the door, and
locked up every passage, whereby any help could come
to two or three Preachers, weak m body as well as
soul ; who they might reasonably believe would, humanly speaking, wear themselves out in a short time:
when they had gained tbeir point, by securing (as they
fuppoled) all the men of learning in the nation; © He
that sitteth in heaven laughed them to scorn,” and
came upon them by a way they thought not of. Out
of the stones he raised up those who should beget children
to Abraham, We had no more foresight of this than
you. Nay, we had the deepest prejudices against it:
untill we could not but own, that God gave wildom
| | from

sinners were daily converted to God.
|

--

To Men of Reason and Religion. 25%
from above to these unlearned and ignorant men; fo
that the work of the Lord prospered in their hand, and

Indeed in the one thing which they profels to know,
they are not ignorant men. I trust there is not one of
them who is not able to go through such an examination, in substantial, practical, experimental Divinity,
as few of our Candidates for Holy Orders, even in the
University, (I speak it with sorrow and shame, and in
tender love) are able to do. But oh | what manner of
examination do most of those Candidates go through ?
And what proof are the Testimonials commonly
brought (as solemn as the form is wherein they run,)
either of their piety or knowledge, to whom are intrusted those sheep which God hath purchased with his
own blood !

11. + But they are Laymen. You seem to be sensible yourself of the strength of this objection. For as
many as you have answered, I observe you have never
once so much as touched on this.“

I have not. Yet it was not distrust of my cause,

but tenderness to you which occasioned my silence. I
had something to advance on this head also : but I was
afraid you could not bear it. I was conscious to myself, that some years since, to touch this point, was to
touch the apple of my eye. And this makes me almost
unwilling to speak now ; lest 1 should shock the prejudices I cannot remove.
Suffer me, however, just to intimate to you some
things, which I would leave to your farther consideration, The Scribes of old, who were the ordinary
Preachers among the Jews, were not Priests; they were
not better than Laymen. Yea, many of them were incapable of the Priesthood, being of the tribe of Simeon,
not of Levi.

Hence probably it was, that the Jews themselves
never urge it as an objettion to our Lord's preaching,
(even those who did not acknowledge or believe, that

he was sent of God in an extraordinary: character) thas

he was no Priest after the Order of Aaron, Nor indeed could be ; seeing he was of the tribe of Judah.
| Nor

266 A ranrnst APPEAL, Part III.

Nor does it appear, that any objefed this to the
- Apostles. So far from it, that at Antioch in Pifidia,
we find the Ruler of the Synagogue lending to Paul
end Barnabas, strangers just come into the city, faving,
Men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on,“ Acts xin. 15. |
If we consider these things, we. shall be less surprised
at what occurs in the 8th chapter of the Acts: © At
that time there was a great persecution against the
Church, and they were all scattered abroad: (i. e. all
the Church, all the Believers in Jesus throughout the
regions of Judea and Samaria, (ver. 1.) * Therefore
they that were srattered abroad, went every where
preaching the word,” (ver. 4.) Now, what shadow
of reason have we to fay, or think, that all these were
ordained before they preached ?
12, If we come to later times: Was Mr. Calvin ordained ? Was he either Priest or Deacon? And were
not most of those whom it pleased God to employ in
promoting the Reformation abroad, Laymen also ?
Could that great work have been promoted at all in
many places, if Laymen had not preached? And yet
how seldom do the very Papists urge this, as an objection against the Reformation ? Nay, as'rigorous as
they are in things of this kind, they themselves appoint, even in some of their strictest Orders, that * if
any Lay-brother believes himself called of God, to
3 as a Mishonary, the Superior of the Order,
ing informed thereof, shall immediately send him
away.“ |
15 all Protestant Churches it is still more evident,
that Ordination is not held a necessary pre-requisite of
preaching : for m Sweden, in Germany, in Holland,
and, I beheve, in every reformed Church in Europe,
it is not only permitted, but required, that before any
one is i (before he is admited even into Deacon's Orders, where-ever the distinction between Priests
and Deacons is retained,) he should publicly preach a
year or more, ad probandum facultatem, And for this
practice, they believe they have the authority of an express command of God ; Let these first be proved:
then

. ---- Ade OG EAI ID OE

*

10 Men of Reason and Religion. 257
men let them use the ossice of a Deacon, being found
blameless, 1 Tim. iii. 10.

13. * In England, however, there is nothing of this
kind : no Layman is permitted to speak in public.” No!
Can you be ignorant, that in a hundred Churches they
do it continually? In how many (particularly in the
West of England) does the Parish-Clerk read one of
the lessons? (In some he reads the whole service of the
Church, perhaps, every Lord's-day.) And do not
other Laymen conftantly do the same thing, yea, in our
very Cathedrals? Which being under the more immediate inspettion of the Bishops, should be patterns to
all other Churches. |
Perhaps it will be said, But this is not preaching.”
Yes, but it is, essentially such. For what is it to
preach, but predicare Verbum Dei? To publish the
Word of God? And this Laymen do all over England ; particularly under the eye of every Bishop in
the nation,

Nay, is it not done in the Universities themselves ?
Who ordained that singing man at Chrilt-Church ?
Who is likewise utterly unquallified for the work,
murdering every lesson he reads? Not even endeavouring to read it as the word of God, but rather as
an old song? Such a Layman as this, meddling at all
with the word of God, I grant is a scandal to the English nation.

To go a step farther. --Do not the fundamental Constitutions of the University of Oxford, the Statutes,
even as revised by Archbishop Laud, require every
Batchelor of Arts, nine in ten of whom are Laymen,
to read three public Lectures in Moral Philosophy, on
whatever subject he chuses? My subject, I well remember, was the Love of God. Now, what was this
but Preaching ?

Nay, may not a man be a Dottor of Divinity, even
in Oxford, though he never was ordained at all? The

instance of Dr. Atwell, (late) Rector of Exeter Col-

lege, is fresh in every one's memory.
These are a few of the considerations that may readily
occur to any thinking man on this head, But I did:

YA not

258 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part III.
not rest the cause on these, I believe it may be defended

a shorter way. |

14. It pleased God by two or three Ministers of the
Church of England, to call many sinners to repentance ;
who, in several parts, were undeniably turned from a
course of sin, to a course of holiness.

The Ministers of the places where this was done,
ought to have received those Ministers with open arms;
50 to have taken them who had just begun to serve
God, into their peculiar care ; watching over them in
tender love, lest they should fall back into the snare of
the Devil, T

Instead of this, the greater part spoke of those Ministers, as if the devil, not God had sent them. Some
repelled them from the Lord's Table : others stirred
up the people against them, representing them, even in
their public discourses, as Fellows not fit to live: Papists,
Heretics, Traitors Conspirators against their King and
Country.

And how did they watch over the sinners lately reformed ? Even as a Leopard watcheth over his prey,
Thev drove lome of them allo from the Lord's Table;
to which, till now, they had no desire to approach,
They preached all manner of evil concerning them,
openly cursing them in the Name of the Lord. They
turned many out of their work; persuaded others to do
lo too, and harassed them all manner of ways.

The event was, that some were wearied out, and fo
turned back to their vomit again. And then these good
Pastors gloried over them, and endeavoured to shake
others by their example.

13. When the Ministers by whom God had helped
them before, came again to those places, great part of
their work was to begin again ; if it could be begun
egain : but the relapsers were often so hardened in sin.
that no impression could be made upon them.

What could they do in a case of so extreme neceslity ?
Where so many fouls lay at flake ?

No Clergyman would assist at all. The expedient
that remained was, to find some one among themselves,
who was upright of heart, and of sound judgment in
the things of God: and to desire him to meet the rest

4s

es A 2 _

To Men of Reason and Religion. 259

25 often as he could, in order to confirm them, as he
was able, in the ways of God, either by reading to them,
or by prayer, or by exhortation.
| God immediately gave a blessing hereto. In several
places, by means of these plain men, not only those
who had already begun to run well, were hindered from
drawing back to perdition; but other sinners also, from
time to time, were converted from the error of their
Ways.
This plain account of the whole proceeding, I take
to be the best defence of it. I know no Scripture
which forbids making use of such help, in a case of such
necessity. And I praise God, who has given even this
help to those poor sheep, when therr own Shepherds pre
tied them not. | |

% But does not the ws wats say, No man taketh this
honour to himfelf, but he that is called of God, as was

Aaron? Nor do these. The honour here mentioned

is the Priesthood. But they no more take upon them to
be Priests than to be Kings. They take not upon them
to administer the Sacraments, an honour peculiar to
the Priests of God. Only, aecording to their power,
they exhort their brethren, to continue in the grace of
God.

“ But for these Laymen to exhort at all is a violation

| of all Order.“

What is this Order of which you speak? Will it
serve instead of the knowledge and love of God? Will
this order rescue them fiom the snare of the devil, who
are now taken captive at his will? Will it keep them
who are escaped a little way, from turning back into
Egypt? If not, how should I answer it to God, if
rather than violate I know not what Order, I should

| sacrifice thousands of souls thereto ?*£>a I dare not do it.

It is at the peril of my own seul.
If indeed by Order were meant, True Christian Difcipline, whereby all the living members of Christ are

| knit together in one, and all that are putrid and dead

immediately cut off from the body : this Order I reverence ; for it is of God. But where is it to be found ?
In what diocese? In what town or parish in England

or Wales? Are you Rector of a parish? Then let

Z 2 us

--

to Auyarrnin APPEAL, Part III.

us go no farther. Does this Order obtain there? Nothing less. Your parishioners are a rope of sand, As
few (if any) of them are alive to God; so they have
no connection with each other, unless such as might be
among Turks or Heathens, Neither have you any
power to cut off from that body, were it alive, the
dead and putrid members. Perhaps you have no desire:
but all are jumbled together without any care or concern of yours. | 1
It is plain then, that what Order is to be found, is
not among you, who so loudly contend, for it, but
among that very people whom you continually blame,
for their violation and contempt of it. The flock you
condemn 1s united together in one body, by one spirit :
so that, „if one member suffers, all the members suffer
with it, if one be honoured, all rejoice with it.“ Nor
does any dead member long remain ; but as soon as the
hope of recovering it is pail, it is cut off,

Now, suppose we were willing to relinquish our
charge, and to give up this flock into your hands;
would you observe the same Order, as we do now, with
them and the other souls under your care? You dare
not; because you have respe& of persons. You fear
the faces of men. You cannot; because you have not
overcome the world. You are not above the desire of
earthly things. And it is impossible you should ever
have any true Order, or exercise any Chriflian Discipline, till you are wholly crucified to the world, till you
desire nothing more but God,

Consider this matter, I entreat you, a little farther, Here
are seven thousand persons (perhaps some what more) of
whom I take care, watching over their fouls ae he that
must give account, In order hereto it lies upon me,
(lo I judge) at the peril of my own salvation, to know
not only their names, but their outward and inward
states, their difficulties and dangers. Otherwise how
can I know either how to guide them aright, or to commend them to God in prayer? Now if I am willing
to make these over to you, will you watch over them
in the same manner? Will you take the same care (or
as much more as you please) of each soul as I have hitherto done? Not such Curam Animarum as you have

taken *

-- -- _

| __ » To Men of Revson and Religion. 261
taken these ten years in your own parish. Poor empty
name! Has not your parish been, in fact, as much a
Sinecure to you as your Prebend ? Oh what account
have you to give to the great Shepherd and Bishop of

Souls!

18, There is one more excuse for denying this

work of God, taken from the Instruments employed
therein: that is, © That they are wicked men.”

And a thousand stories have been handed about to
prove it.

But you may observe, their wickedness was not
heard of, till after they went about doing good. Their
reputation for hopesty was till then unblemished. But

it was imposhble it should continue so, when they

were publicly employed in * testifying of the world,

that its deeds. were evil.“ It could not be but the
Scriptures should be, fulfilled. © The servant is not
above his Master. If they had called the Master df the
house Beelzebub, how much more them of his household ? ”

Yet I cannot but remind considerate men, in how
remarkable a manner the wisdom of God has for many
years guarded agaiast this pretence, with respett to my
Brother and me u particular, Scarce any two men in
Great Britain, of our rank, have been so held out, as
it were to all the world : especially of those who from
their childhood had always -- and studiously sought

retirement. And I had procured what I sought. I

was quite safe, as I Ae in a little country town,
when I was required to return to Oxford, without

delay, to take the charge of some young gentlemen,

by Dr. Morley, the only man then in England to
whom I could deny nothing, From that time both my
Brother and I (utterly against our will) came to be more
and more observed and known, till we were more
spoken of, than, perhaps, two so inconsiderable persons
ever were before in the nation, To make us more
public still, as honest madmen at least, by a strange:
concurrence of Providences, overturning all our preceding resolutions, we were hurried away to America.
However at our return from thence, we were relolved
to retire out of the world at once: being sated with

- noise, hurry and fatigue, and secking nothing but to be:

2 3 at.

-- in -- 2
--

-- . _ Tv} az

262 A raxTutR APPEAL, Part III.

at rest, Indeed for a long season, the greatest pleasure
I had desired, on this fide eternity, was |

Tacitum Sylvas inter reptare salubres,
Quæ rentem quicguid dignum sapiente bonoque,
And we had attained our desire. We wanted nothing.

We looked for nothing more in this world, when we

were dragged out again, by earnest importunity, to

preach at one place and another, and another, and fo

carried on, we knew not how, without any design but
the general one, of saving souls, into a situation, which
had it been named to us at first, would have appeared
far worse than death. Mgt

19. What a surprising apparatus of Providence was
here! And what stronger demonstrations could have
been given, of men's afting from a zeal for God, whether it were according to knowledge or no? What
persons cou}d, in the nature of things, have been (antecedently) less liable to exception, with regard to their
moral character, at least, than those the All-wise God

had employed? Indeed I cannot devise what manner

of men could have been more unexceptionable on all
accounts, Had God indued us with greater natural or
acquired abilities, that very thing might have been
turned into an objection. Had we been remarkably

defective, it would have been matter of objection, on the
other hand. Had we been Dissenters of any kind, or

even Low-Church Men, (so called) it would have been
a great stumbling-block in the way of those who are
zealous for the Church. And yet had we continued
in the impetuolity of our High-Church zeal, neither
should we have been willing to converse with Dissen-

ters, nor they to receive any good at our hands. Some

objeftions were kept out of the way, by our known
contempt of money and preferment : and others, hy
that rigorous strictness of life, which we exatted, not
of others, but ourselves only. Insomuch, that twelve
or fourteen years ago, the censure of one who had narrowly observed us, (me, in particular) went no farther
than this :
« Does John beyond his strength persist to go,
To his frail carcase literally foe ? |
Carclcss

To Men of Reason and Religion. 263

Careless of health, as if in haste to die,
And lavish time to' insure eternity?“

So that upon the whole, I see not what God could
have done more in this respect, which he hath not
done. Or what Instruments he could have employed
in such a work, who would have been less liable to
exception.

20. Neither can I conceive how it was possible to
do that work, the doing of which, we are still under
the strongest conviftion, is bound upon us at the peril
of our own souls, in a less exceptionable manner. We
have, by the grace of. God, behaved not only with
meeknels, but with all tenderness towards all men ;
with all the tenderness which we conceived it was pofsible to use without betraying their souls. And from
the very first, it has been our special care, to deal tenderly with our brethren of the Clergy. We have not
willingly provoked them at any time; neither any single Clergyman, We have not sought occahon to pot
lish their faults; we have not used a thousand occasions
that offered. When we were constrained to speak
something, we spake as little as we beheved we could,
without offending God: and that little, though in plain
and strong 9 yet as mildly and lovingly as we
were able. And in the same course we have steadily
persevered (as well as in earnestly advising others to
tread in our steps) even tho? we saw that with regard:
to them, by all this we profited nothing; tho” we knew
we were {till continually represented as implacable enemies to the Clergy, as railers against them, as flanderers.
of them, as seeking all opportunities to blacken and
asperse them. When a Clergyman himself has vehemently accused me of doing this, I bless God he could.
not provoke me to do it. I {till kept my mouth as it
were with a bridle, and committed my caule to a. higher,
hand. |

21. The truth is, you impute that hatred to us,
Which is in your own breast, (I speak not this of all
the Clergy ; God forbid ? But let it fall on whom it
concerns.) You, it is certain, have shewn the utmost
hatred. to us, and in every poslible way, unless you

were

*

264 A rARTHER APPEAL, Part III.
were actually to beat us, (of which also we ate not
without precedent) or to shoot us thro? the head. And
if you could prevail upon others to do this, I suppose
you would think you did God service. I do not speak
without ground, I have heard with my own ears such
sermons, (in Staffordshire particularly) that I should *
not have wondered if as soon as we came out of the
Church, the people had stoned me with stones. And
It was a natural consequence of what that poor Minister
had lately heard at the Bishop's Visitation : as it was
one great cause of the miserable riots and outrages which
soon followed, |

It is this, my brethren, it is your own preaching,
and not ours, which sets the people against you. The
very same persons, who are diverted with those sermons,
cannot but despise you for them in their hearts : even
those who on your authority believe most of the assertions which you advance, What then must they think
of you, who know the greatest part of what you assert
to be utterly falle? They may pity and pray for you;
but they can esteem you no other, than false witnesses
against God and your brethren.

22. But what need is there (say even some of a
milder spirit) of this preaching in fields and ftreets ?
Are there not Churches enough to preach in ?*” No,
my friend, there are not; not for us to preach in. You
forget: we are not suffered to preach there; else we
should prefer them to any places whatever. Well,
there are Ministers enough without you,” Ministers
enough, and Churches enough ; for what? To reclaim all the sinners within the four seas? If there
were, they would all be reclaimed. But they are not
reclaimed. Therefore it is evident, there are not
Churches enough. And one plain reason why, notwithstanding all these Churches, they are no nearer being reclaimed is this: they never come into a Church;
perhaps not once in a twelve-month, perhaps not for
many years together. Will you say (as I have known
fome tender-hearted Christians) © then it is their own
fault, let them die and be damned.“ I grant it is their
own fault. And so it was my fault and yours, when
we went astray, like sheep that were lost. Yet the

Shepherd.

To Men of Reason and Religion, 265

Shepherd of Souls sought after us, and went after us
into the wilderness. And © oughtest not thou to have
compassion on thy fellow servants, as he had pity on
thee?” Ought not we also to seek, as far as in us lies,
and to save that which is lost ? | 85
N HBchold the amazing love of God to the outcasts of
] men! His tender condescension to their folly ! They
would regard nothing done in the usual way. All this
was lost upon them. The ordinary preaching of the
word of God, they would not even deign to hear. So
the devil made sure of these careless ones. For who
should pluck them out of his hand? Then God was
noved to jealousy, and went out of the usual way to
a the souls which he had made, Then over and

„ 4 9 oo.

above what was ordinarily spoken in his Name, in all
the houses of God in the land, he commanded a voice
to cry in the wilderness, ** Prepare ye the way of the
Lord. The time is fulfilled, The kingdom of heaven
15 at hand. Repent ye and believe the gospel.” |
2g. Consider coolly, if it was not highly expedient,
that something of this kind should be? How expe»
dient, were it only on the account of those poor sinners against their own souls, who (to all human appearance) were utterly inaccessible every other way? And
what numbers of these are {till to be found, even in or
near our most populous cities? What multitudes. of
them were some years since, both in Kingswood, and the
Fells about Newcastle ? Who, week after week, spent
the Lord's day, either in the ale-house, or in idle diversions, and never troubled themselves about going to
Church, or to any public worship at all? Now,
would you really have desired that these poor wretches
should have sinned on, till they dropped into hell ?
Surely you would not. But by what other means was
it possible they should have been plucked out of the
fire? Had the Minister of the parish preached like an
angel, it had profited them nothing; for they heard
him not. But when one came and said, Vonder is a
man preaching on the top of the mountain, they ran in
droves to hear what he would say. And God spoke
to their hearts. It is hard to conceive any thing else
which could have reached them, Had it not been for
8 3 Field-

266 A rAATREN APPEAL, Part 117,

Field-preaching, the uncommonness of 'which was the
very circumstance that recommended it, they must have
--414 in the error of their way, and perished in their
. 24. But suppose Aer THe, to be in a case of
this kind, ever so expedient, or even necessary, yet
who will contest with us for this province ?--May we

not enjoy this quiet and unmolested? Unmolested, 1

mean, by any competitors.-- For who is there among
you, brethren, that is willing (examme your own
earts) even to fave souls from death at this price?
Would not you let a thousand souls perish, rather than
you woutd. be the instrument of rescuing them thus? J
do not speak now with regard to conscience, but to the
inconveniences that must accompany it. Can you sustain them, if you would ? Can you bear the fummer
sun to beat upon your naked head? Can you suffer
the wintry rain or wind, from whatever quarter it
blows? Are you able to stand in the open air, without any covering or defence, when God casteth abroad
his snow like wool, or scattereth his hoar-frost like
ashes? And yet these are some of the smallest inconveniences which accompany Field preaching. For beyond all these, are the contradiftion of sinners, the
scoffs both of the great vulgar, and the small ; contempt and reproach of every kind ; often more than
verbal affronts, stupid, brutal violence, sometimes to
the hazard of health, or limbs, or life, Brethren, do
ou envy us this honour? What, I pray, would
y you to be a Field-Preacher ? Or, what think
you, could induce any man of common sense to continue therein one year, unless he had a full conviction
an himself, that it was the will of God concerning
im P | |
Upon this conviction it is (were we to submit to these
things on any other motive whatsoever, it would furmish you with a better proof of our distraction than any
that has yet been found,) that we now do, for the good
of poor souls, what you cannot, will not, dare not do.
And we desire not that you should ; but this one thing
we may reasonably defire of you; do not increase the
_ difficulties which are already so great, that without the
ao mighty

To Men of Reason and Religion 2869
mighty power of God, we must fink under them, Do
not aK in trampling down a little handful of men,
who for the present stand in the gap between ten thousand poor wetches and destruftion, till you find some
others to take their places. 3 VLA,

25. Highly needful it is, that some should do this,
left those poor souls be lost without remedy. And it
should rejoice the hearts of all who defire the kingdom
of God should come, that so many of them have been
{natched already from the mouth of the lion, by an uncommon (though not, unlawful) way. This circum»
Nance therefore is no just excule, for not acknowledging the work of God. Especially, if we consider, that
whenever it has pleased God to work any great work
upon the earth, even from the earliest times, he hath
sept more or less out of the common way: whether tq
excite the attention of a greater number of people, than
might otherwise have regarded it; or to separate the
Proud and haughty of heart, from those of an humble,
child-like spirit ; the former of whom he foresaw,
trusting in their own wisdom, would fall on that stone
and be broken; while the latter, enquiring with simplicity, would soon know of the work, that it was of
God,

26. Nay, (some say) but God is a God of wisdom,
And it is his work to give understanding. Whereas
this man is one of them, and he is a fool. You see the
fruits of their preaching.” No, my friend, you do
not, That is your mistake. A fool very possibly he
may be. So it appears by his talking, perhaps writing
too, But this is none of the fruits of our preaching.
He was a fool before ever he heard us. We found and
are likely to leave him so. Therefore his folly is not to
be imputed to us, even if it continue to the day of his
death. As we are not the cause, so we undertake not
the cure of disorders of this kind. No fair man therefore can excuse himlelf thus, from acknowledging the
work of God.

Perhaps you will say, “ He is not a natural fool neither.
But he is so ignorant! He knows not the firlt principles of Religion.“ It is very possible. But have patence with him, and he will know them by and by,
SN Yea,

588 A*vaxrute APPEAL, Part III.
Yea, if he be in earnest to fave his soul, far sooner than
you can conceive, And ini the mean time; neither is
this an objeftion of any weight. Many when they, be.
gin to hear us, may, without any fault of ours, be utter
strangers to the whole of Religion. But this is no
incurable disease. Vet a little while and they may be
wise unto salvation. n | pu
ls the ignorance you complain of among this people
(you who object to the people more than to their
Teachers) of another kind? Do not they “ know,
how in meekness to reprove or instruct those that op-
* themselves?” I believe what you say: all of them
o not: they have not put on gentleness and long-suffermg. I wish they had : pray for them that they
may ; that they may be mild and patient toward all
men. But what if they are not! Sure you do not
make this an argument that God hath not sent us?
Our Lord came, and we come, not to call the righteous,
but senners to repentance : passfonate sinners, (such as
these whereof you complain) as well as those of every
other kind. Nor can it be expected they should be
wholly delivered from their fin, as soon as they begin to
hear his word. |
27. A greater stumbling-block than this is laid before
you, by those that say and do not. Such I take it for
granted will be among us, although we purge them ont
as fast as we can : persons that talk much of Religion,
that commend the Preachers, perhaps are diligent in
hearing them: it may be, read all their books, and sing
their hymns; and yet no change is wrought in their

Hearts, Were they of old time as lions in their houses ?

They are the same still, Were they (in low life) slothful or intemperate? Were they tricking or dishonest ?
over-reaching or oppreshve ? Or did they ule to borrow and not pay? The Ethiopian hath not changed his

in. Were they (in high life) delicate, tender, self-

indulgent? Were they mice in furniture or appare! ?
Were they fond of trifles, or of their own dear persons? The Leopard hath not changed her spots. Vet
their being with us for a time proves no more, than
that we have not the miraculous discernment of spirits.
| | Others

p
:

n

To Men of Reason and Religion. 269

Others you may find in whom there was a real
change. But it was only for a season. They are now
turned back, and are two-fold more the children of hell
than before. Yet neither is this any manner of proof,
that the former work was not of God. No, not tho?
these apostates should, with the utmost confidence, say
all manner of evil against us. I expect they should.
For every other injury hath been forgiven, and will be
to the end of the world. But hardly shall any one
forgive the intolerable injury, of almost persuading him
ta be a Christian, When these men therefore who were
with us, but went out from among us, assert things that
may cause your ears to tingle, if you consider either
the Scripture, or the nature of man, it will not stagger
you at all, Much less will it excuse you, for not acknowledging the work in general to be of God,

28. But to all this it may possibly be replied, © When
you bring your credentials with you, when you provg
by miracles what you affert, then we will acknowledge
that God hath sent you.“

What is it you would have us prove by miracles P
That the Doctrines we preach are true? This is nos
the way to prove that; (as our first Reformers replied
to those of the Church of Rome, who, you may prabably remember, were continually urging them with
this very demand.) We prove the Doctrines we
preach, by Scripture and Reason ; and, if need be, by
Antiquity, |

What else is it then we are to prove by Miracles ?

Is it, 1. That A. B. was for many years without God
in the world, a common swearer, a drunkard, a sabbathbreaker?

Or, 2. That he is not so now ?

Or, 3. That he continued so till he heard us preach,
and from that time was another man ?

Not so. The proper way to prove these fafts, is by
the testimony of competent witnesses: and these witnesses are ready, whenever required, to give full evidence of them, | 7

Or would you have us prove by miracles,
4. That this was not done by our own power or ho.
liness ? That God only is able to raise the dead, those

Aa who

270 A rARNTHER APPEAL, Part III.

who are dead in trespasses and fins? Nay, if you hear
not Moses and the Prophets and Apostles on this head,
2 would you believe though one rose from the
dead. | |

It is therefore utterly unreasonable and absurd, to re2 or 2 the proof of miracles, in questions of
such a kind, as are always decided by proofs of quite
another nature. |

29. © But you relate them yourself.” I relate just
what I saw, from time to time: and this is true, that
some of those circumstances seem to go beyond the ordinary course of nature. But I do not peremptorily
determine, whether they were supernatural, or no,
Much less do I rest upon them, either the proof of
other facts, or those of the doftrines which I preach.
I prove these in the ordinary way ; the one by Testimony, the other by Scripture and Reason,

% But if you can work miracles when you please, is
not this the surest way of proving them? This would
put the matter out of dispute at once, and supersede all
other proof.” f

You seem to lie under an entire mistake, both of the
nature and use of miracles, It may reasonably be questioned, whether there ever was that man living upon
earth, except the man Christ Jesus, that could work
miracles when he pleased. God only, when he pleased,
exerted that power, and by whomsoever it pleased
him.

But if a man could work miracles when he pleased,
yet is there no Scripture-authority, nor even example
for doing it, in order to satisfy such a demand as this, I
do not read, that either our Lord or any of his Apostles, wrought any miracle on such an occasion. Nay,
how sharply does our Lord rebuke those who made a
demand of this kind? When certain of the Scribes
and Pharisees answered, saying, Master, we would see
a fign from thee ;*” (observe, this was their method of
answering the strong reasons whereby he had just proved
the works in question to be of God!) He answered
and said to them, an evil and adulterous generation
seeketh after a sign. But there shall no sign be given
to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas,“ Tl

| 88,

* 1 n os ab

. * r

To Men of Reason and Religion. 271

93, 939. An evil and adulterous generation!“ Else
they would not have needed such a kind of proof.
Had they been willing to do his will, they would,
without this, have known that the doctrine was of
God,
Miracles therefore are quite needless in such a case.
Nor are they so conclusive a proof as you imagine. If
a man could and did work them, in defence of any
doftrine, yet this would not supersede other proof. For
there may be vregaga Yevdzc, lying Wonders, miracles
wrought in support of falschood. Still therefore this
dotrine would remain to be proved, from the proper
topics of Scripture and Reason. And these even without miracles are sufficient. But miracles without these
are not. Accordingly our Saviour and all his Apostles,
in the mid{t of their greatest miracles, never failed to
prove every doctrine they taught, by clear Scripture
and cogent Reason.

30. I presume, by this time you may perceive the
gross absurdity of demanding Miracles in the present
Cale : seeing one of the propositions in question, (over
and above our general doctrines) viz. That sinners
are reformed,” can only be proved by Testimony : and
the other, © "This cannot be done but by the power of
God, needs no proof, being self-evident.

„ Why, | did once mylelf rejoice to hear, (says a
grave citizen, with an air of great importance) that fo
many sinners were reformed, till I found they were only
turned from one wickednels to another; that they were
turned from cursing or swearing, or drunkenness, into
the no leis damnable fin of Schism.“ |

Do you know what you say? You have, I am
afraid, a confused huddle of ideas in your head, And
I doubt, you have not capacity to clear them up
you : nor coolness enough, to receive help from
Others.

However I will try. What is Schism £ Have you

any determinate idea of it? I ask the rather, because

I have found, by repeated experiments, that a common
English tradesman receives no more light, when he
hears or reads, „This is Schism,” than if he heard or
read,
| A a 2 Bombalio,

272 A rART HER APPEAL, part III.
Bombalio, stridor, clangor, taratantara, murmur.

Honest neighbour do not be angry. Lay down your
hammer, and let us talk a little on this head.

You say, We are in the damnable fin of Schism,
and therefore in as bad a state as Adulterers and Murderers.“

I ask once more, What do you mean by Schism ?
„ Schiim! Schism! Why, it is separating from the
Church.” Ay, so it is. And yet every separating
from the Church to which we once belonged, is not
Schism. Else you will make all the English to be
Schismatics, in separating from the Church of Rome,
* But we had just cause.” So doubtless we had:
whereas Schism is a cauleless separation from the Church
of Christ, So far so good. But you have many steps
to take before you can make good that conclusion, that
a separation from a particular National Church, such as
the Church of England is, whether with sufficient
cause or without, comes under the scriptural notion of
Schism,

However, taking this for granted, will you aver in
cool blood, That every one who dies a Quaker, a Baptist, an Independant, or a Presbyterian, is as infallibly
damned as if he died in the act of murder or adultery ?
Surely you start at the thought! It makes even nature
recoil, How then can you reconcile it to the Love that
hopeth all things? |

31. But whatever state they are in, who causelessly
separate from the Church of England, it affects not
those of whom we are speaking ; for they do not separate
From it at all. a

Vou may easily be convinced of this, if you will only
weigh the particulars following.

1. A great part of these went to no Church at all,

before they heard us preach. They no more pretended

to belong to the Church of England, than to the Church
of Muscovy. If therefore they went to no Church
now, they would be no farther from the Church than
they were before, ;
2. Those who did sometimes go to Church before, go
three times as often now. Thetc therefore do not *
g | rate

OY EOS TO e VII A IRIS” I >

|
|

|
|
*
ö

as a drunken Protestant ?

To Men of Reason and Religion. 273

rate from the Church. Nay, they are united to it more
closely than before, | Re

3. Those who never went to Church at all before,
do now go at all opportunities. Will common sense
allow any one to say, that thele are separated from the
Church ? | |

4. The main question is, Are they turned from doing
the works of the devil, to do the works of God?
Do they now live soberly, righteously, and godly, in
the present world ? If they do, if they live according
to the Directions of the Church, believe her Doctrines,
and join in her Ordinances: with what face can you
1% that these men separate from the Church of England ?

32, But in what state are they whom the Clergy and
Gentry (and perhaps you for one) have successfully laboured to preserve from this damnable sin of Schilm P
Whom you have kept from hearing these men, and separating from the Church ? |

Is not the drunkard that was, a drunkard till ?
Enquire of his poor wise and family. Is not the common swearer {till horribly crying to God for dainnation upon his own soul ? Is not the sinner in every
other kind, exactly the same man still ? Not better
at least, if he be not worse, than he was. ten years
ago. |

Now consider, 1. Does the Church of England gain.
either honour, or {trength, or blessing, by such wretches.
as these calling themselves her Members? By ten
thousand Drunkards, or Whoremongers, or Common.
Swearers? Nay, ought she not immediately to spew
them out? To renounce all fellowship with them P
Would she not be far better without them than. with
them ? Let any man of reason judge.

2. Is this Drunkard's calling himself of the Church
of England, of any more use to him than to the Church ?
Will this save him from hell, if he die in his fin? Will

it not rather increase his-damnation ? |

3. Is not a Drunkard of any other Church, just as
good as a drunkard of the Church of England ? Yea,
is not a drunken Papist as much in the favour of God,

A a 3 4

274 A raxTHER APPEAL, Part III.

4. Is not a curling, swearing Turk, (if there be such
z one to be found) full as acceptable to God, as a cursing, swearing Christian ? |

Nay, 5. If there be any advantage, does it not lie on
the fide of the former ? Is he not the less excusable of
the two? As sinning against less light ?

O why will you fink these poor souls deeper into
perdition, than they are sunk already? Why will
you prophely unto them, Peace, Peace; when there
is no Peace? Why, if you do it not yourself, (whether you cannot, or will not ; God knoweth,) should
ou hinder us from guiding them into the way of
Peace ? |

33- Will you endeavour to excuse yourself by saying,
* there are not many who are the better for your preaching: and these by and by will be as bad as ever; as such
and such a one is already ?

L would to God I could set this in a just light! But
J cannot, All language fails.

God begins a glorious work in our land. You set
yourself against it with all your might; to prevent its
beginning where it does not yet appear, and to destroy
it wherever it does, In part you prevail. You keep
many from hearing the word that is able to save their
souls. Others who had heard it, you induce to turn
back from God, and to list under the devil's banner
again. Then you make the success of your own wickedness an excuse for not acknowledging the work
of God! You urge, that not many sinners were
reformed! And that some of those are now as bad as
ever!“ N

Whose fault is this? Is it ours, or your own ?
Why have not thousands more been reformed ? Yea,
for every one who is now turned to God, why are there
not ten thousand ?£ Because you and your associates
laboured so heartily in the cause of hell; beeause you
and they spared no pains, either to prevent or to de-
{troy the work of God! By using all the power and
wisdom you had, you hindered thousands from hearing
the Gospel, which they might have found to be the
power of God unto salvation. Their blood is upon
your hcads, By inventing, or countenaneing, or re-

tailing

.
|
*
”
.
*
> |
.
. =
»
*
'
r.
ft
*
.
*
_
7 19
"4
5,
*
„
*
4 *
*
Gt
„
=
x
=
*
*

rey

©
:

n

------

move us, whem will you find to supply our p

To Men of Reason and Religion. 275

g lies, some refined, some gross and palpable, you
hindered#others from profiting by what they did hear.
Yoware answerable to God for these souls also. Many
who began to taste the good word, and to run the way

of God's commandments, you, by various methods,

revailed on to hear it no more, So they soon drew
bark to perdition. But know, that for every one of
these also, God will require an account of you in the
day of judgment, ;

34. And yet, in spite of all the malice, and wisdom,
and strength, not only of men, but of Principalities
and Powers, of the Rulers of the darkness of this world,
of the wicked Spirits in high places ; there are thousands
ound, who are turned from dumb idols, to serve the
living and true God, What a harvest then we might
have seen before now, if all who say, they are on the
Lord's fide, had come, as in all reason they ought, to
the help of the Lord against the Mighty ? Yea, had
they only not opposed the work of God, had they
only refrained from his Meslengers ; might not the
trumpet of God have been heard long since in every
corner of the land? And thousands of sinners in
every, county been brought to fear God and honour the
Kung.

Today of what immense service we might have been,
even in this single point, both to our King and Coun.
try. All who hear, and regard the word we preach,
honour the King for God's sake, They render unto
Cesar the things that are Cajar's, as well as unto God
the things that are God's, -- They have no conception of
piety without loyalty ; knowing the powers that be, are
ordained of God, I pray God to strengthen all that are
of this mind, how many soever they be, But might
there not have been at this day, a hundred thousand in
England, thus minded, more than are now? Vea, verily ; even by our mmistry, had not they who should
have strengthened us, weakened our hands,

35- Surely you are not wise! What advantages doyou throw away! What opportunities do you lose ?
Such as another day you may earnestly seek, and never.
theless may not find them, For if it please Cod to relace e
We

276 A rarTRER, APPEAL, Part III.

We are in all things your servants for Jesus” sake z; tho
the more we love you, the less we are loved. Let us
be employed not in the highest, but in the meanest ;
and not in the easiest, but in the hottest service, Ease
and plenty we leave to those that wank them. Let us
go on an toil, in wearinels, in painfulness, in cold or
hunger, so we may but testify the Gospel of the grace
of God. The rich, the honourable, the great, we are
thoroughly willing (if it be the will of our Lord) to
leave to you. Only let us alone with the poor, the
vulgar, the base, the outcasts of men. -- Take also to
yourselves the Saints of the world; but suffer us to
call sinners to repentance ; even the most vile, the
most ignorant, the most abandoned, the most fierce and
favage of whom we can hear, To these we will go
forth in the name of our Lord, desiring nothing, receiving nothing of any man (save the bread we eat,
while we are under his roof) and let it be seen whether
God hath sent us. Only, let not your hands, who fear
the Lord, be upon us. Why should we be {stricken of
you any more ?

IV. 1. Surely ye are without excuse, all who do
not yet know the day of your visitation! The day,
wherein the great God, who hath been forgotten among
us, days without number, is arising at once to be avenged
of his adversaries, and to visit and redeem his people.
And are not his judgments and mercies. both broad p
And still, will ye not learn righteousness? Is not the
Lord passing by? Doth not a great and strong wind
already begin to rend the mountains, and to break in.
pieces the rocks before the Lord? Is not the earthquake also felt already? And a fire hath begun to burn
in his anger. Who knoweth what will be the end.
thereof? But at the same time, he is speaking to man
in a still, small voice. He that hath ears to hear, let
him hear, lest he be suddenly destroyed, and that without remedy ! |

2. What excuse can possibly be made for those, who
are regardless of such a season as this? Who are at
such a crisis, stupid, senseless, unapprehensive; caring
for none of these things? Who do no give --

Ho =
To Men of Reason and Religion. 277

the pains to think about them, but are still easy and unconcerned? What! Can there ever be a point, on
which it more behoves you to think 7 And that with
the coolest and deepest attention ? As long as the heaven and the earth remain, can there be any thing of fo
vast importance, as God's Last Call to a guilty Land,
just perishing in its iniquity !

You, with those round about you, deserved long
ago to have drank the dregs of the cup of trembling :
yea, to have been “ punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the
glory of his power.” But he hath not dealt with you
according to your fins, neither rewarded you after
your iniquities. And once more he is mixing mercy
with judgment. Once more he is crying aloud, “ Turn
ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for Why wall ye die,
O House of Israel ;” and will you not deign to give
him the hearing ? If you are not careful to answer
him in this matter, do you still shut your eyes, and
stop your ears, and harden your stubborn heart?
Oh beware, lest God laugh at your calamity, and
mock when your fear cometh !

3- Will you plead that you have other concerns to
mind? That other business engages your thoughts ?
It does so indeed; but this is your foolishnels ; this 18
the very thing that leaves you without excule,.
For what business can be of equal moment? The
mariner may have many concerns to mind, and
many businesses to engage his thoughts: but not
when the ship is sinking. In such a circumstance (it
is your own) you have but one thing to think of.
Save the ship and your own life together! And the
higher post you are in, the more deeply intent should
you be on this point. Is this a time for diversions ?
For eating and drinking, and rifing up to play?
Keep the ship above water, Let all else go, and mind

{has ane thing! |

4. Perhaps you will fay, © So I do. I do mind
this one thing, how to fave the sinking nation. And
therefore now I must think of Arms and Provihons,
J have no time now to think of Religion.” This is

exactly as if the mariner should fay, Now I must

think

278 A FaxTUERX APPEAL, Part III.

think of my Guns and Stores. I have no time now to
think of the Hold.” Why man, you must think of
this, or perish, It is there the Leak is sprung. Stop
that, or you and all your Stores will go together to the
bottom of the sea, |

Is not this your very case? Then, whatever you
do, stop the Leak: else you go to the bottom! I do
not speak against your Stores, They are good in their
kind; and it may be well they are laid in, --But all
your Stores will not fave the finking ship, unless you
can stop the Leak. Unless you can some way keep
out these floods of ungodliness, that are still continually pouring in, you must soon be swallowed up in
the great deep, in the Abyss of God's judgments.
This, this is the destruftion of the English nation. It
is vice bursting in on every side, that is just ready to
fink us into flavery first, and then into the nethermost hell. © Who is a wise man, and endued with
knowledge among you?” Let him think of this,
Think of this, all that love your country, or care for
your own fouls, If now especially you do not think
of this one thing, you have no excuse before God or
man. |
5. Little more excuse have you, who are still in
doubt concerning this day of your visitation. For you
have all the proof that you can reasonably expect or
desire, all that the nature of the thing requires. That
in many places, abundance of notorious sinners are
totally reformed, is declared by a thousand eye and
ear-witnesses, both of their present and past behaviour. 1
And you are sensible, the proof of such a point as this 9
must, in the nature of things, rest upon testimony. 5
And that God alone is able to work such a reforma- 13
tion, you know all the Scriptures testify, What
would you have more? What pretence can you have,
for doubting any longer? You have not the least
room to expect or desire any other or any stronger
evidence,

I trust, you are not of those who fortify themselves
against conviction ; who are “ resolved they will never
believe this.“ They ask, © who are these men?” We
tell them plainly : but they credit us not. "aa

an

To Men of Reason and Religion. 279

and another of their own friends is convinced, and
tells them the same thing. But their aniwer is ready,

« Are you turned Methodist too? So their testimony likewise goes for nothing. Now how is it possible these should ever be convinced? For they will
believe none but those who speak on one side.

6. Do you delay fixing your judgment, till you fee
a work of God, without any stumbling-block attending it? That neither is yet, nor. ever will. „It
must needs be, that offences will come. And scarce
ever was there such a work of God before, with so

jew as have attended this,

When the Reformation began, what mountainous
offences lay in the way, of even the sincere Members
of the Church of Rome? They saw such failings in
those great men, Luther and Calvin! Their vehement
tenaciousness of their opinions; their bitterness towards
all who differed from them; their impatience of contradiction, and utter want of forbearance, even with
their own brethren,

But the grand stumbling-block of all, was, their
opened avowed separation from the Church ; their
rejefting so many of the doctrines and practices, which
the others accounted the most sacred; and their continual invettives against the Church they. separated
from, so much sharper than Michael's reproof of
Satan. |

Were there fewer stumbling-blocks attending the
Reformation in England? Surely no; for what was
Henry the Eighth? Consider, either his character,
his motives to the work, or manner of pursuing it !
And even King Edward's Ministry we cannot clear of
persecuting in their turns, yea, and burning Heretics,
The main stumbling-block also ftill remained, viz,
open separation from the Church.

7. Full as many were the offences that lay in the
way of even the sincere Members of the Church of
England, when the people called Quakers first profelled, that they were sent of God to reform the land,
Whether they were or no, is beside our question : it
suffices for the present purpose to observe, that over
and above their open, avowed, total separation --

the

the Church, and their vehement invectives againsk

42 1 1 -

280 A raxtizr APPEAL, Part III.

many of her Doctrines, and the whole frame of her
Discipline ; they spent their main strength in disputing
about Opinions and Externals, rather than in preaching faith, mercy, and the love of God.

In these respects, the calc was nearly the fame when
the Baptists firft appeared in England. They immediately . commenced a warm difpute, not econeerning
the vitals of Christianity, but concerning the manner
and time of administring one of the external Ordinances of it, And as their Opinion hereof totally
differed from that of all the other Members of the
Church of England, so they soon openly declared
their separation from it, not without sharp censures of
those that continued therein, N

8. The fame occasion of offence was, in a smaller
degree, given by the Presbyterians and Independants:
for they also spent great part of their time and strength,
in opposing the commonly received Opinions concerning {ome of the circumstantials of Religion ; and
for the fake of these, separated from the Church.

But I do not include that venerable man, Mr.
Philip Henry, nor any that were of his spirit, in this
number. I know they abhorred contending about Externals. Neither did they separate themselves from
the Church. They continued therein, till they were
driven out, whether they would or no. I cannot but
tenderly sympathize with these; and the more, because this is, in part, our own case, Warm men spare
no pains, at this very day, to drive us out of the
Church. They cry out to the people, wherever one
of us comes, * a Mad Dog, a Mad Dog!” if haply
we might fly for our lives, as many have done before
us. And sure it is, we should have complied with
their defire, we should merely for peace and quietness
have left the Church long 3 now, but that we =
could not in conscience do it. And it is on this 15
fingle motive, it is for conscience sake that we still .

continue therein; and shall continue (God being our %

helper) unless they by violence thrust us out,
9. But to return, What are the stumbling blocks

in the present case, compared to thole in any of the

preceding p We

To Men of Reason and Religion. 281

We do not dispute concerning any of the externals
or circumstantials of Religion, There is no room;
for we agree with you therein, We approve of, and
adhere to them all; all that we learned together when
we were children, in our Catechism and CommonPrayer Book. We were born and bred up in your
own Church, and desire to die therein. We always
were, and are now, zealous for the Church ; only
not with a blind, angry zeal, We hold, and ever
have done, the same opinions, which you and we received from our forefathers. But we do not lay the
main stress of our Religion on any Opinion, right or
wrong: neither do we ever begin, or willingly join in
any dispute concerning them. The weight of all Religion, we apprehend, rests on IIoliness of Heart and
Life. And consequently, wherever we come, we
press this with all our might. How wide then is the
difference between our case and the case of any of
those that are above-mentioned? They avowedly separated from the Church: we utterly disavow an
such design. They severely, and almoit continually,
inveighed against the Doctrines and Discipline of the
Church they left. We approve both the Doctrines
and Discipline of our Church, and inveigh only
against Ungodliness and Unrighteousness. They spent
great part of their time and strength in contending
about Externals and Circumstantials. We agree with
you in both; so that having no room to spend
any time m such vain Contention, we have our Fefre
of spending and being spent, m promoting plain, practical Religion, How many stumbling-blocks are removed out of your way? Why do not you acknowledge the work of God,

10. If you say, * Because you hold Opinions which
1 cannot believe are true :” I answer, believe them
true or false; I will not quarrel with you about any
Opinion. Only see that your heart be right towards
God, that you know and love the Lord Jesus Chrift ;
that you love your Neighbour, and walk as your
Master walked, and I desire no more. I am sick of
Opinions: I am weary to bear them. My soul loaths
this frothy food. Give me solid and substantial Re-

b i B b ligion.

282 A rAR TER APPEAL, Part III.

ligion. Give me an humble, gentle Lover of God and
Man; a man full of Mercy and good Fruits, without
partiality, and without hypocrisy: a man laying himself out in the Work of Faith, the Patience of Hope,
the Labour of Love, Let my foul be with these
Christians, wheresoever they are, and whatsoever
Opinion they are of. Whoseever [thus] doth the
will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my
Brother, and Sister, and Mother. $72 |

11, Inexcusably infatuated must you be, if you can
even doubt whether the propagation of this Religion
be of God! Only more inexcusable are those unhappy men, who oppose, contradict and blaspheme it.

How long will you stop your ears against him, that
still crieth, Why perlecutest thou me? It is hard
for thee to kick against the pricks;*” for a man to contend with his Maker, IIow long will you despise the
well-known advice of a great and learned man, *“ Refrain from these men, and let them alone. If this
| work be of man, it will come to nought. But if it
be of God, ye cannot overthrow it.” And why
| should you be found even to fight against God? If a
man fight with God, shall he prevail? “ Canst thou
thunder with a voice like hin? Make haste! Fall
down! Humble thyself before him. Lest he put forth
his hand, and thou perish.

12. How long will you fight under the banner of
the great Enemy of God and man? You are now in
his service: you are taking part with the Devil against
God, Even supposing there were no other proof,
this would undeniably appear, from the goodly company among whom you are enlisted, and who war one
and the same warfare, I have heard some affirm, that
the molt bitter enemies to the present work of God,
were Pharisees, They meant, men who had the form
of godliness, but denied the power of it. But I cannot fay so. The sharpest adversaries thereof whom J
have hitherto known (unless one might except a few
honourable men, whom I may be excused from naming) were the Scum of Cornwall, the Rabble of Billton and Darleston ; the wild Beasts of Walsal, and the
Turnkeys of Newgate, | ;

13. Might

To Men of Reason and Religion. 283

1g. Might not the very sight of these Troops, shew
any reasonable man, to what General they belonged p
As well as the weapons they never fail to use; the
most horrid Oaths and Execrations, and lawless V1olence, carrying away as a flood whatsoever it is which
stands before it: having no eyes, nor ears, no regard
to the loudest cries of Reason, Justice or Humanity:
can you join heart or hands with thele any longer?
With such an infamous, {candalous Rabble-rout, roaring and raging as if they were just broke loose, with
their Captain Apollyon, from the bottomless pit?
Does it not rather concern you, and that in the highest
degree, as well as every friend to his King and Country, every lover of Peace, Juilice and Mercy, immediately to join and stop any such godless crews, as
they would join to stop a fire just beginning to spread,
or an inundation of the sea ?

24. If on the contrary, you join with that godless
crew, and strengthen their hands in their wickednels,
mult not you, in all reason, be accounted, (like them)
a public enemy of mankind? And indeed fuch must
every one appear, in the eye of unprejudiced Reason,
who oppoles directly or indirectly, the Reformation of
mankind, By Reformation I mean, the bringing them
back (not to this or that syslem of Opinions, or to
this or that set of Rites and Ceremonies, how decent
and fignificant soever; but) to the calm love of God
and one another, to an uniform practice of Justice,
Mercy and Truth. With what colour can you lay
any claim to Humanity, to Benevolence, to public
Spirit, if you can once open your mouth, or stir one
finger, against such a Reformation as this ?

It is a poor excule to say, O, but the people are
brought into several erroneous Opinions.” It matters
not a straw, whether they are or no: (I speak of
such Opinions as do not touch the foundation) it is
scarce worth while to spend ten words about it. Whether they embrace this religious Opinion or that, is no
more concern to me, than whether they embrace this
or that system of Astronomy. Are they brought to
holy Tempers and holy Lives? This is mine, and
{should be your enquiry ; since on this, both social and

B b. 2 personal

*

284 A rART UR APPEAL, Part III.
personal. happi ness depend: happiness, temporal and

eternal. Are they brought to the Love of God and

the Love of their Neighbour? Pure Religion and
undefiled is this, how long then will you darken
counsel, by words without knowledge? The plain
Religion now propagated is Love, And can you oppose this, without being an enemy to mankind ? |

15. No; nor without being an enemy to your King
and Country: especially at such a time as this. For
however men of no thought may not see or regard it,
or hectoring cowards may brave it out; it is evident to
every man of calm reflection, that our nation stands
on the very brink of destruction. And why are we
thus, but because © the cry of our wickedness is gone
up to heaven?” Because we have so exceedingly,
abundantly, - beyond measure, corrupted our ways before the Lord. And because, to all our other abominations we have added, the open fighting against God;
he not only rejetting, but even denying, yea, blas-

pheming his last offers of mercy; the hindering others

who were-defirous to close therewith ; the despitefully
uhtng bis Mefsengers, and the varioully troubling and
&pproiing thole who did-accept of his grace, break off
thor fins, and turn to him with their whole heart.

16, I cannot but believe, it is chiefly on thisaccount,
that God hath now a controversy with our land. And

must not any conitderate men be inclined to form the.

fame judgment, if he reviews the state of public
affairs, for only a few years last past? 1 will not enter
into particulars, But, in general, can vou possibly
help observing, that whenever there has been any
thing like a public attempt, to suppreis this new Sect,
(for so it was 2:tfully represented) another and another
pub. e trouble acose. This has been repeated io often,
that it is surprisu g any man of iense can avoid taking
notice of :t, My we turn at length © to him that
smacth us, hear the Rod, and him that appointeth it!“
May we © Lumble ourselves under the mighty hand of
God,” before the great deep swallow us up!

17. Just now, viz. on the 4th of this instant De-

cember, the Reverend Mr, Henry Wickham, one of
n

-
< ww v4. Og PF 4 % ”. -- es A ,
I -- 3 = p 4 1 2 N A wx % _ , 1 * 1 -- N - q -- 1
- "ey wo TY 1 - as a ry 2 lx % * 4 d 4 «3 % 2 - ” , VL ö 3 - 1 7 * you -- 1 .
" dn . * © o - EE, 7 _ "I a _ of 2 bis 2 \ 1 4 1 » * x i% Io" 8 1 a * 1 * 5 7 PR, & 5
* * * 1 9 n N. * > : , ; 2 ' " * 1 3 e : wm | &
* £ - * 5 5 nw +.» CUP As 4% LS, * - > „ 1 4, A >, _ LY l a > 0 l Y 4 « AS * * 4 [ALA 7% N 4 A, by
A 54 . 3 W 18 NW . * 4 4 "4+ = Ln * . 7 „ : . **% 3 as. KA
2 2 -- yy 15 * 4h

Cs r
* "i he ASL At LR 2 .
2 0 -- * * 3

oo

Wp 2; * * >

* 7 RT; os 3»

To Men of Reason and Religion. 283
his Mzjesty's Jultices of Peace for the West. Riding of
York {hire writes an order, | FR |

To the Constable of Kighley, commanding him, “ to
convey the body of Jonathan Reeves, (whose real
crime is, the calling Sinners to repentance) to his
Majesty's Goal and Castle of Vork; suspected (faith
the Precept) of being a Spy among us, and a dangerous man to the person and government of his Majesty King George.” |

God avert the Omen! I fear this is no presage
either of the repentance or deliverance of our poor.
Nation!

18, If we will not turn and repent, if we will harden our hearts, and acknowledge neither his Judgments nor Mercies; what remains but the fulfilling of
that dreadful word, which God spake by the Prophet
Ezekiel; Son of man, when the land sinneth against.
me, by trespassing grievoully; then will 1 stretch
forth my hand upon it, and break the staff of the
bread thereof. Though these three men, Noah,
Daniel, and Job, were in it, they should deliver but
their own souls. Or if I bring a sword upon that
land, and fay, „Sword, go through the land : ””
Or if I fend a Pestilence into that land, and pour out
my fury upon it in blood: Though Noah, Daniel,
and Job were in it, as I live, saith the Lord God,
they shall deliver neither son nor daughter ; they shall
but deliver their own souls by their righteousness,”
Chap. xiv. ver. 1g, 14, 17. 19. 20.

«© Yet behold, therein shall be left a Remnant, that
shall be brought forth, both sons and daughtcrs,-- --
And ye shall be comforted concerning the ev:l that I
have brought upon Jerufalem,-----And ye inall know
that I have not done without caule, all that 1 have
done in it, {aith the Lord God.” Ver, 22, 23.

Lox bo, Dec. 18, 1745.

.

Published by the late Rev. Mr. WesLsy,
And sold at the New Chapel, City-Road, London.

--

1. HE Life of Mr. THOMAS WALSH, of

Bally-Linn, in Ireland; composed chiefly

from his own papers, by Mr. JAMES MORGAN.

Mr. Wals was educated in the principles of the
Church of Rome, but being convinced of the errors
and pernicious Doctrines of that Church, he embraced the Protestant Religion. Soon after he was
instrutted more perfectly in the truth as it is in Jesus,
and became an Itinerant Preacher in the Methodist
Connection. This Narrative contains a. particular
account of his remarkable Convittions and Conversion; his deep experience, inward sufferings, persecutions afflictions, and temptations : his almost
unexampled zeal for the conversion of sinners, and
indefatigable labours in the ministry, both in England and Ireland. Bound 1s; 6d. sewed 1s.

2. The Life of the pious and venerable Mr,
JOHN FLETCHER, Vicar of Madeley, Author
of the Checks against Antinomianism, and many
other valuable pieces of polemical and practical
Divinity, For the Character of Mr. Fletcher see
the Arminian Magazine for the year 1793. Price
bound 2s. 6d. sewed 25s,

3. Extract of the Life of Madam GUION, The

account of this extraordinary person abounds with

many excellent things, tending to promote the.

spiritual advantage of the children of God. She

was often favoured with uncommon influences of

the. Holy Spirit; and, notwithstanding her educa»
tion among a dark, degenerate people, the attained
through Grace, a lai1ge measure of the Mind that
was in Christ Jesus: of righteousness, peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost: tew instances are to be
found of fuch exalted love to God and nr neigh«
our;

2 os "nd *
HWY ou 49
war 2

»
*
*
„
=
Sy
$77
t
yas
c &
*
_
x
1 *
*
.
*
*
? -
kc
"x 4 1 1
*
o VJ
= 4
>
*
. +
© q
* in
"4
a7
\ +
\ --
On
*
$53
i.
*
a
*
*

.

| B O OK 8, &r,
bour ; of genuine humility, invincible meekness,

and unbounded resignation, Price bound 25, 6a,
scwed 28. |

4. The Life of Mr. THOMAS HALIBURTON, Professor of Divinity in the University of
St. Andrews, Scotland, In this Narrative is described the Work of God in the Soul of Man, in
a way so clear and instrutting, as is rarely to be met
with either in ancient or modern Writings, Mr,
Haliburton went through deep convictions and dif.
tressing temptations, for several years; he was
particularly exercised with perplexing doubts concerning the Being of Gop, and the Veracity of the
Holy Scriptures; and was happily and powerfully
delivered from all his fears and anxicties, Lis labours in the Ministry were successful, and he
finished his courle with holy triumph in the Lord,
Price 6d, R

5. The Life of M. De NENTY, a French N
bleman, of exemplary piety and devotedness to
GOD. Some years before his death he could testify
6& I carry about with me ordinarily, an experimental verity, and a plenitude of the presence of the
Holy Trinity; and this in lo lively a manner, that
my outward employments create me no dilturbance
at all,” Price 6d.

6. An Account of Gop's Dealings with Mr,
JOHN HAIME. He was brought to the knowledge of the Truth when a soldier in the Qucen's
Regiment of Dragoons, and preached the Gospel to
the British Army in Flanders, in the years 1744
and 45. This Narrative includes some account of
the Methodist Soldiers who were killed at the battle of Fontenoy. 4d.

. The Journal and Christian Experience of Mrs.
ELIZABLLTIII HARPER, of Redruth in Cornwall.
Price 4d.

8, The Life of Mr, JOHN. JANEWAY, Fellow of King's College, Cambridge. gd.

9. A short Account of the happy Death of Mrs.
HANNAH RICHARDSON ; by Mr, Charles
Wefley, 1d. |