Tues. MAY 6.--I had much conversation (at Carrickfergus)
with Monsieur Cavenac, the French General, not on the circum
stances, but the essence, of religion. He seemed to startle at
nothing; but said more than once, and with emotion, “Why,
this is my religion: There is no true religion besides it!”
Wed, 7.--I rode to Larn. The rain, which had continued
with little intermission for several days, stopped this afternoon;
so that I had a very large, as well as serious, congregation:
And I spoke to them with the utmost plainness; but I could
not find the way to their hearts.
Thur. 8.--We rode over the mountains to Ballymena, and
had just passed through the town, when a man came running
out of the field, called me by my name, and pressed me much
to preach there. But I could not stay, having appointed one
to meet me at Portlomane; which he accordingly did, and
brought me to Mr. Burrows, near Garvah.
Fri. 9.--A little rest was acceptable. Saturday, 10. I
preached, morning and evening, in Mr. B 's house, to a
well-behaved congregation, though of various denominations;
Churchmen, Papists, Presbyterians, Cameronians. One
Seceder likewise ventured in; but the moment he heard, “Our
Father, which art in heaven,” he ran away with all speed.
Sun. 11.--We had such a congregation in the church as
perhaps had not been there in this century; and I believe
God reached some of their hearts: Several were in tears. I
spoke extremely plain; especially to those who were full of
their own wisdom and righteousness.
Mon. 12.--Returning through Ballymena, I preached in
the market-house to a large concourse of people; and God
was there of a truth. I have found no such spirit in any
congregation since I left Dublin. Thence I rode to Moira,
and preached to a very civil congregation: But there is no
life in them.
4. Rev. J. west EY’s [May, 1760.
Tues. 13.--My Irish horse was thoroughly tired. How
cver, with much difficulty, partly riding, and partly walking,
about eight in the evening I reached Coot-Hill. I preached
in the House now, and at five in the morning; but at eleven
in the market-house, where I delivered my own soul, to most
of the Protestants in the town.
Having procured a fresh horse, I rode on to Belturbet, a
town in which there is neither Papist nor Presbyterian. But
to supply that defect, there are Sabbath-breakers, drunkards,
and common swearers in abundance. Thursday, 15. We
rode through a delightful country to Swadlingbar, famed for
its mineral waters. Soon after my new horse began to tire,
so that it was with much difficulty I got to Sligo.
Fri. 16.--I walked round the ruins of the abbey, formerly
one of the largest in the kingdom. The walls of it are stand
ing, and three sides of the cloisters are entire: But you can
scarce tread, either within or without, unless you will step
upon skulls or human bones, which are everywhere scattered
up and down, as dung upon the earth. Surely no other
nation, Christian or Heathen, would endure this !
In the evening the congregation was a little disturbed by
two or three giddy Officers. I spoke to them, and they
stopped: But they soon recovered their spirits, and behaved
as they used to do at church.
Sun. 18.--I preached at nine to a large congregation,
who all seemed to hear with understanding. At five in the
evening they were not less attentive, though abundantly more
numerous. On Monday we met, for the last time, between
four and five. Many were deeply affected, and all received
the word “with all readiness of mind.” But which of these
will “bring forth fruit with patience?” God only knoweth.
Mon. 19.--We rode to Castlebar, where I preached in the
evening. I was particularly concerned for the poor backsliders.
It seems as if most of us said in our hearts, “If they have a
mind to go to hell, let them go.” Not so; rather let us pluck
the “brands,” willing or unwilling, “out of the burning.”
Thur. 22.--I rode to Newport, and preached at seven in
the evening. I suppose all the Protestants in the town
were present, and many of the Papists, notwithstanding the
prohibition and bitter curses of their Priests. So has God
spread the line from sea to sea, from Dublin on the east, to
this place on the western ocean.
June, 1760.] JOURNAL, 5
MAY 25.--(Being Whit-Sunday.) Mr. Ellison desired me
to assist him at the Lord's Supper. Tuesday, 27. There
was a remarkable trial here:-A Swedish ship, being leaky,
put into one of our harbours. The Irish, according to custom,
ran to plunder her. A neighbouring gentleman hindered
them; and for so doing demanded a fourth part of the cargo:
And this, they said, the law allows! But where, meantime,
is the law of God?
To hear this cause all the gentlemen of the country were
come to Castlebar. It was to be heard in the Court-House
where I preached: So they met an hour sooner, and heard
the sermon first. Who knows but even some of these may
be found of Him they sought not?
Wed. 28.--I rode to Hollymount, and the next day to
Aghrim, where were a people alive to God. I told them
plainly what things they wanted still: And surely God will
supply all their wants.
JUNE 1.-(Being Trinity-Sunday.) I preached about
nine in the market-house at Athlone, on, “There are three
that bear record in heaven,--and these three are one.”
Afterwards, at the Minister's desire, I read prayers in the
church, and in the evening preached on the Connaught side
of the river, on, “Ye must be born again.” Both Papists
and Protestants attended; and some seemed cut to the heart.
Tues. 3.-I met the classes, and was agreeably surprised to
find that bitterness against the Church, with which many were
infected when I was here before, was now entirely over: Yet
the deadness which it had occasioned remained, and I doubt
it will not soon be removed.
Fri. 6.--I preached in the evening at Ahaskra, where the
bulk of the congregation were Papists. Yet the decency of
their behaviour was such as might have made many
Protestants ashamed.
Sun. 8.--I rode over to Aghrim again. Understanding the
Tector had none to assist in the Service, I offered to read
Prayers for him; which he willingly accepted. Immediately
after the Church-Service, I preached to a numerous congre
gation, and returned to Athlone soon enough to speak once
more to a large concourse of all ranks and religions. But
great part of them were as bullocks unaccustomed to the
yoke, neither taught of God nor man.
-Mon. 9.--About one I preached at Abidarrig, and then
rode on to Longford. The town was so thronged, by reason
of the approaching fair, that we had much ado to pass.
But this increased the evening congregation much; among
whom was Dr. Hort, then Rector of the parish, a learned,
sensible, pious man, and a pattern both for Clergy and laity.
Tues. 10.--I rode to Drumersnave, a village delightfully
situated. Almost the whole town, Protestants and Papists,
were present at the sermon in the evening; and a great part
of them in the morning: But O how few of them will bear
fruit to perfection |
At moon William Ley, James Glasbrook, and I rode to
Carrick-upon-Shannon. In less than an hour, an Esquire
and Justice of the Peace came down with a drum, and what
mob he could gather. I went into the garden with the con
gregation, while he was making a speech to his followers in
the street. He then attacked William Ley, (who stood at
the door,) being armed with an halbert and long sword;
and ran at him with the halbert, but missing his thrust, he
then struck at him, and broke it short upon his wrist. Having
made his way through the house to the other door, he was
at a full stop. James Glasbrook held it fast on the other
side. While he was endeavouring to force it open, one
told him I was preaching in the garden: On this he quitted
the door in haste, ran round the house, and, with part of his
retinue, climbed over the wall into the garden; and, with a
whole volley of oaths and curses, declared, “You shall not
preach here to-day.” I told him, “Sir, I do not intend
it; for I have preached already.” This made him ready
to tear the ground. Finding he was not to be reasoned with,
I went into the house. Soon after he revenged himself on
James Glasbrook, (by breaking the truncheon of his halbert
on his arm,) and on my hat, which he beat and kicked most
valiantly; but a gentleman rescued it out of his hands, and
we rode quietly out of the town.
After preaching to several of the intermediate societies in
the way, on Saturday, 14, I came to Tyrrel's Pass, and found
several of our friends who were come from various parts.
Sunday, 15. I preached at eight, and at twelve (there being
no Service at the church). A heap of fine, gay people came
in their post-chaises to the evening preaching. I spoke very
plain, but the words seemed to fly over them: “Gallio cared
for none of these things.”
June, 1760.] JOURNAL. 7
Mon. 16.--I preached in the evening in the long, shady
walk at Edinderry, to such a congregation as had not been
seen there for many years. And God gave an edge to his
word, both this evening and the next morning. He can
work, even among these dry bones.
Wed. 18.--I designed to preach in the market-house at Port
arlington; but it was pre-engaged for a ball. So I preached,
and with much comfort, in our own Room; as also, at five in
the morning. I preached at ten, for the sake of the Gentry.
But it was too early, they could not rise so soon.
In the afternoon I rode to Mount-Mellick. The rain was
suspended in the evening, while I exhorted a large congrega
tion to “walk in the old paths.” Many Papists appeared to
be quite astonished; some of them were almost persuaded to
walk therein. The next evening I preached in the market
place, for the sake of the rich, who could hear there without
impeachment to their honour. And some were deeply affected.
Surely the thorns will not choke all the good seed!
Sat. 21.--The congregation at Tullamore was near as large
as at Mount-Mellick. At eight in the morning, Sunday, 22,
it was much increased, but much more at one. And I have
reason to believe, that God at this time touched several
careless hearts. I rode from thence to Coolylough, and found
a congregation gathered from twenty miles round. It rained
when I began to preach; but none offered to go away. And
God did indeed “send a gracious rain upon his inheritance,”
and comforted the souls of his servants.
Mon. 23.--Being the Quarterly-Meeting, the Stewards from
all the country societies were present; a company of settled,
sensible men. Nothing is wanting in this kingdom but zeal
ous, active Preachers, tenacious of order and exact discipline.
Tues. 24.--I took horse early, and at ten preached at
Cloughan, about twenty-four miles from Coolylough. We
afterwards rode through Longford; but did not stop, as the
day was cool and pleasant. About two we were unawares
encompassed with a multitude of Papists, coming out of
their mass-house. One of them knowing me soon alarmed
the rest, who set up a hideous roar, and drew up in battle
array. But we galloped through them, and went on to
Drumersmave, where I preached in the evening, and the next
day, Wednesday, 25, rode on to Sligo.
Never did I see a fairer prospect of good here. But
blossoms are not fruit. As large, if not a larger congregation
than before, was at the market-place in the evening. I was
exceeding weary, having rode an extremely dull horse; but I
soon forgot my weariness, seeing so many, young and old,
rich and poor, receiving the word with all gladness.
Thur. 26.--I preached at five, in a large, commodious
Room which has been procured since I was here last. I
breakfasted at Mr. A ’s, and dined at Mr. K. ’s : But
two such families I have seldom seen. They had feared God
for many years, and served him in the best manner they
knew. Nothing was wanting but that they should hear the
“more excellent way,” which they then embraced with all
their heart.
Fri. 27.--Our morning congregation was doubled. Mr.
D did not fail to be there, though it seemed strange to
him at first, when mention was made of preaching at five in
the morning. In the evening we had a still larger congre
gation, and I believe God applied his word. Some trembled,
others wept. Surely some of these shall know there is “balm
in Gilead.”
Sat. 28.--At five the congregation was larger than ever it
had been at that hour. After breakfast I rode out with Mr.
K. and Mr. D., who, hearing I was ill-mounted, desired me
to make use of one of his horses, during my stay in Ireland.
In the evening (it being market-day, so that the market
house was full of people) I wrote a line to the Colonel, who
readily gave me the liberty of preaching in the barrack-yard.
He likewise came to hear himself, as did several of the Officers.
It was a solemn conclusion of the happiest birth-day which I
have known for many years.
Sun. 29.--We had a solemn meeting of the society at five.
At eight I preached again in the barrack-yard; and I did not
observe a trifler there. They all seemed to hear as for life.
To-day I saw an odd instance of the force of example: When
we were at church in the morning, scarce any one either
sung or stood at the Psalms; so that I was almost alone
therein. But in the afternoon almost every one stood up; and
most of them sung, or endeavoured so to do. After service I
went directly to the market-house, and enforced those solemn
words, “What doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to
do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy
God?”
July, 1760.] JOURNAL. 9
Mr. D had left us at six in the morning, in order to
serve his cure; but about ten at night he came back, and was
with me soon after four, importuning me to stay another day;
but as my journeys were fixed, I could not do that without
disappointing several congregations. Now was the general call
for the town of Sligo. And many did “receive the word with
joy.” But the greatest part had “no root in themselves.”
What fruit then could be expected from them?
Mon. 30.--I have rarely seen so heavy rain in Europe, as
we had in the way to Tubbercurraugh. I was quickly wet to
my toes' end; but the day clearing, I was dry again in a few
hours. We had a very large congregation at Castlebar in the
evening; and many seemed almost persuaded to be Christians.
O what does it avail, almost to hit the mark? Almost to
escape the damnation of hell?
Tues. JULY 1.--We took horse about four; and it was well
we did; for our seven-and-thirty Irish miles, so called, were
little less than seventy English. I preached at a friend’s house
soon after three; and then, procuring a fresh horse, about the
size of a jackass, I rode on, with more ease than state, to
Aghrim.
Wed. 2.--We rode on to Eyrecourt, where many threatened
great things; but all vanished into air. I preached at ten in
the Court-house: Col. Eyre was there, and several other
persons of fashion. In the evening I preached at Birr, with
more satisfaction than for several years; finding many more
alive to God than ever, and provoking one another to love
and to good works. I had purposed to set out early in the
morning; but their love constrained me to stay a day longer.
So I had leisure to complete the account of the societies.
At present the societies in Connaught contain little more
than two hundred members; those in Ulster, about two
hundred and fifty; those in Leinster, a thousand.
Fri. 4.--I took my ease, riding in a chaise to Limerick;
where, on Saturday, 5, ten of us met in a little Conference.
By the blessing of God, we were all of one mind, particularly
with regard to the Church: Even J D- has not
now the least thought of leaving it, but attends there, be the
Minister good or bad. On Tuesday, 8, having settled all
our little affairs, we parted in much love.
Wed. 9.--I rode over to Killiheen, a German settlement,
near twenty miles south of Limerick. It rained all the way;
10 REv. J. west EY’s [July, 1760
but the earnestness of the poor people made us quite forget it.
In the evening I preached to another colony of Germans, at
Ballygarane. The third is at Court-Mattrass, a mile from
Killiheen. I suppose three such towns are scarce to be found.
again in England or Ireland. There is no cursing or
swearing, no Sabbath-breaking, no drunkenness, no ale-house,
in any of them. How will these poor foreigners rise up in
the judgment against those that are round about them |
Fri. 11.--I preached in the new House at Clare, to a
genteel congregation. What a contrast between these and
the poor people at Killiheen I We had a still more genteel
congregation the next morning at nine in the Court-House
at Ennis, to whom I spoke with all plainness. I did the same
on Sunday morning; so if they hear me no more, I am clear
of their blood. I took my leave of them at Clare in the
afternoon, and in the evening returned to Limerick.
Wed. 16.--I rode to Newmarket, which was another German
settlement. But the poor settlers, with all their diligence and
frugality, could not procure even the coarsest food to eat, and
the meanest raiment to put on, under their merciful landlords:
So that most of these, as well as those at Ballygarane, have
been forced to seek bread in other places; some of them in
distant parts of Ireland, but the greater part in America.
Thur. 17.--I met the classes at Limerick, and found a
considerable decrease. And how can it be otherwise, wher.
vice flows as a torrent, unless the children of God are all life,
zeal, activity? In hopes of quickening them, I preached at
seven in the old camp, to more than twice the usual congre
gation; which the two next evenings was more numerous still,
and equally attentive. I was well pleased to see a little army
of soldiers there, and not a few of their Officers. Nor did
they behave as unconcerned hearers, but like men that really
desired to save their souls.
Sun. 20.--I took my leave of that comfortable place, where
some thousands of people were assembled. I have seen no
such sight since I came to the kingdom. They not only filled
all the lower ground, but completely covered the banks that
surround it, though they stood as close as possible. I
exhorted them to “ask for the old paths, and walk therein,”
that they might “find rest to ” their “souls.” We had after
wards a solemn meeting of the society, in confidence that
God would revive his work.
July, 1760.] JOURNAL. 11
Mon. 21.--I left Limerick, and about noon preached at
Shronill, near a great house which a gentleman built many
years ago: But he cannot yet afford to finish it, having only
thirty thousand a year, and some hundred thousands in ready
money !
The beggars but a common lot deplore:
The rich-poor man’s emphatically poor.
At six I preached at the camp near Caire, to a large and
serious congregation of soldiers. Thence we rode on to
Clonmell, where I preached, near the barracks, at eight in
the morning, to a wild, staring people; but quiet perforce;
for the soldiers kept them in awe. We rode in the afternoon
to Waterford, where our friends had procured a commodious
place, inclosed on all sides. I preached thcare three evenings,
with great hope of doing good. Our large Room was full
every morning. O why should we despair of any souls whom
God hath made?
Thur. 24.--I looked over that well-wrote book, Mr.
Smith’s “State of the County and City of Waterford.” He
plainly shows, that twelve hundred years ago Ireland was a
flourishing kingdom. It seems to have been declining almost
ever since; especially after it was torn into several independent
kingdoms. Thenceforward it grew more and more wild and
barbarous, for several hundred years. In Queen Elizabeth’s
time it began to revive; and it increased greatly both in
trade and inhabitants, till the deadly blow which commenced
on October 23, 1641. Three hundred thousand Protestants,
by a moderate computation, were then destroyed in less than
a year; and more than twice as many Papists, within a few
years following: Most of these were adults; and this was a
loss which the nation has not recovered yet. Nay, it will
probably require another century, to restore the number of
inhabitants it had before.
Fri. 25.--I preached once more near the barracks in
Clonmell, and the next morning took horse at four. About
eleven the sun was scorching hot, till a little cloud rose and
covered us till we were near Rathcormuck. Here we rested
two hours, and then rode on (mostly shaded by flying clouds)
to Cork.
Sun. 27.--The House was well filled; but I expect small
increase of the work of God till we preach abroad. Thursday,
31. I rode to Bandon; but my good old friend, Mrs. Jones,
did not stay for my coming. She was released out of life
some weeks ago, in the seventy-second year of her age. I
preached, as usual, in the main street, to a large and attentive
congregation. And they were nearly doubled the next
evening; yet all behaved with the utmost decency. The
market obliged me to preach in the House on Saturday in
the afternoon; a very neat and lightsome building. Having
spent the time proposed here, with much satisfaction, in the
evening I returned to Cork.
Sunday, AUGUST 3.--I had wrote to the Commanding
Officer for leave to preach near the barracks; but he was just
gone out of town; so I was obliged once more to coop myself
up in the Room. Monday, 4. Knowing by the experiment I
made two years since, that it was an entertainment above the
taste of our evening congregation, I read some select letters
at five in the morning, to those who desired to hear them.
And many of them were not a little comforted and established
in the ways of God.
Thur. 7.--In the afternoon I set out for Kinsale. In the
way a violent storm drove us into a little hut, where a poor
woman was very thankful for physical advice, and another
for a little money to buy her food. The sky then clearing,
we soon reached Kinsale, where I preached at six in the
Exchange, to a multitude of soldiers, and not a few of the
dull, careless townsfolk. At five in the morning, it being a
field-day, the soldiers could not attend; but I had a large
and serious congregation notwithstanding. Surely good
might be done here also, would our Preachers always preach
in the Exchange, as they may without any molestation,
instead of a little, ugly, dirty garret.
About nine, a sharp storm having put an end to their
exercise, I went to the soldiers in the field. I stood so near
the intrenchments of the fort, that they could hear within as
well as without. The sun indeed shone extremely hot on my
head; but presently a cloud interposed. And when I began
to be chill (for the wind was high and sharp) it removed till I
wanted it again. How easily may we see the hand of God
in small things as well as great ! And why should a little
pointless raillery make us ashamed to acknowledge it?
In the evening I preached to the usual congregation in the
main street at Bandon, on, “Her ways are ways of pleasant
ness, and all her paths peace.” The congregation was near
Aug. 1760.] JOURNAL. 13
twice as large, at five in the morning, as it was last week
when I preached an hour later.
Sun. 10.--After preaching at seven, in an house crowded
within and without, I left this comfortable place, and went
back to Cork. I had a desire to preach abroad in the evening;
but the weather would not permit. When the society met, a
person hugely daubed with gold thrust violently in. By his
appearance I should have judged him to be some Nobleman.
But I was afterward informed it was Dr. Taylor.
On Monday and Tuesday I took an account of the society,
and was grieved, though not surprised, to find such a declen
sion. I left two hundred and ninety members: I find only
two hundred and thirty-three. And what will the end be,
unless those that remain learn to bear one another's burdens?
Adding to those in the other provinces about six hundred
who are in Munster, the whole number is a little above two
thousand.
Our evening congregations this week were smaller than
usual; as the Gentry were engaged in a more important affair.
A company of players were in town. However, many of them
came on Friday; for a watch-night was newer to them than
a comedy.
Mon. 18.--Being advised from Dublin that Captain Dansey
(with whom I desired to sail) would sail on the 19th or 20th, I
took horse early, and reached Clonmell between five and six in
the evening. I took my usual stand near the barrack-gate;
and had abundantly more than my usual congregation, as it
was the Assize week, so that the town was extremely full of
Gentry as well as common people.
Tues. 19.--We had many light showers, which cooled the
air and laid the dust. We dined at Kilkenny, noble in ruins:
I see no such remains of magnificence in the kingdom. The
late Duke of Ormond’s house, on the top of a rock, hanging
over the river, the ancient cathedral, and what is left of many
grand buildings, yield a melancholy pleasure. Thus
A little power, a little sway,
A sun-beam in a winter's day,
Is all the great and mighty have
Between the cradle and the grave :
We lodged at Castle-Dermot, and reached Dublin on
Wednesday, 20; but Captain Dansey was not to sail this
week. I then inquired for a Chester ship, and found one
which was expected to sail on Friday morning: But on
Friday morning the Captain sent us word he must wait for
General Montague. So in the afternoon I rode over to the
Skirries, where the packet lay; but before I came thither, the
wind, which was fair before, shifted to the east, and blew a
storm. I saw the hand of God, and, after resting awhile,
rode cheerfully back to Dublin. It being the watch-night, I
came just in time to spend a comfortable hour with the
congregation. O how good it is to have no choice of our
own, but to leave all things to the will of God!
Sat. 23.--The Captain of the Chester ship sent word the
General would not go, and he would sail the next morning.
So we have one day more to spend in Ireland. Let us live
this day as if it were our last.
Sun. 24.--At seven I took leave of my friends, and about
noon embarked in the Nonpareil for Chester. We had forty or
fifty passengers on board, half of whom were cabin passengers.
I was afraid we should have an uneasy time, in the midst of
such a crowd of Gentry. We sailed out with a fair wind,
but at four in the afternoon it failed, and left us in a dead
calm. I then made the gentlemen an offer of preaching,
which they thankfully accepted. While I was preaching, the
wind sprung up fair; but the next day we were becalmed
again. In the afternoon they desired me to give them another
sermon; and again the wind sprung up while I was speaking,
and continued till, about noon, on Tuesday, we landed at
Parkgate.
Being in haste, I would not stay for my own horse, which
I found could not land till low water. So I bought one,
and, having hired another, set forward without delay. We
reached Whitchurch that evening.
Wed. 27.--We breakfasted at Newport, where, finding our
horses begin to fail, we thought it best to take the Birmingham
road, that, if they should fail us altogether, we might stay
among our friends. But they would go no farther than
Wolverhampton; so we hired fresh horses there, and imme
diately set out for Worcester. But one of them soon after fell,
and gave me such a shock, (though I did not quit my seat)
that I was seized with a violent bleeding at the nose, which
nothing we could apply would stop. So we were obliged to
go a foot pace for two miles, and then stay at Broadwater.
Sept. 1760.] JOURNAL. 15
Thur. 28.-Soon after we set out, the other horse fell lame.
An homest man, at Worcester, found this was owing to a bad
shoe. A smith cured this by a new shoe; but at the same
time, by paring the hoof too close, he effectually lamed the
other foot, so that we had hard work to reach Gloucester.
After resting here awhile, we pushed on to Newport, where I
took a chaise, and reached Bristol before eleven.
I spent the two following days with the Preachers, who
had been waiting for me all the week: And their love and
unanimity was such as soon made me forget all my labour.
Mon. SEPTEMBER 1.--I set out for Cornwall, preaching
at Shepton, Middlesey, and Tiverton, in the way. Wednes
day, 3. I reached Launceston, and found the small remains
of a dead, scattered society: And no wonder, as they have
had scarce any discipline, and only one sermon in a fortnight.
On Friday, 5, I found just such another society at Camel
ford. But their deadness here was owing to bitterness against
each other. In the morning I heard the contending parties
face to face; and they resolved and promised, on all sides,
to let past things be forgotten. O how few have learned
to forgive “one another, as God, for Christ’s sake, hath
forgiven” us!
Sat. 6.--We had an exceeding lively congregation in the
evening at Trewalder. Indeed, all the society stands well, and
“adorns the doctrine of God our Saviour.” Sunday, 7. At
eight I preached again, and was much comforted. I then rode
to Port-Isaac church, and had the satisfaction of hearing an
excellent sermon. After service I preached at a small distance
from the church to a numerous congregation; and to a far
more numerous one in the town, at five in the afternoon.
In examining this society, I found much reason to bless
God on their behalf. They diligently observe all the Rules
of the society, with or without a Preacher. They constantly
attend the church and sacrament, and meet together at the
times appointed. The consequence is, that thirty out of
thirty-five, their whole number, continue to walk in the light
of God’s countenance.
Mon. 8.--A gentleman followed me to my inn at St.
Columb, and carried me to his house, where were three or four
more as friendly as himself. One of them rode with me
seven or eight miles, and gave me a pleasing account of two
young Clergymen, Mr. C and Mr. Phelps, who had the
care of three adjoining parishes. Surely God has a favour for
the people of these parts ! He gives them so serious, zealous,
lively Ministers. By these and the Methodists together, the
line is now laid, with no inconsiderable interruption, all along
the north sea, from the eastern point of Cornwall to the
Land’s End. In a while, I trust, there will be no more cause
on these coasts to accuse Britannos hospitibus feros.”
The congregation at St. Agnes in the evening was, I
suppose, double to that at Port-Isaac. We had near as
many, Tuesday, 9, at five in the morning, as the preaching
house could contain. Afterward I examined the society, and
was surprised and grieved to find that, out of ninety-eight
persons, all but three or four had forsaken the Lord’s Table.
I told them my thoughts very plain: They seemed convinced,
and promised no more to give place to the devil.
Wed. 10.--I had much conversation with Mr. Phelps; a
man of an humble, loving, tender spirit. Between him on the
one hand, and the Methodists on the other, most in the
parish are now awakened. Let but our brethren have “zeal
according to knowledge,” and few will escape them both.
When I came to St. Ives, I was determined to preach
abroad; but the wind was so high, I could not stand where I
had intended. But we found a little inclosure near it, one
end of which was native rock, rising ten or twelve feet perpen
dicular, from which the ground fell with an easy descent. A
jetting out of the rock, about four feet from the ground, gave
me a very convenient pulpit. Here well nigh the whole town,
high and low, rich and poor, assembled together. Nor was
there a word to be heard, or a smile seen, from one end of the
congregation to the other. It was just the same the three
following evenings. Indeed I was afraid on Saturday, that
the roaring of the sea, raised by the north wind, would have
prevented their hearing. But God gave me so clear and
strong a voice, that I believe scarce one word was lost.
Sun. 14.--At eight I chose a large ground, the sloping side
of a meadow, where the congregation stood, row above row, so
that all might see as well as hear. It was a beautiful sight.
Every one seemed to take to himself what was spoken. I
believe every backslider in the town was there. And surely
God was there to “heal their backslidings.”
* Britons as inhospitable, or cruel, to strangers.-EDIT.
Sept. 1760.] JOURNAL, 17
I began at Zennor, as soon as the Church Service ended:
I suppose scarce six persons went away. Seeing many there
who did once run well, I addressed myself to them in
particular. The spirit of mourning was soon poured out;
and some of them wept bitterly. O that the Lord may yet
return unto them, and “leave a blessing behind him !”
At five I went once more into the ground at St. Ives, and
found such a congregation as I think was never seen in a
place before (Gwennap excepted) in this county. Some of
the chief of the town were now not in the skirts, but in the
thickest of the people. The clear sky, the setting sun, the
smooth, still water, all agreed with the state of the audience.
Is any thing too hard for God? May we not well say, in
every sense,
Thou dost the raging sea control,
And smooth the prospect of the deep;
Thou mak'st the sleeping billows roll,
Thou mak'st the rolling billows sleep?
Mon. 15.-I inquired concerning the uncommon storm,
which was here on March 9, the last year. It began near the
Land’s End, between nine and ten at night, and went east
ward not above a mile broad, over St. Just, Morva, Zennor,
St. Ives, and Gwinear, whence it turned northward, over the
sea. It uncovered all the houses in its way, and was accom
panied with impetuous rain. About a mile south-east from St.
Ives, it tore up a rock, twelve or fourteen ton weight, from
the top of a rising ground, and whirled it down upon another,
which it split through, and at the same time dashed itself in
pieces. It broke down the pinnacles of Gwinear church, which
forced their way through the roof. And it was remarkable,
the rain which attended it was as salt as any sea-water.
At one I preached in Madron parish, and then rode to St.
Just. I have not seen such a congregation here for twice
seven years. Abundance of backsliders being present, I chiefly
applied to them. Some of them smiled at first; but it was
not long before their mirth was turned into mourning: And
I believe few, if any, went away without a witness from God,
that he “willeth not the death of a sinner.”
Tues. 16.--At five the Room was near full; and the great
power of God was in the midst of them. It was now accom
panied with one unusual effect: The mouth of those whom it
most affected was literally stopped. Several of them came to
18 REv. J. wesi.EY’s [Sept. 1760.
me and could not speak one word; very few could utter three
sentences. I re-joined to the society ten or eleven backsliders,
and added some new members. Here (as at Port-Isaac, St.
Agnes, and St. Ives) we are called to thankfulness; and at
most other places, to patience.
All the day it blew a storm; and in the evening, though
the rain ceased, the furious wind continued. I ordered all the
windows of the preaching-house to be set open, so that most
could hear without as well as within. I preached on, “He
will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking
flax.” And again God applied his word, both to wound, and
to heal them that were already wounded.
About this time I wrote the following letter:
“To the Editor of the London Chronicle.
“SIR, September 17, 1760.
“As you sometimes insert things of a religious nature in
your paper, I shall count it a favour if you will insert this.
“Some years ago I published “A Letter to Mr. Law;’
and, about the same time, “An Address to the Clergy. Of
the former, Mr. Law gives the following account, in his
‘Collection of Letters’ lately published:--
“‘To answer Mr. Wesley's letter seems to be quite
needless, because there is nothing substantial or properly
argumentative in it. I was once a kind of oracle to Mr.
W-. I judged him to be much under the power of his
own spirit. To this was owing the false censure which he
published against the Mystics, as enemies to good works.’
Pp. 128, 130. “His letter is such a juvenile composition of
emptiness and pertness, as is below the character of any man
who had been serious in religion for half a month. It was
not ability, but necessity, that put his pen into his hand. He
had preached much against my books; and forbid his people
the use of them; and for a cover of all this, he promised,
from time to time, to write against them; therefore an answer
was to be made at all adventures. He and the Pope conceive
the same reasons for condemning the mystery revealed by
Jacob Behme. P. 190.
“Of the latter he gives this account:--‘The Pamphlet you
sent is worse than no advice at all; but infinitely beyond Mr.
Wesley's Babylonish Address to the Clergy; almost all of
which is empty babble, fitter for an old grammarian that was
Sept. 1760.] JOURNALs 19
grown blear-eyed in mending dictionaries, than for one who
had tasted of the powers of the world to come. P. 198.
“I leave others to judge whether an answer to that letter
be quite needless or no; and whether there be any thing sub
stantial in it; but certainly there is something argumentative.
The very queries relating to Jacob's Philosophy are argu
ments, though not in form; and perhaps most of them will
be thought conclusive arguments, by impartial readers. Let
these likewise judge if there are not arguments in it (whether
conclusive or no) relating to that entirely new system of
divinity which he has revealed to the world.
“It is true, that Mr. Law, whom I love and reverence
now, was once ‘a kind of oracle’ to me. He thinks I am still
“under the power of my ‘own spirit, as opposed to the Spirit
of God. If I am, yet my censure of the Mystics is not at
all owing to this, but to my reverence for the Oracles of God,
which, while I was fond of them, I regarded less and less;
till, at length, finding I could not follow both, I exchanged
the Mystic writers for the scriptural.
“It is sure, in exposing the Philosophy of Behme, I use
ridicule as well as argument; and yet, I trust I have, by the
grace of God, been in some measure ‘serious in religion,”
not ‘half a month’ only, but ever since I was six years old,
which is now about half a century. I do not know that the
Pope has condemned him at all, or that he has any reason so
to do. My reason is this, and no other: I think he contra
dicts Scripture, reason, and himself; and that he has seduced
many unwary souls from the Bible-way of salvation. A
strong conviction of this, and a desire to guard others against
that dangerous seduction, laid me under a necessity of
writing that letter. I was under no other necessity; though
I doubt not but Mr. Law heard I was, and very seriously
believed it. I very rarely mention his books in public; nor
are they in the way of one in an hundred of those whom he
terms my people; meaning, I suppose, the people called
Methodists. I had therefore no temptation, any more than
power, to forbid the use of them to the Methodists in general.
Whosoever informed Mr. Law of this, wanted either sense or
honesty.
“He is so deeply displeased with the “Address to the
Clergy, because it speaks strongly in favour of learning; but
still, if this part of it is only ‘fit for an old grammarian,
grown blear-eyed in mending dictionaries, it will not follow
that “almost all of it is mere empty babble; for a large part
of it much more strongly insists on a single eye, and a clean
heart. Heathen Philosophers may term this ‘empty babble;’
but let not Christians either account or call it so !”
Wed. 17.--The Room at St. Just was quite full at five, and
God gave us a parting blessing. At noon I preached on the
cliff near Penzance, where no one now gives an uncivil word.
Here I procured an account, from an eye-witness, of what
happened the twenty-seventh of last month. A round pillar,
narrowest at bottom, of a whitish colour, rose out of the sea
near Mousehole, and reached the clouds. One who was riding
over the strand from Marazion to Penzance saw it stand for a
short space, and then move swiftly toward her, till, the skirt
of it touching her, the horse threw her and ran away. It had
a strong sulphurous smell. It dragged with it abundance of
sand and pebbles from the shore; and then went over the
land, carrying with it corn, furze, or whatever it found in its
way. It was doubtless a kind of water-spout; but a water
spout on land, I believe, is seldom seen.
The storm drove us into the House at Newlyn also.
Thursday, 18. As we rode from thence, in less than half an
hour we were wet to the skin; but when we came to Penhale,
the rain ceased; and, the people flocking from all parts, we
had a comfortable opportunity together. About six I preached
near Helstone. The rain stopped till I had done, and soon
after was as violent as before.
Fri. 19.--I rode to Illogan. We had heavy rain before
I began, but scarce any while I was preaching. I learned
several other particulars here concerning the water-spout. It
was seen near Mousehole an hour before sunset. About
sunset it began travelling over the land, tearing up all the
furze and shrubs it met. Near an hour after sunset it passed
(at the rate of four or five miles an hour) across Mr. Harris's
fields, in Camborne, sweeping the ground as it went, about
twenty yards diameter at bottom, and broader and broader
up to the clouds. It made a noise like thunder, took up
eighteen stacks of corn, with a large hay-stack and the stones
whereon it stood, scattered them all abroad, (but it was quite
dry,) and then passed over the cliff into the sea.
Sat. 20.-In the evening I took my old stand in the main
street at Redruth. A multitude of people, rich and poor,
Sept. 1760.] JOURNAL. 21
calmly attended. So is the roughest become one of the
quietest towns in England.
Sun. 21.--I preached in the same place at eight. Mr.
C , of St. Cubert, preached at the church both morning
and afternoon, and strongly confirmed what I had spoken.
At one, the day being mild and calm, we had the largest
congregation of all. But it rained all the time I was preach
ing at Gwennap. We concluded the day with a love-feast,
at which James Roberts, a tinner of St. Ives, related how
God had dealt with his soul. He was one of the first in
society in St. Ives, but soon relapsed into his old sin, drunken
ness, and wallowed in it for two years, during which time
he headed the mob who pulled down the preaching-house.
Not long after, he was standing with his partner at Edward
May's shop when the Preacher went by. His partner said,
“I will tell him I am a Methodist.” “Nay,” said Edward,
“your speech will bewray you.” James felt the word as a
sword, thinking in himself, “So does my speech now bewray
me !” He turned and hastened home, fancying he heard
the devil stepping after him all the way. For forty hours he
never closed his eyes, nor tasted either meat or drink. He
was then at his wit’s end, and went to the window, looking
to drop into hell instantly, when he heard those words, “I
will be merciful to thy unrighteousness, thy sins and imiquities
will I remember no more.” All his load was gone; and he
has now for many years walked worthy of the Gospel.
Mon. 22.--I preached at Penryn in the evening. It rained
before and after, but not while I was preaching. While we
were at prayer, a sheet of light seemed to fill the yard, and
“the voice of the Lord” was heard over our heads. This
fixed the impression they had received upon the minds of
many; as if it had said, in express terms, “Prepare to meet
thy God!”
On Wednesday evening, having (over and above meeting
the societies) preached thirty times in eleven days, I found
myself a little exhausted; but a day’s rest set me up: So on
Friday, 26, I preached at noon again near Liskeard. In the
afternoon we had rain and wind enough; and when we came
to Saltash, no boat would venture out: So we were obliged
to take up our lodgings there.
Sat. 27.--Finding there was no hope of passing here, the
wind being as high as ever, we determined to ride round by
the new bridge. The rain still fell on either side; but for
near twenty miles we had not one drop, and not a considerable
shower all day. Soon after four in the afternoon we came
safe to Plymouth-Dock.
I had but a melancholy prospect here, finding most of the
people dead as stones: And when I took an account of the
society, only thirty-four, out of seventy, were left. At seven
in the evening, and at five in the morning, I strongly
exhorted them to return to God. At eight I did the same,
and at five in the afternoon; and God made his word as an
hammer. At the meeting of the society, likewise, strong and
effectual words were given me. Many were convinced afresh;
many backsliders cut to the heart: And I left once more
between sixty and seventy members.
Mon. 29.--Being invited by the Minister of Mary-Week to
preach in his church, I crossed over the country, and came
thither about four in the afternoon. The congregation was
large, considering the weather, and quite attentive and uncon
cerned. Hence I rode on to Mill-House, and the next day
to Collumpton; where, finding the congregation waiting, I
began preaching without delay, and felt no weariness or want
of strength till I had delivered my message to them.
Wed. OCTOBER 1.--After preaching at five, I examined the
society, and found them more alive to God than I had done
for many years. About one I preached at Halberton, and at
Tiverton in the evening. The next morning I rode to
Maiden-Down, where the congregation was waiting for me.
About noon I preached at Taunton. The rain lessened the
congregation at Bridgewater; a dead, uncomfortable place, at
best. About seven we set out thence for Baderipp, in as
dark a night as I ever saw : But God gave his angels charge
over us, and we dashed not our foot against a stone.
I was surprised to see a congregation at five in the morning,
to whom I spoke with much enlargement of heart. About
one I preached at Shepton-Mallet, and about seven in the
evening at Bristol.
Sun. 5.--I perceived, by the liveliness of the people, that
Mr. Gilbert's labour had not been in vain. But I found some
exercise too: And this is always to be expected among a large
body of people; it being certain that as “all men have not
faith,” so all believers have not wisdom.
Sun. 12.--I visited the classes at Kingswood. Here only
Nov. 1760.] JOURNAL, 23
there is no increase; and yet, where was there such a
prospect, till that weak man, John Cennick, confounded the
poor people with strange doctrines? O what mischief may
be done by one that means well! We see no end of it to
this day.
In the afternoon I had appointed the children to meet
at Bristol, whose parents were of the society. Thirty of
them came to-day, and above fifty more on the Sunday and
Thursday following. About half of these I divided into four
classes, two of boys, and two of girls; and appointed proper
Leaders to meet them separate. I met them all together,
twice a week; and it was not long before God began to touch
some of their hearts.
On Tuesday and Wednesday I visited some of the societies
in the country. On Thursday I returned to Bristol, and in
the afternoon preached a charity-sermon in Newgate, for the
use of the poor prisoners.
On the three following days I spoke severally to the
members of the society. As many of them increase in
worldly goods, the great danger I apprehend now is, their
relapsing into the spirit of the world: And then their religion
is but a dream.
Wed. 22.--Being informed that some neighbouring gentle
men had declared they would apprehend the next Preacher
who came to Pensford, I rode over to give them the meeting:
But none appeared. The house was more than filled with
deeply attentive hearers. It seems, the time is come at
length for the word of God to take root here also.
Fri. 24.--I visited the French prisoners at Knowle, and
found many of them almost naked again. In hopes of pro
voking others to jealousy, I made another collection for them,
and ordered the money to be laid out in linen and waistcoats,
which were given to those that were most in want.
Sat. 25.--King George was gathered to his fathers. When
will England have a better Prince?
Many of us agreed to observe Friday, 31, as a day of
fasting and prayer for the blessing of God upon our nation,
and in particular on His present Majesty. We met at five,
at nine, at one, and at half-hour past eight. I expected to be
a little tired, but was more lively after twelve at night than I
was at six in the morning.
Sat. NoveMBER 1.--I had the pleasure of spending a little
time with that venerable man, Mr. Walker, of Truro. his physicians do not understand his case. I fear
If he recovers, it
must be through an almighty Physician.
Mon. 3.--I left Bristol, and took Bath, Bradford, and
Frome, in my way to Salisbury, where I spent a day with
much satisfaction. Friday, 7. I preached about nine at
Andover, to a few dead stones; at one in Whitchurch, and in
the evening at Basingstoke. The next day, Saturday, 8, I
was once more brought safe to London.
I spent about a fortnight, as usual, in examining the
society; a heavy, but necessary, labour.
Mon. 17.--I sent the following letter:
“To the Editor of Lloyd's Evening Post.
“SIR, November 17, 1760.
“IN your last paper we had a letter from a very angry
gentleman, (though he says he had put himself into as good
humour as possible,) who personates a Clergyman, but is, I
presume, in reality, a retainer to the theatre. He is very warm
against the people vulgarly called Methodists, “ridiculous
impostors,’ ‘religious buffoons,’ as he styles them; ‘saint
errants,” (a pretty and quaint phrase,) full of “inconsiderate
ness, madness, melancholy, enthusiasm;’ teaching a ‘knotty
and unintelligible system’ of religion, yea, a ‘contradictory
or self-contradicting; nay, a ‘mere illusion,” a “destructive
scheme, and of pernicious consequence; since ‘an hypothesis
is a very slippery foundation to hazard our all upon.’
“Methinks the gentleman has a little mistaken his character:
He seems to have exchanged the sock for the buskin. But, be
this as it may, general charges prove nothing: Let us come to
particulars. Here they are: ‘The basis of Methodism is the
grace of assurance,” (excuse a little impropriety of expression,)
‘regeneration being only a preparative to it.’ Truly this is
somewhat ‘knotty and unintelligible.’ I will endeavour to help
him out. The fundamental doctrine of the people called
Methodists is, Whosoever will be saved, before all things it is
necessary that he hold the true faith; the faith which works by
love; which, by means of the love of God and our neighbour,
produces both inward and outward holiness. This faith is
an evidence of things not seen; and he that thus believes is
regenerate, or born of God; and he has the witness in
himself: (Call it assurance, or what you please:) The Spirit
Nov. 1760.] JOURNAL. 25
itself witnesses with his spirit that he is a child of God.
“From what scripture’ every one of these propositions ‘is
collected, any common Concordance will show. “This is the
true portraiture of Methodism, so called. ‘A religion supe
rior to this’ (the love of God and man) none can ‘enjoy,'
either in time or in eternity.
“But the Methodists do not hold “good works merit
orious.” No; neither does ours, or any other Protestant
Church. But meantime they hold it is their bounden duty,
as they have time, to do good unto all men; and they know
the day is coming wherein God will reward every man
according to his works.
“But they “act with sullenness and sourness, and account
innocent gaiety and cheerfulness a crime almost as heinous as
sacrilege.’ Who does? Name the men. I know them not,
and therefore doubt the fact; though it is very possible you
account that kind of gaiety innocent which I account both
foolish and sinful.
“I know none who denies that true religion, that is, love,
the love of God and our neighbour, “elevates our spirits, and
renders our minds cheerful and serene. It must, if it be
accompanied, as we believe it always is, with peace and joy
in the Holy Ghost; and if it produces a conscience void of
offence toward God and toward man.
“But they ‘preach up religion only to accomplish a lucra
tive design, to fleece their hearers, to accumulate wealth, to
rob and plunder, which they esteem meritorious. We deny
the fact. Who is able to prove it? Let the affirmer produce
his witnesses, or retract.
“This is the sum of your correspondent’s charge, not one
article of which can be proved: But whether it can or no,
“we have made them,” says he, ‘a theatrical scoff, and the
common jest and scorn of every chorister in the street. It
may be so; but whether you have done well herein may still
admit of a question. However, you cannot but wish “we
had some formal Court of Judicature erected,’ (happy Portugal
and Spain l) ‘to take cognizance of such matters. Nay,
cur optas quod habes? Why do you wish for what you have
already? The Court is erected; the holy, devout play-house
is become the house of mercy; and does take cognizance
hereof, ‘of all pretenders to sanctity, and happily furnishes
ms with a discerning spirit to distinguish betwixt right and
wrong.” But I do not stand to their sentence; I appeal to
Scripture and reason, and by these alone consent to be judged.
“I am, Sir,
“Your humble servant,
“JoHN WESLEY.”
Sat. 22.--I was obliged to trouble him with another letter,
as follows:
“JUST as I had finished the letter published in your last
Friday’s paper, four tracts came to my hands; one wrote, or
procured to be wrote, by Mrs. Downes; one by a Clergyman
in the county of Durham; the third, by a gentleman of
Cambridge; and the fourth, by a member (I suppose,
Dignitary) of the Church of Rome. How gladly would I
leave all these to themselves, and let them say just what they
please! as my day is far spent, and my taste for controversy
is utterly lost and gone. But this would not be doing justice
to the world, who might take silence for a proof of guilt. I
shall therefore say a word concerning each. I may, perhaps,
some time say more to one or two of them.
“The letter which goes under Mrs. Downes's name scarce
deserves any notice at all, as there is nothing extraordinary
in it, but an extraordinary degree of virulence and scurrility.
Two things only I remark concerning it, which I suppose the
writer of it knew as well as me:-1. That my letter to Mr.
Downes was both wrote and printed before Mr. Downes died.
2. That when I said, Tibi parvula res est, ‘Your ability is
small, I had no view to his fortune, which I knew nothing
of; but, as I there expressly say, to his wit, sense, and
talents, as a writer.
“The tract wrote by the gentleman in the north is far more
bulky than this: But it is more considerable for its bulk than
for its matter; being little more than a dull repetition of what
was published some years ago, in ‘The Enthusiasm of the
Methodists and Papists Compared. I do not find the author
adds any thing new, unless we may bestow that epithet on a
sermon annexed to his address, which, I presume, will do
neither good nor harm. So I leave the Durham gentleman,
with Mrs. Downes, to himself and his admirers.
“The author of the letter to Mr. Berridge is a more
considerable writer. In many things I wholly agree with him,
though not in admiring Dr. Taylor. But there is a bitterness
Nov. 1760.] JOURNAL. 27
even in him, which I should not have expected in a gentle
man and a scholar. So in the very first page I read, ‘The
Church, which most of your graceless fraternity have
deserted. Were the fact true, (which it is not) yet is the
expression to be commended? Surely Dr. G. himself thinks
it is not. I am sorry too for the unfairness of his quotations.
For instance: He cites me, (p. 53,) as speaking of ‘faith shed
abroad in men’s hearts like lightning. Faith shed abroad in
men’s hearts! I never used such an expression in my life: I
do not talk after this rate. Again, he quotes, as from me,
(p. 57) so, I presume, Mr. W. means, ‘a behaviour does not
pretend to add the least to what Christ has done. But be
these words whose they may, they are none of mine. I never
spoke, wrote, no, nor read them before. Once more: Is it
well judged for any writer to show such an utter contempt of
his opponents as you affect to do with regard to the whole
body of people vulgarly termed Methodists? ‘You may keep
up, say you, ‘a little bush-fighting in controversy; you may
skirmish awhile with your feeble body of irregulars; but you
must never trust to your skill in reasoning.” (P. 77.) Upon
this I would ask, 1. If these are such poor, silly creatures,
why does so wise a man set his wit to them? ‘Shall the
King of Israel go out against a flea?” 2. If it should
happen, that any one of these silly bush-fighters steps out
into the plain, engages hand to hand, and foils this champion
by mere dint of reason, will not his defeat be so much the
more shameful as it was more unexpected? But I say the
less at present, not only because Mr. Berridge is able to
answer for himself, but because the title-page bids me expect
a letter more immediately addressed to myself.
“The last tract, entitled ‘A Caveat against the Method
ists, is, in reality, a caveat against the Church of England, or
rather, against all the Churches in Europe who dissent from
the Church of Rome. Nor do I apprehend the writer to be
any more disgusted at the Methodists than at Protestants
of every denomination; as he cannot but judge it equally
unsafe to join to any society but that of Rome. Accordingly,
all his arguments are levelled at the Reformed Churches in
general, and conclude just as well, if you put the word
Protestant throughout in the place of the word Methodist.
Although, therefore, the author borrows my name to wound
those who suspect nothing less, yet I am no more concerned
to refute him than any other Protestant in England; and
still the less, as those arguments are refuted over and over, in
books which are still common among us.
“But is it possible any Protestants, nay, Protestant
Clergyman, should buy these tracts to give away? Is then
the introducing Popery the only way to overthrow Method
ism? If they know this, and choose Popery as the smaller
evil of the two, they are consistent with themselves. But if
they do not intend this, I wish them more seriously to
consider what they do. I am, Sir,
“Your humble servant,
Mon. 24.--I visited as many as I could of the sick. How
much better is it, when it can be done, to carry relief to the
poor, than to send it ! and that both for our own sake and
theirs. For theirs, as it is so much more comfortable to
them, and as we may then assist them in spirituals as well as
temporals; and for our own, as it is far more apt to soften
our heart, and to make us naturally care for each other.
Mon. DECEMBER 1.--I went in the machine to Canter
bury. In going and returning I read over “The Christian
Philosopher.” It is a very extraordinary book, containing,
among many (as some would be apt to term them) wild
thoughts, several fine and striking observations, not to be
found in any other treatise.
Wed. 3.--I rode to Dover. Who would have expected to
find here some of the best singers in England? I found
likewise what was better still,--a serious, earnest people.
There was a remarkable blessing among them, both in the
evening and the morning; so that I did not regret the having
been wet to the skin in my way to them.
Fri. 12.--Having as far as Hyde-Park-Corner to go, I took
a coach for part of the way, ordering the man to stop anywhere
at the end of Piccadilly next the Haymarket. He stopped
exactly at the door of one of our friends, whose mother, above
ninety years old, had long desired to see me, though I knew
it not. She was exceedingly comforted, and could not tell how
to praise God enough for giving her the desire of her soul.
We observed Friday, the 19th, as a day of fasting and
prayer for our King and country, and the success of the
Gospel: And part of the answer immediately followed, in
the remarkable increase of believers, and in the strengthening
Dec. 1760.] JOURNAL. 29
of those who had before attained that precious faith, “unto
all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness.”
Sat. 20.--In the evening I hastened back from Snowsfields,
to meet the penitents, (a congregation which I wish always to
meet myself) and walked thither again at five in the morning.
Blessed be God, I have no reason or pretence to spare myself
yet. I preached a charity sermon in West-Street chapel, both
morning and afternoon; but many were obliged to go away,
finding it impossible to get in. Is it novelty still which draws
these from all parts? No; but the mighty power of God.
To-day I sent the following letter:--
“To the Editor of Lloyd's Evening Post.
“To MR. T. H., alias E. L., &c., &c.
“WHAT, my good friend again! Only a little disguised
with a new name, and a few scraps of Latin ' I hoped, indeed,
you had been pretty well satisfied before; but since you desire
to hear a little farther from me, I will add a few words, and
endeavour to set our little controversy in a still clearer light.
“Last month you publicly attacked the people called
Methodists, without either fear or wit. You charged them
with ‘madness, enthusiasm, self-contradiction, imposture,’
and what not ! I considered each charge, and, I conceive,
refuted it to the satisfaction of all indifferent persons. You
renewed the attack, not by proving any thing, but affirming
the same things over and over. I replied; and, without
taking notice of the dull, low scurrility, either of the first or
second letter, confined myself to the merits of the cause, and
cleared away the dirt you had thrown.
“You now heap together ten paragraphs more, most of
which require very little answer. In the first you say,
‘Your foolishness is become the wonder and admiration of
the public.” In the second, “The public blushes for you, till
you give a better solution to the articles demanded of you.’
In the third, you cite my words, I still maintain ‘the Bible,
with the Liturgy, and Homilies of our Church; and do not
espouse any other principles but what are consonant to the
Book of Common-Prayer.’ You keenly answer, ‘Granted,
Mr. Methodist; but whether or no you would not espouse
other principles, if you durst, is evident enough from some
innovations you have already introduced, which I shall attempt
to prove in the subsequent part of my answer.” Indeed you
will not. You neither prove, nor attempt to prove, that I
would espouse other principles if I durst. However, you give
me a deadly thrust: “You falsify the first Article of the
Athanasian Creed.’ But how so? Why, I said, ‘The funda
mental doctrine of the people called Methodists is, Whosoever
will be saved, before all things it is necessary that he hold the
true faith. Sir, shall I tell you a secret?--It was for the
readers of your class that I changed the hard word Catholic
into an easier.
“In the fourth paragraph you say, ‘Did you never use that
phrase, The grace of assurance? Never, that I remember,
either in preaching or writing; both your ears and eyes have
been very unhappy if they informed you I did: And how
many soever look either sorrowful or joyful, that will not
prove the contrary. “But produce your texts. What, for a
phrase I never use? I pray you, have me excused. But,
(as I said before,) ‘from what Scripture every one of my
propositions is collected, any common Concordance will show.’
To save you trouble, I will for once point out those scriptures.
‘Whosoever will be saved must believe.” (Mark xvi. 16;
Acts xvi. 31.) ‘This faith works by love.’ (Gal. v. 6.) It is
“an evidence of things not seen.” (Heb. xi. 1.) “He that
believes is born of God.” (1 John v. 1.) “He has the witness
in himself.’ (Verse 10.) ‘The Spirit itself witnesses with his
spirit, that he is a child of God.” (Rom. viii. 16.)
“In the fifth you say, ‘You embrace any shift to twist
words to your own meaning.” This is saying just nothing.
Any one may say this of any one. To prove it, is another
point. In the sixth you say, ‘No Protestant Divine ever
taught your doctrine of assurance.’ I hope you know no
better; but it is strange you should not. Did you never see
Bishop Hall's Works? Was not he a Protestant Divine?
Was not Mr. Perkins, Bolton, Dr. Sibbs, Dr. Preston, Arch
bishop Leighton? Inquire a little farther; and do not run
thus hand over head, asserting you know not what. By
assurance, (if we must use the expression,) I mean ‘a con
fidence which a man hath in God, that by the merits of Christ
his sins are forgiven, and he reconciled to the favour of God.”
Stop! Do not run your head into a noose again. These are
the words of the Homily.
“In the seventh you grant, ‘that works are not meritorious,
unless accompanied with faith. No, nor then neither. But
Dec. 1760.] JOURNAL. 31
pray do not talk of this any more, till you know the difference
between meritorious and rewardable; otherwise your ignorance
will cause you to blunder on without shame and without end.
“In your eighth you throw out a hard word, which some
body has helped you to, Thaumaturg--what is it?--about
Lay Preachers. When you have answered the arguments in
the ‘Farther Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion, I will
say something more upon that head.
“In the ninth you say something, no way material, about
the houses at Bristol, Kingswood, and Newcastle; and, in the
last, you give me a fair challenge to a ‘personal dispute.”
Not so; you have fallen upon me in public; and to the public
I appeal. Let all men, not any single umpire, judge whether
I have not refuted your charge, and cleared the people called
Methodists from the foul aspersions which, without why or
wherefore, you had thrown upon them. Let all my country
men judge which of us have spoken the words of truth and
soberness, which has reason on his side, and which has treated
the other with a temper suitable to the Gospel.
“If the general voice of mankind gives it against you, I
hope you will be henceforth less flippant with your pen. I
assure you, as little as you think of it, the Methodists are
not such fools as you suppose. But their desire is to live
peaceably with all men; and none desires this more than
About the close of this year, I received a remarkable
account from Ireland:
“WHEN Miss E was about fifteen, she frequently heard
the preaching of the Methodists, so called; and though it made
no deep impression, yet she retained a love for them ever after.
About nineteen she was seized with a lingering illness. She
then began to wrestle with God in prayer, that his love might
be shed abroad in her heart. ‘Then,” said she, “how freely
could I give up all that is dear to me in this world !’ And
from this very time she did not expect, nor indeed desire, to
recover; but only to be cleansed from sin, and to go to Christ.
“Some who visited her, said, “O Miss, you need not fear;
your innocence will bring you to heaven. She earnestly
replied, “Unless the merits of Christ plead for me, and his
mature be imparted to me, I can never enter there.’ And
she was incessantly breaking out into these and the like
expressions, ‘O that I knew my sins were forgiven O that
I was born again! My onc wish is, to know God, and be
with him eternally.”
“She frequently sung or repeated that verse,
O that he would himself impart,
And fix his Eden in my heart,
The sense of sin forgiven :
How would I then throw off my load,
And walk delightfully with God,
And follow Christ to heaven :
“She had now an earnest desire to see some of the
Methodists, and spoke to several, to ask some of those in
Tullamore to visit her. At length her importunity prevailed,
and James Kelly was sent for. On his coming in, she said,
‘I am exceeding glad to see you. I have had a longing
desire of it this month past. I believe the power of God is
with you. If I had health and strength, there should not be
a sermon preached, or a prayer put up, in your preaching
house, but I would be there.”
“I told her, “I hope the Spirit of the Lord will be your
present and eternal Comforter. She answered, ‘I can find
no comfort in any thing but in God alone.” While she
spoke, her soul was melted down. The love of God was shed
abroad in her heart, the tears ran down her cheeks, and she
began to rejoice in God exceedingly. Her mother, seeing
this, was fully convinced that there was more in religion than
she had herself experienced; and began to pray, with many
tears, that God would show her his salvation. This so
affected me, that I could not refrain from tears myself; so we
all wept, and prayed, and sang praise together.
“On my going to her a second time, I found her truly alive
to God. ‘O, she said, ‘how I have longed to see you, that
we may be happy in God together! Come let us sing an
hymn. I gave out,
Of him that did salvation bring,
I could for ever think and sing.
She sung all the time with exceeding joy. Afterwards she said,
‘This is a weary world; but I have almost done with it. O
how I long to be gone ! Some people tell me I may recover;
but I do not thank them; I do not count them my friends.”
On my saying occasionally, ‘There is no satisfaction for sin,
but that which Christ has made by his precious blood;’ she
Jan. 1761.] JOURNAL. 33
answered, “That is all the satisfaction I want; and I believe
he both lived and died for me.”
“After this, she gave a strict charge that none should
be admitted to see her but such as could speak for God;
saying, ‘I do not love to have a word spoken, which is not
to edification. O how unsuitable to me, are all things which
do not tend to the glory of my God!’ On her spitting a
large quantity of blood, one said, ‘You are in great pain.”
She answered, ‘I think little of it. My blessed Redeemer
suffered greater pain for me.’
“When I stood up to go away, she said, ‘I now take my
leave of you. Perhaps we may not meet again in this world;
but I trust we shall meet in heaven. I am going to God.
O may it be soon | I now feel an heaven in my soul.”
“The last time I came was on Sunday, December 14.
Hearing she was extremely ill and wanted rest, we did not go
up, but after a while began singing below. She immediately
heard, sat up in bed, and insisted on our being brought into
the room and singing there. Many times she repeated these
words, ‘Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly l’ And this she
continued to do till, on Wednesday, 17, she resigned her
soul into the hands of her dear Redeemer.”
JANUARY 2, 1761.--I wrote the following letter:
“To the Editor of the London Chronicle.
“Of all the seats of woe on this side hell, few, I suppose,
exceed or even equal Newgate. If any region of horror could
exceed it a few years ago, Newgate in Bristol did; so great
was the filth, the stench, the misery, and wickedness, which
shocked all who had a spark of humanity left. How was I
surprised then, when I was there a few weeks ago! 1. Every
part of it, above stairs and below, even the pit, whercin the
felons are confined at night, is as clean and sweet as a gentle
man’s house; it being now a rule, that every prisoner wash
and clean his apartment throughly twice a weck. 2. Here is
no fighting or brawling. If anythinks himself ill used, the
cause is immediately referred to the Keeper, who hears the
contending parties face to face, and decides the affair at once.
3. The usual grounds of quarrelling are removed. For it is
very rarely that any one cheats or wrongs another, as being
sure, if anything of this kind is discovered, to be committed
to a closer confinement. 4. Here is no drunkenness suffered,
however advantageous it might be to the Keeper, as well as
the tapster : 5. Nor any whoredom; the women prisoners
being marrowly observed, and kept separate from the men:
Nor is any woman of the town now admitted, no, not at any
price. 6. All possible care is taken to prevent idleness:
Those who are willing to work at their callings are provided
with tools and materials, partly by the Keeper, who gives them
credit at a very moderate profit, partly by the alms occasion
ally given, which are divided with the utmost prudence and
impartiality. Accordingly, at this time, among others, a
shoemaker, a tailor, a brazier, and a coachmaker are working
at their several trades. 7. Only on the Lord’s day they
neither work nor play, but dress themselves as clean as they
can, to attend the public Service in the chapel, at which every
person under the roof is present. None is excused unless
sick; in which case he is provided, gratis, both with advice and
medicines. 8. And in order to assist them in things of the
greatest concern, (besides a sermon every Sunday and Thurs
day,) they have a large Bible chained on one side of the
chapel, which any of the prisoners may read. By the blessing
of God on these regulations the prison now has a new face:
Nothing offends either the eye or ear; and the whole has the
appearance of a quiet, serious family. And does not the
Keeper of Newgate deserve to be remembered full as well as
the Man of Ross? May the Lord remember him in that
day! Meantime, will no one follow his example? I am, Sir,
“Your humble servant,
Mon, 5.--This week I wrote to the author of the “West
minster Journal” as follows:
“I HoPE you are a person of impartiality; if so, you
will not insert what is urged on one side of a question only,
but likewise what is offered on the other.
“Your correspondent is, doubtless, a man of sense; and
he seems to write in a good humour: But he is extremely
little acquainted with the persons of whom he undertakes to
give an account.
“There is ‘gone abroad,” says he, “an ungoverned spirit of
enthusiasm, propagated by knaves, and embraced by fools.”
Suffer me now to address the gentleman himself. Sir, you
may call me both a knave and a fool: But prove me either the
Jan. 1761.] JOURNAL, 35
one or the other, if you can. “Why, you are an enthusiast.’
What do you mean by the term? A believer in Jesus Christ?
An assertor of his equality with the Father, and of the entire
Christian Revelation? Do you mean one who maintains the
antiquated doctrines of the New Birth, and Justification by
Faith? Then I am an enthusiast. But if you mean any
thing else, either prove or retract the charge.
“The enthusiasm which has lately gone abroad is faith
which worketh by love. Does this ‘endanger government
itself?’ Just the reverse. Fearing God, it honours the
King. It teaches all men to be subject to the higher powers,
not for wrath, but for conscience’ sake.
“But, ‘mo power in England ought to be independent of
the supreme power.” Most true; yet ‘the Romanists own
the authority of a Pope, independent of civil government.”
They do, and thereby show their ignorance of the English
constitution. “In Great Britain we have many Popes, for so
I must call all who have the souls and bodies of their followers
devoted to them. Call them so, and welcome. But this
does not touch me; nor Mr. Whitefield, Jones, or Romaine;
nor any whom I am acquainted with : None of us have our
followers thus devoted to us. Those who follow the advice
we constantly give are devoted to God, not man. But ‘the
Methodist proclaims he can bring into the field twenty-five
thousand men.” What Methodist? Where and when P
Prove this fact, and I will allow you, I am a Turk.
“‘But it is said they are all good subjects. Perhaps they
are; because under a Protestant government they have all the
indulgence they can wish for.” And do you seriously wish
for a Popish government to abridge them of that indulgence?
“But has not a bad use been made of this? Has not the
decency of religion been perverted?” Not in the least: The
decency of religion is never so well advanced, as by advancing
inward and outward religion together. 2. ‘Have not the
minds of the vulgar been darkened to a total neglect of their
civil and social duties?” Just the contrary: Thousands in
London, as well as elsewhere, have been enlightened to under
stand, and prevailed on to practise, those duties, as they never
did before. 3. ‘Has not the peace of many families been
ruined?’ The lost peace of many families has been restored.
In others, a furious opposition to true religion has occasioned
division, as our Lord foretold it would. 4. ‘Have not the
circumstances of many industrious tradesmen been hurt?’
I believe not. I know no instance; but I know an hundred
tradesmen in London who began to be industrious since they
began to fear God, and their circumstances, low enough till
then, are now easy and affluent.
“I am almost ashamed to spend time upon these thread
bare objections, which have been answered over and over.
But if they are advanced again, they must be answered again,
lest silence should pass for guilt.
“‘But how can the government distinguish between tender
ness of conscience, and schemes of interest?” Nothing more
easy. “They may withdraw the licenses of such.” Sir, you
have forgot the question. Before they withdraw them, they
are to distinguish whether they are such or no. And how
are they to do this? ‘O, it is very easy!” So you leave
them as wise as they were before.
“But, ‘the Methodist who pretends to be of the Church
of England in forms of worship, and differs from her in point
of doctrine, is not, let his pretences be what they will, a
member of that Church. Alas, Sir! your friends will not
thank you for this. You have broke their heads sadly. Is
no man of the Church, let him pretend what he will, who
differs from her in point of doctrine? Au ! obsecro; cave
diveris /* I know not but you may stumble upon scandalum
magnatum : + But stay; you will bring them off quickly.
“A truly good man may scruple signing and swearing to
Articles, that his mind and reason cannot approve of.” But
is he a truly good man who does not scruple signing and
swearing to Articles which he cannot approve of ? However,
this doth not affect us; for we do not differ from our Church
in point of doctrine: But all do who deny justification by
faith; therefore, according to you, they are no members of
the Church of England.
“‘Methodist Preachers, you allow, ‘practise, sign, and
swear whatever is required by law; a very large concession;
“but the reserves they have are incommunicable and unintel
ligible. Favour us, Sir, with a little proof of this; till then
I must plead, Not Guilty. In whatever I sign or swear to, I
have no reserve at all. And I have again and again com
municated my thoughts on most heads, to all mankind; I
* Stop, I beseech you, and beware of what you say.-EDIT.
* Libel on persons of exalted rank.-EDIT.
Jan. 1761.] JOURNAL. 37
believe intelligibly; particularly in the “Appeals to Men
of Reason and Religion.’
“But, “if Methodism, as its professors pretend, be a new
discovery in religion: This is a grievous mistake; we pretend
no such thing. We aver it is the one old religion; as old as
the Reformation, as old as Christianity, as old as Moses, as
old as Adam.
“‘They ought to discover the whole ingredients of which
their nostrum is composed; and have it enrolled in the public
register, to be perused by all the world. It is done. The
whole ingredients of Methodism, so called, have been dis
covered in print over and over; and they are enrolled in a
public register, the Bible, from which we extracted them at
first. ‘Else they ought not to be tolerated. We allow it,
and desire toleration on no other terms. “Nor should they be
suffered to add or alter one grain different from what is so
registered. Most certainly. We ought neither to add or
diminish, nor alter whatever is written in that book.
“I wish, Sir, before you write concerning the Methodists
again, you would candidly read some of their writings.
Common report is not a sure rule of judging: I should be
unwilling to judge of you thereby.
“To sum up the matter. The whole ingredients of our
religion are, love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, fidelity, meekness, temperance. Against these, I
think, there is no law; and, therefore, I still apprehend they
may be tolerated, at least in a Christian country. I am, Sir,
“Your sincere well-wisher,
“JoHN WESLEY.”
Fri. 9.--I rode to Sundom, and preached in the evening;
and the next evening at Bedford. Sunday, 11. I read
Prayers and preached at Everton, both morning and afternoon.
Monday, 12. I rode to Colchester; and, after spending two
or three comfortable days, on Friday, 16, went on to Bury.
I would gladly have stayed a day or two here, had it been
only on account of the severity of the weather; but I had
work to do elsewhere. So I took horse soon after preaching
in the morning, Saturday, 17, though as bitter an one as
most I have known. I never before felt so piercing a wind
as that which met us in riding out of the gate at day-break.
To think of looking up was a vain thing. I knew not whether
I should not lose one of my eyes. The wind affected it as if I
38 REv. J. wesDEY’s [Jan. 1761.
had received a severe blow; so that I had no use of it for a
time. To mend the matter, having a very imperfect direction,
we soon got out of our way. However, we hobbled on, through
miserable roads, till about three in the afternoon we got to
Norwich.-
Sun. 18.--I met the Society in the morning, and many of
them went with me to the cathedral. At two we had the
largest congregation I ever saw at that hour. At five the
House was well filled; and just as long as I was speaking, all
were silent: But when I ceased, the floods lifted up their
voice: One would have thought Bedlam was broke loose.
And thus it always is; the custom began in the reign of King
Log, and continued ever since. The next evening the same
hubbub began again, not among the mob, but the ordinary
hearers. I desired them to stop, and reasoned the case with
them. The effect was far greater than one could expect. The
whole congregation went as quietly and silently away as they
use to do at the Foundery in London.
Tues. 20.--I inquired concerning Yarmouth, a large and
populous town, and as eminent, both for wickedness and
ignorance, as even any sea-port in England. Some had
endeavoured to call them to repentance; but it was at the
hazard of their lives. What could be done more? Why,
last summer God sent thither the regiment in which Howell
Harris was an officer. He preached every night, none daring
to oppose him; and hereby a good seed was sown. Many
were stirred up to seek God; and some of them now earnestly
invited me to come over. I went this afternoon, and preached
in the evening. The House was presently more than filled;
and, instead of the tumult which was expected, all were as
quiet as at London. Indeed the word of God was quick and
powerful among them, as it was again at six in the morning.
At eleven I preached my farewell sermon. I saw none that
was not deeply affected. O fair blossoms | But how many of
these will “bring forth fruit unto perfection?”
In the afternoon I rode back to Norwich, and took an
account of the society there. I found the persons who pro
fessed to meet in class were about three hundred and thirty;
but many of them were as bullocks unaccustomed to the yoke.
Where or what will they be a year hence?
Thur. 22.--We had our first watch-night at the Tabernacle;
at which I could not but observe, though I preached the Law
Feb. 1761.] JOURNAL. 39
from the beginning of my sermon to the end, yet many were
exceedingly comforted. So plain it is that God can send
either terror or comfort to the heart, by whatever means it
pleaseth him.
Sunday, 25, was a day of solemn rejoicing. Both at eight,
at eleven, at two, and at five, God was eminently present in
the congregation; filling their hearts with love, and their
mouths with praise.
In some of the following days I visited the country societies.
Friday, 30. After preaching at the Foundery in the evening,
I met the Bands as usual. While a poor woman was speaking
a few artless words out of the fulness of her heart, a fire
kindled, and ran, as flame among the stubble, through the
hearts of almost all that heard: So, when God is pleased to
work, it matters not how weak, or how mean, the instrument.
Sat. 31.--I spent an hour with one who was as hot as any
of the lambs at the Tabernacle; but she is now a calm, reason
able woman. Indeed God has now breathed a spirit of love
and peace into all that remain united together. Those who
are otherwise minded have left us.
Sun. FEBRUARY 1.--Many were comforted and strength
ened both at the Lord’s Supper, and at the evening service.
I think all jealousies and misunderstandings are now vanished,
and the whole society is well knit together. How long will
they continue so, considering the unparalleled fickleness of the
people in these parts? That God knows. However, he does
work now, and we rejoice therein.
Mon. 2.--I left them with a cheerful heart, and rode on to
Lakenheath. The congregation was large, but to this day
there was no society. So, after preaching, I explained the
nature of a society, and examined those who were willing to
join together. Near half of them had known the love of
God, and seemed alive to him.
Tues. 3.--About noon I preached at Harston, five miles
beyond Cambridge. Here Mr. Berridge's labour has not been
in vain. Several have found peace with God; and a more
artless, loving people I have seldom seen. They were
gathered from all parts. It pleased God to give a manifesta
tion of his love to one woman in the midst of the sermon.
She praised God aloud, and inflamed many hearts with love
and thankfulness.
In the evening I preached at Melbourn, another small town,
about four miles from Harston. Many from Harston walked
thither, and from the neighbouring villages; and surely God
was in the midst of them, just as in our Bristol congregations
at the beginning.
Hence we rode, on Ash-Wednesday, FEBRUARY 4, to Mr.
Hicks, who showed me the way to his church, at Wrestling
worth; where I exhorted a large and serious congregation,
from the Scripture appointed for the Epistle, to “rend their
hearts, and not their garments, and turn unto the Lord their
God.”
In the evening Mr. Berridge read Prayers, and I preached,
at Everton. Few of them are now affected as at first, the
greater part having found peace with God. But there is a
gradual increasing of the work in the souls of many believers.
Thur. 5.--I called at Barford, half-way to Bedford, and was
agreeably surprised to meet J. C., from London, who came to
Bedford the day before, and walked over with Mr. Parker.
We had a far larger congregation than I expected; and all
were deeply serious. I preached at Bedford in the evening, on
Friday at Sundon, and on Saturday returned to London.
Monday, 9, and the following days, I visited the classes.
Friday, 13, being the General Fast-day, the chapel in West
Street, as well as the rest, was throughly filled with serious
hearers. Surely God is well pleased with even these outward
humiliations, as an acknowledgment that he is the Disposer of
all events; and they give some check, if it be but for a time,
to the floods of ungodliness. Besides, we cannot doubt but
there are some good men in most of the congregations then
assembled; and we know, “the effectual fervent prayer” even
of one “righteous man availeth much.”
This week I published, in the “London Chronicle,”
an answer to a Tract entitled, “A Caveat against the
Methodists.” It is here subjoined:--
“To the Editor of the London Chronicle.
“SIR, February 19, 1761.
“Is it not surprising that every person of understanding
does not discern, at the very first view, that the Tract entitled,
“A Caveat against the Methodists,’ is, in reality, a Caveat
against the Protestants? Do not the arguments conclude, (if
they conclude at all,) not against the Methodists only, but
against the whole body of Protestants? The names, indeed,
Feb. 1761.] JOURN AI. 4]
of Mr. Whitefield and Mr. Wesley are used; but this is
mere finesse ! Greater men are designed, and all along are
wounded through our sides.
“I was long in hopes of seeing an answer to this artful
performance, from some one of more leisure, as well as
abilities; and some whose name would have recommended
his work: For that thought has something of truth in it,
O what a tuneful wonder seized the throng,
When Marlbro's conquering name alarm'd the foe!
Had Whiznowisky led the armies on,
The General's scarecrow name had foil'd each blow.
However, who knows but reason, for once, may be stronger
than prejudice? And many may forget my scarecrow
name, and mind not who speaks, but what is spoken. I am
pleading now, not for the Methodists only, but for the whole
body of Protestants; first, for the Church of England;
then for the Protestants of every denomination; in doing
which I shall first give the substance of each Section of the
Romish Tract: Secondly, answer, and retort it upon the
members of the Church of Rome. O that this may incite
some more skilful advocate to supply my lack of service |
“‘The Methodists’ (Protestants) “are not the people
of God; they are not true Gospel Christians; nor is their
new-raised society the true church of Christ, nor any part
of it.” (P. 3.)
“‘This is demonstrated by the word of God, marking
out the people of God, the true church of Christ, by such
characters as cannot agree to the Methodists, or any other
new-raised sect or community.” (Ibid.)
“‘The Old Testament is full of prophecies relating to the
church: And the New Testament makes glorious promises
to it, and gives glorious characters of it.” (P. 4.)
“‘Now all those prophecies, promises, and characters, point
out a society founded by Christ himself, and by his commission
propagated throughout the world, which should flourish till
time should end, ever one, ever holy, ever orthodox; secured
against error by the perpetual presence of Christ; ever
directed by the Spirit of truth; having a perpetual succession
of Pastors and Teachers, divinely appointed and divinely
assisted: But no part of this character is applicable to any
new-raised sect, who have no succession from, or connexion
with, that one holy society; therefore no modern sect can
be any part of the people of God.” (P. 5.)
“I answer, It is true, ‘all these promises, prophecies, and
characters, point out a society founded by Christ himself, and
by his commission propagated throughout the world, which
should flourish till time should end: And such is the Catholic
church, that is, the whole body of men, endued with faith
working by love, dispersed over the whole earth, in Europe,
Asia, Africa, and America. And this church is ‘ever one:’
In all ages and nations it is the one body of Christ. It is
“ever holy; for no unholy man can possibly be a member of
it. It is ‘ever orthodox;’ so is every holy man, in all things
necessary to salvation: “Secured against error, in things
essential, ‘by the perpetual presence of Christ; and ever
directed by the Spirit of truth, in the truth that is after god
liness. This church has “a perpetual succession of Pastors
and Teachers, divinely appointed, and divinely assisted.’
And there has never been wanting, in the Reformed
Churches, such a succession of Pastors and Teachers; men
both divinely appointed, and divinely assisted; for they
convert sinners to God: A work none can do unless God him
self doth appoint them thereto, and assist them therein; there
fore every part of this character is applicable to them. Their
Teachers are the proper successors of those who have delivered
down, through all generations, the faith once delivered to
the saints; and their members have true spiritual communion
with the ‘one holy’ society of true believers: Consequently,
although they are not the whole “people of God, yet are
they an undeniable part of his people.
“On the contrary, the Church of Rome, in its present form,
was not ‘founded by Christ himself. All the doctrines and
practices wherein she differs from us, were not instituted by
Christ,-they were unknown to the ancient church of Christ,
--they are unscriptural, novel corruptions; neither is that
Church ‘propagated throughout the world.” Therefore, if
either antiquity, or universality, be essential thereto, the
Church of Rome cannot be “the true church of Christ.’
“Nor is the Church of Rome one ; it is not in unity with
itself; it is to this day torn with numberless divisions. And
Feb. 1761.] JOURNAL. 43
it is impossible it should be “the one church, unless a part
can be the whole; seeing the Asiatic, the African, and the
Muscovite Churches, (to name no more,) never were
contained in it.
“Neither is it holy: The generality of its members are no
holier than Turks or Heathens. You need not go far for
proof of this: Look at the Romanists in London or Dublin.
Are these the holy, the only holy church? Just such holiness
is in the bottomless pit.
“Nor is it ‘secured against error, either ‘by Christ’ or “his
Spirit; witness Pope against Pope, Council against Council,
contradicting, anathematizing, each other. The instances are
too numerous to be recited.
“Neither are the generality of her ‘Pastors and Teachers’
either ‘divinely appointed’ or ‘divinely assisted. If God had
sent them, he would confirm the word of his messengers; but
he does not; they convert no sinners to God; they convert
many to their own opinion, but not to the knowledge or love
of God. He that was a drunkard, is a drunkard still; he that
was filthy, is filthy still; therefore neither are they ‘assisted’
by him; so they and their flocks wallow in sin together:
Consequently, (whatever may be the case of some particular
souls,) it must be said, if your own marks be true, the Roman
Catholics in general are not ‘the people of God.’”
It may be proper to add here the second section, which is
all I had leisure to write, though it was not published till the
following week:--
“‘The Methodist’ (Protestant) ‘Teachers are not the true
Ministers of Christ; nor are they called or sent by him.’ (P.6.)
“‘This appears from what has been already demonstrated.
For if the Protestants are not the true people of Christ, their
Ministers cannot be the true Ministers of Christ.” (Ibid.)
“Farther, ‘The true Ministers came down by succession
from the Apostles. But the Protestant Teachers do not. There
fore they are not the true Ministers of Christ.” (Ibid.)
“‘All power in the church of Christ comes from him; so
that whoever, without a commission from him, intrudes into the
pastoral office, is a thief and a robber. Now, the commission
can be conveyed but two ways; either immediately from God
himself, as it was to the Apostles, or from men who have
the authority handed down to them from the Apostles.
“‘But this commission has not been conveyed to Protestant
Preachers either of these ways. Not immediately from God
himself; for how do they prove it? By what miracles?
Neither by men deriving authority from the Apostles,
through the channel of the Church. And they stand divided
in communion from all Churches that have any pretensions to
antiquity. Their doctrine of justification by faith alone, was
anathematized at its first appearance, by the undoubted heirs
of the Apostles, the Pastors of the Apostolic churches;
consequently they are sent by no other but him who sent all
the false prophets from the beginning.” (Pp. 8, 9.)
“I answer, ‘from what has been already demonstrated,’ that
nothing will follow; for you have demonstrated just nothing.
“Now for your ‘farther’ proof. ‘The true Ministers came
down by succession from the Apostles.’ So do the Protestant
Ministers, if the Romish do; the English in particular; as
even one of yourselves, F. Courayer, has irrefragably proved.
“‘All power in the church of Christ comes from him; either
immediately from himself, or from men who have the authority
handed down to them from the Apostles. But this commission
has not been conveyed to the Protestant Preachers either of
these ways: Not immediately; for by what miracles do they
prove it?” So said Cardinal Bellarmine long ago. Neither
‘by men deriving authority from the Apostles. Read F.
Courayer, and know better. Neither are the Protestants
‘divided from any ‘Churches’ who have true ‘pretensions
to antiquity.’ But ‘their doctrine of justification by faith
alone was anathematized, at its first appearance, by the
undoubted heirs of the Apostles, the Pastors of the Apostolic
church. By the Prelates at the Council of Trent it was;
who thereby anathematized the Apostle Paul, to all intents and
purposes. Here you throw off the mask; otherwise you might
have passed for a Protestant a little longer. ‘Consequently
they are sent by no other but him who sent all the false pro
phets from the beginning.’ Sir, we thank you. This is really
a very modest assertion for the subject of a Protestant King.
“But to turn the tables: I said, ‘If the Romish Bishops
do.” For this I absolutely deny. I deny that the Romish
Bishops came down by uninterrupted succession from the
Feb. 1761.] JOURNAL. 45
Apostles. I never could see it proved; and, I am persuaded
I never shall. But unless this is proved, your own Pastors,
on your principles, are no Pastors at all.
“But farther: It is a doctrine of your Church, that the
intention of the administrator is essential to the validity of the
sacraments which are administered by him. Now, are you
assured of the intention of every Priest from whom you have
received the Host? If not, you do not know but what you
received as the sacrament of the altar, was no sacrament at
all. Are you assured of the intention of the Priest who
baptized you? If not, perhaps you are not baptized at all.
To come close to the point in hand: If you pass for a Priest,
are you assured of the intention of the Bishop that ordained
you? If not, you may happen to be no Priest, and so all
your ministry is nothing worth : Nay, by the same rule, he
may happen to be no Bishop. And who can tell how often
this has been the case? But if there has been only one
instance in a thousand years, what becomes of your
uninterrupted succession?
“This ad hominem. But I have a word more ad rem.
Can a man teach what he does not know? Is it possible
a man should teach others what he does not know himself?
Certainly it is not. Can a Priest then teach his hearers
the way to heaven, marked out in our Lord's Sermon on the
Mount, if he does not know or understand the way himself?
Nothing is more impossible. But how many of your Priests
know nothing about it ! What avails then their commission
to teach what they cannot teach, because they know it not?
Did God then send these men on a fool’s errand? send them
to do what they cannot do? O say not so ! And what will
be the event of their attempting to teach they know not
what? Why, ‘if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall
into the pit.’”
Sat. 21.--I spent some hours with Mr. L. and Mr. I'Anson,
in order to prevent another Chancery suit. And though the
matter could not then be fully adjusted, yet the suit did not
go on.
Tues. 24.--I retired to Lewisham, and transcribed the list
of the society. About an hundred and sixty I left out, to
whom I can do no good at present. The number of those
which now remain, is two thousand three hundred and
seventy-five.
Fri. 27.--At twelve I met about thirty persons who had
experienced a deep work of God; and I appointed an hour for
meeting them every week. Whether they are saved from sin
or no, they are certainly full of faith and love, and peculiarly
helpful to my soul.
Sun. MARCH 1.--We had a happy love-feast at the
chapel. Many of our brethren spoke plainly and artlessly
what God had done for their souls. I think none were
offended; but many were strengthened and comforted.
Wed. 4.--I was scarce come into the room where a few
believers were met together, when one began to tremble
exceedingly, and soon after sunk to the floor. After a
violent struggle, she burst out into prayer, which was quickly
changed into praise. She then declared, “The Lamb of God
has taken away all my sins.” She spoke many strong words
to the same effect, rejoicing with joy unspeakable.
Fri. 6.--I met again with those who believe God has
delivered them from the root of bitterness. Their number
increases daily. I know not if fifteen or sixteen have not
received the blessing this week.
Mon. 9.--I set out early, and about noon preached at High
Wycombe, where the dry bones began to shake again. In the
afternoon I rode on to Oxford, and spent an agreeable evening
with Mr. H. His openness and frankness of behaviour were
both pleasing and profitable. Such conversation I want: But
I do not wonder it is offensive to men of nice ears.
Tues. 10.--We rode to Evesham, where I found the poor
shattered society almost sunk into nothing. And no wonder,
since they have been almost without help, till Mr. Mather
came. In the evening I preached in the Town-Hall. Both at
this time, and at five in the morning, God applied his word,
and many found a desire to “strengthen the things that
remained.” I designed to have rested on Wednesday, but
finding that notice had been given of my preaching at
Stanley, we got thither, through roads almost impassable,
about noon, and found more people than the House could
contain; so I stood in the yard, and proclaimed free salvation
to a loving, simple people. Several were in tears, and all of
them so thankful that I could not repent of my labour.
The congregation at Evesham in the evening was thrice as
large as the night before. Indeed many of them did not design
to hear, or to let any one else hear; but they were over-ruled,
March, 1761.] JOURNAL. 47
and behaved with tolerable decency, till the service was over:
Then they roared amain; but I walked straight through them,
and none offered the least rudeness.
Thur. 12.--About one I preached at Redditch, to a deeply
serious congregation; about seven, in the Room at Birming
ham, now far too small for the congregation. Friday, 13.
Many flocked together at five; and far more than the Room
would contain in the evening. Perhaps the time is come for
the Gospel to take root even in this barren soil.
Sat. 14.--I rode to Wednesbury. Sunday, 15. I made a
shift to preach within at eight in the morning; but in the
afternoon I knew not what to do, having a pain in my side,
and a sore throat. However, I resolved to speak as long as I
could. I stood at one end of the House, and the people
(supposed to be eight or ten thousand) in the field adjoining.
I spoke from, “I count all things but loss, for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.” When I had
done speaking, my complaints were gone. At the love-feast
in the evening, many, both men and women, spoke their
experience in a manner which affected all that heard. One in
particular said, “For seventeen or eighteen years I thought
God had forgotten me. Neither I nor any under my roof
could believe. But now, blessed be his name, he has taken
me and all my house; and given me, and my wife, and our
seven children, to rejoice together in God our Saviour.”
Mon. 16.--I intended to rest two or three days; but being
pressed to visit Shrewsbury, and having no other time, I rode
over to-day, though upon a miserable beast. When I came in,
my head ached as well as my side. I found the door of the
place where I was to preach surrounded by a numerous mob.
But they seemed met, only to stare. Yet part of them came
in ; almost all that did (a large number) behaved quietly and
seriously.
Tues. 17.--At five the congregation was large, and appeared
not a little affected. The difficulty now was, how to get back.
For I could not ride the horse on which I came. But this
too was provided for. We met in the street with one who lent
me his horse, which was so easy, that I grew better and better
till I came to Wolverhampton. None had yet preached
abroad in this furious town; but I was resolved, with God’s
help, to make a trial, and ordered a table to be set in the
inn-yard. Such a number of wild men I have seldom seen;
but they gave me no disturbance, either while I preached,
or when I afterwards walked through the midst of them.
About five I preached to a far larger congregation at
Dudley, and all as quiet as at London. The scene is changed,
since the dirt and stones of this town were flying about me
on every side.
Wed. 18.--By talking with several at Wednesbury, I found
God is carrying on his work here as at London. We have
ground to hope, one prisoner was set at full liberty under the
sermon on Saturday morning; another under that on Saturday
evening. One or more received remission of sins on Sunday;
on Monday morning another, and on Wednesday yet another
believed the blood of Jesus Christ had cleansed him from
all sin. In the evening I could scarce think but more than
one heard Him say, “I will; be thou clean l’” Indeed so
wonderfully was He present till near midnight, as if He
would have healed the whole congregation.
Thur. 19.--After preaching at Bilbrook I rode on to
Burslem, and preached at half-hour past five, in an open place
on the top of the hill, to a large and attentive congregation;
though it rained almost all the time, and the air was extremely
cold. The next morning, (being Good-Friday,) I did not
preach till eight. But even then, as well as in the evening, the
cold considerably lessened the congregation. Such is human
wisdom | So small are the things which divert mankind from
what might be the means of their eternal salvation |
Sat. 21.--About ten I preached at Biddulph, and about
six at Congleton. Sunday, 22. About one I preached at
Macclesfield, near the preaching-house. The congregation
was large, though the wind was sharp. But it was more than
doubled after the evening service, while I opened and
enforced the solemn declaration, “Him hath God exalted
with his own right hand, to be a Prince and a Saviour.” In
the evening I rode on to Manchester.
Mon. 23.--After preaching at five, I hastened forward, and
reached Leeds about five in the evening, where I had desired
all the Preachers in those parts to meet me; and an happy
meeting we had both in the evening and morning. I afterwards
inquired into the state of the societies in Yorkshire and Lincoln
shire. I find the work of God increases on every side; but
particularly in Lincolnshire, where there has been no work like
this, since the time I preached at Epworth on my father's tomb.
April, 1761.] JOURNAL. 49
In the afternoon I talked with several of those who believe
they are saved from sin; and, after a close examination, I
found reason to hope that fourteen of them were not deceived.
In the evening I expounded the thirteenth chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, and exhorted all to weighthemselves
in that balance, and see if they were not “found wanting.”
Wed. 25.--I took horse early, breakfasted with Mr. Venn,
and about four in the afternoon came to Stockport. Finding
the congregation waiting, I preached immediately, and then
rode on to Manchester; where I rested on Thursday. Friday,
27. I rode to Bridgefield, in the midst of the Derbyshire
mountains, and cried to a large congregation, “If any man
thirst, let him come unto me and drink.” And they did indeed
drink in the word, as the thirsty earth the showers. About
six I preached at Stockport. Here I inquired after a young
man, who was sometime since much in earnest for salvation.
But it was not long before he grew quite cold, and left the
society. Within a few months after, he left the world, and that
by his own hand! The next day I returned to Manchester.
Sun. 29.--We had an uncommon blessing, both morning
and afternoon. In the evening I met the believers, and
strongly exhorted them to “go on unto perfection.” To many
of them it seemed a new doctrine. However, they all
received it in love; and a flame was kindled, which I trust
neither men nor devils shall ever be able to quench.
Tues. 31.--I rode to Altringham. We had four rooms,
which opened into each other; but they would not near contain
the congregation, so that many were obliged to stand without.
I believe many were wounded, and some much comforted.
Perhaps this town will not be quite so furious as it has been.
In the evening we had abundance of genteel people at
Manchester, while I described faith as “the evidence of
things not seen.” I left Manchester in the morning, APRIL 1,
in a better condition than ever I knew it before; such is the
shaking, not only among the dry bones, but likewise among
the living souls.
About noon I preached at Little-Leigh and at Chester in
the evening. Thursday, 2. I rode over to Tattenhall, eight
or nine miles from Chester. When we came, the town seemed
to be all in an uproar; yet when I began preaching, (in the
open air, the House not being large enough to contain one
quarter of the congregation,) none opposed, or made the least
disturbance, the fear of God falling upon them. I think
Tattenhall will be less bitter for the time to come. Well
may Satan be angry with field-preaching !
Fri. 3.--I preached, about one, at Mould, in Flintshire, and
was again obliged to preach abroad, though the wind was
exceeding rough. All were deeply attentive. I preached in
the evening at Chester, and in the morning set out for
Liverpool: I came thither (preaching at Warrington by the
way) in the evening. The election seemed to have driven
the common sort of people out of their senses. But on
Sunday they were tolerably recovered, and the town looked
like itself. I heard two useful sermons at our parish church:
One upon, “Follow peace with all men, and holiness;” the
other on, “Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.” I
pity those who “can learn nothing at church.”
Mon. 13.--I left them at Liverpool, a little increased in
number, but very considerably in strength; being now entirely
united together in judgment, as well as in affection.
About noon, I preached to a serious congregation at
Downham-Green, near Wigan; but to a far more serious one
in the evening, at Bolton. I find few places like this; all
disputes are forgot; and the Christians do indeed love one
another. When I visited the classes, on Wednesday, 15,
I did not find a disorderly walker among them; no, nor a
trifler. They appeared to be, one and all, seriously seeking
salvation.
Thur. 16.--After preaching at noon, I rode to Lower
Darwen, near Blackburn, where a large congregation behaved
with deep seriousness. Leaving honest Mr. Grimshaw to
preach in the morning, I set out early, and in the evening
reached a little quiet house a few miles beyond Kendal, to
which, I believe, we did not come in vain. The man of the
house, having been long ill, was thankful for advice with
regard to his bodily disorder. And his guests appeared right
willing to receive some advice with respect to their souls.
Sat. 18.--We were soon lost on the mountains; but in an
hour we found a cottage, and a good woman, who bade her son
“take the galloway and guide them to the fell foot.” There
we met a poor man just coming from a Doctor, who, I think,
had quite mistaken his case. Perhaps his meeting us may
save his life. He piloted us over the next mountain, the like
to which I never beheld either in Wales or Germany. As we
April, 1761.] JOURNAL, 51
were climbing the third, a man overtook us, who was going
the same road. So he accompanied us till we were in a plain,
level way, which in three hours brought us to Whitehaven.
Sun. 19.--I preached morning and evening at the Gins, to
far more people than the house would have contained. At one
I preached in the assembly-room at Workington. The whole
congregation behaved well; though I could not perceive that
the greater part of them understood any thing of the matter.
Wed. 22.--About noon I preached at Branthwayte, and in
the evening at Lorton. Who would imagine that Deism
should find its way into the heart of these enormous moun
tains? Yet so it is. Yea, and one who once knew the love
of God is a strenuous advocate for it.
Sat. 25.--As the people at Whitehaven are usually full of
zeal, right or wrong, I this evening showed them the nature
of Christian zeal. Perhaps some of them may now distinguish
the flame of love, from a fire kindled in hell.
Sun. 26.--I preached in the morning at the Gins; in the
Room at one; and about five at Cockermouth, on the steps
of the market-house. Even the genteel hearers were decent;
many of the rest seemed deeply affected. The people of the
town have never been uncivil. Surely they will not always be
unfruitful.
Mon. 27.--I preached at eight in the market-place at
Wigton. The congregation, when I began, consisted of one
woman, two boys, and three or four little girls; but in a
quarter of an hour we had most of the town. I was a good
deal moved at the exquisite self-sufficiency which was visible
in the countenance, air, and whole deportment of a con
siderable part of them. This constrained me to use a very
uncommon plainness of speech. They bore it well. Who
knows but some may profit?
Before noon we came to Solway-Frith. The guide told us it
was not passable; but I resolved to try, and got over well.
Having lost ourselves but twice or thrice, in one of the most
difficult roads I ever saw, we came to Moffat in the evening.
Tuesday, 28. We rode partly over the mountains, partly with
mountains on either hand, between which was a clear, winding
river, and about four in the afternoon reached Edinburgh.
Here I met Mr. Hopper, who had promised to preach in the
evening, in a large Room, lately an episcopal meeting-house:
Wednesday, 29. It being extremely cold, I preached in the
same Room at seven. Some of the reputable hearers cried
out in amaze, “Why, this is sound doctrine ! Is this he of
whom Mr. Wh used to talk so?” Talk as he will, I
shall not retaliate.
I preached again in the evening, and the next day rode
round by the Queen’s Ferry to Dundee; but, the wind being
high, the boatmen could not, at least would not, pass. Nor
could we pass the next day till between nine and ten. We
then rode on through Montrose to Stonehaven. Here Mr.
Memis met us; and on Saturday morning brought us to his
house at Aberdeen.
In the afternoon I sent to the Principal and Regent, to
desire leave to preach in the College-Close. This was readily
granted; but as it began to rain, I was desired to go into the
Hall. I suppose this is full an hundred feet long, and seated
all around. The congregation was large, notwithstanding the
rain, and full as large at five in the morning.
Sun. MAY 3.--I heard two useful sermons at the kirk, one
preached by the Principal of the College, the other by the
Divinity Professor. A huge multitude afterwards gathered
together in the College-Close; and all that could hear seemed
to receive the truth in love. I then added about twenty to
the little society. Fair blossoms ! But how many of these will
bring forth fruit?
Mon. 4.--We had another large congregation at five.
Before noon twenty more came to me, desiring to cast in their
lot with us, and appearing to be cut to the heart.
About noon I took a walk to the King’s College, in Old
Aberdeen. It has three sides of a square, handsomely built,
not unlike Queen’s College in Oxford. Going up to see the
Hall, we found a large company of ladies, with several gentle
men. They looked, and spoke to one another, after which one
of the gentlemen took courage and came to me. He said,
“We came last night to the College-Close, but could not
hear, and should be extremely obliged if you would give us
a short discourse here.” I knew not what God might have
to do; and so began without delay, on, “God was in Christ,
reconciling the world unto himself.” I believe the word was
not lost: It fell as dew on the tender grass.
In the afternoon I was walking in the library of the
Marischal College, when the Principal and the Divinity
Professor came to me; and the latter invited me to his
May, 1761.] JOURNAL, 53
lodgings, where I spent an hour very agreeably. In the
evening, the eagerness of the people made them ready to
trample each other under foot. It was some time before they
were still enough to hear; but then they devoured every word.
After preaching, Sir Archibald Grant (whom business had
called to town) sent and desired to speak to me. I could not
then, but promised to wait upon him, with God’s leave, in
my return to Edinburgh.
Tues. 5.--I accepted the Principal's invitation, and spent
an hour with him at his house. I observed no stiffness at all,
but the easy good breeding of a man of sense and learning.
I suppose both he and all the Professors, with some of the
Magistrates, attended in the evening. I set all the windows
open; but the Hall, notwithstanding, was as hot as a bagnio.
But this did not hinder either the attention of the people, or
the blessing of God.
Wed, 6.--We dined at Mr. Ogilvy's, one of the Ministers,
between whom the city is divided. A more open-hearted,
friendly man, I know not that I ever saw. And indeed I
have scarce seen such a set of Ministers in any town of Great
Britain or Ireland.
At half-hour after six I stood in the College-Close, and
proclaimed Christ crucified. My voice was so strengthened
that all could hear; and all were earnestly attentive. I have
now “cast” my “bread upon the waters:” May I “find it
again after many days l”
Thur. 7.--Leaving near ninety members in the Society, I
rode over to Sir A. Grant’s, near Monymusk, about twenty
miles north-west from Aberdeen. It lies in a fruitful and
pleasant valley, much of which is owing to Sir Archibald’s
improvements, who has ploughed up abundance of waste
ground, and planted some millions of trees. His stately old
house is surrounded by gardens, and rows of trees, with a
clear river on one side. And about a mile from his house he
has laid out a small valley into walks and gardens, on one
side of which the river runs. On each side rises a steep
mountain; one rocky and bare, the other covered with trees,
row above row, to the very top.
About six we went to the church. It was pretty well
filled with such persons as we did not look for so near the
Highlands. But if we were surprised at their appearance, we
were much more so at their singing. Thirty or forty sung an
anthem after sermon, with such voices as well as judgment,
that I doubt whether they could have been excelled at any
cathedral in England.
Fri. 8.--We rode to Glammis, about sixty-four measured
miles; and on Saturday, 9, about sixty-six more, to
Edinburgh. I was tired: However, I would not disappoint
the congregation; and God gave me strength according to
my day.
Sun. 10.--I had designed to preach near the Infirmary;
but some of the managers would not suffer it. So I preached
in our Room, morning and evening, even to the rich and
honourable. And I bear them witness, they will endure plain
dealing, whether they profit by it or not.
Mon. 11.--I took my leave of Edinburgh for the present.
The situation of the city, on a hill shelving down on both
sides, as well as to the east, with the stately castle upon a
craggy rock on the west, is inexpressibly fine. And the main
street, so broad and finely paved, with the lofty houses on
either hand, (many of them seven or eight stories high,) is far
beyond any in Great Britain. But how can it be suffered,
that all manner of filth should still be thrown even into this
street continually? Where are the Magistracy, the Gentry,
the Nobility of the land? Have they no concern for the
honour of their nation? How long shall the capital city of
Scotland, yea, and the chief street of it, stink worse than a
common-sewer? Will no lover of his country, or of decency
and common sense, find a remedy for this?
Holyrood-House, at the entrance of Edinburgh, the ancient
Palace of the Scottish Kings, is a noble structure. It was
rebuilt and furnished by King Charles the Second. One side
of it is a picture-gallery, wherein are pictures of all the
Scottish Kings, and an original one of the celebrated Queen
Mary: It is scarce possible for any who looks at this to think
her such a monster as some have painted her; nor indeed for
any who considers the circumstances of her death, equal to
that of an ancient martyr.
I preached in the evening at Musselburgh, and at five in the
morning. Then we rode on to Haddington, where (the rain
driving me in) I preached between nine and ten in Provost
Dickson's parlour. About one I preached at North-Berwick,
a pretty large town, close to the sea-shore; and at seven in
the evening, (the rain continuing,) in the House at Dunbar.
May, 1761.] JOURNAL. 55
Wed. 13.--It being a fair, mild evening, I preached near
the quay to most of the inhabitants of the town, and spoke
full as plain as the evening before. Every one seemed to
receive it in love; probably if there was regular preaching
here, much good might be done.
Thur. 14.--I set out early, and preached at noon on the
Bowling-Green, at Berwick-upon-Tweed. In the evening I
preached at Alnwick. Friday, 15. Abundance of soldiers
came in, on their way to Germany. Many of these attended
the preaching, to whom I could not but make a particular
application. And who knows, but what they have now heard
may stand them in stead in a day of trial?
Sat. 16.--One of our friends importuned me much to give
them a sermon at Warksworth. And a post-chaise came for
me to the door; in which I found one waiting for me, whom,
in the bloom of youth, mere anguish of soul had brought to
the gates of death. She told me the troubles which held her
in on every side, from which she saw no way to escape. I
told her, “The way lies straight before you. What you
want is the pure love of God. shortly. I believe God will give it you
Perhaps it is his good pleasure to make you, a poor
bruised reed, the first witness here of that great salvation.
Look for it just as you are, unfit, unworthy, unholy, by simple
faith, every day, every hour.” She did feel the next day
something she could not comprehend, and knew not what to
call it. In one of the trials which used to sink her to the
earth, she was all calm, all peace and love; enjoying so deep
a communion with God, as nothing external could interrupt.
Ah! thou child of affliction, of sorrow and pain, hath Jesus
found out thee also ? And he is able to find and bring back
thy husband, as far as he is wandered out of the way.
About noon I preached at Warksworth, to a congregation
as quiet and attentive as that at Alnwick. How long shall
we forget that God can raise the dead? Were not we dead
till he quickened us?
A little above the town, on one side of the river, stands the
remains of a magnificent castle. On the other side, toward
the bottom of a steep hill, covered with wood, is an ancient
chapel, with several apartments adjoining to it, hewn in the
solid rock. The windows, the pillars, the communion-table,
and several other parts are entire. But where are the inhabit
ants? Gathered to their fathers, some of them, I hope, in
Abraham’s bosom, till rocks, and rivers, and mountains flee
away, and the dead, small and great, stand before God |
Sun. 17.--I preached at eight in Alnwick, and about one
at Alemouth; a poor, barren place, where as yet there is no
fruit of all the seed which has been sown. But there may be,
since many are still willing to hear.
In the evening a multitude of people and a little army of
soldiers were gathered in the market-place at Alnwick. In
the morning they were to march for Germany. I hope some
of them have put their armour on.
Mon. 18.--At nine I preached to a large and serious
congregation at Widrington. Thence we rode to Morpeth.
As it was a rainy day, they expected me to preach in the
Room. But observing a large covered place in the market
place, I went thither without delay. It was soon more than
filled; and many, soldiers and others, stood on the outside,
notwithstanding the rain. Why should we despair of doing
good in any place, because we do not see present fruit? At
five I preached to the honest, simple-hearted colliers at
Placey, and before sunset reached Newcastle.
Tuesday, 19, was a day of rest. In the evening God was
with us of a truth; and many felt their hearts burn with
fervent desire of being renewed in the whole image of God.
The same flame was kindled at Gateshead-Fell, while I was
opening and applying those words, “Every one that hath this
hope in him, purifieth himself, even as He is pure.”
Thur. 21.--I was much struck with a story told by
Ephraim Syrus. I wonder it was never translated into
English. It is as follows:-
“My beloved brethren, I have a desire to relate to you what
our brother Abraham did in his old age. This blessed man had
a brother according to the flesh, who had an only child. When
her father fell asleep she remained an orphan. Her friends
brought her to him, being six years old. He ordered her to be
placed in the outer cell: He himself abode in the inner. A
little door was between them. He taught her the Psalms and
the other Scriptures, and watched and sang with her. And as
he lived an austere life, so did she, willingly profiting in every
exercise, and labouring to excel in all virtues. The holy man
often besought God for her with tears, that her heart might
be fixed on God, and not entangled with the care of worldly
things; for her father had left her much wealth, which by his
May, 1761.] JOURNAL. 57
advice she gave to the poor. And she entreated him, saying,
‘Pray for me, that I may be delivered from evil thoughts,
and from all the wiles and snares of the devil.” The blessed
man rejoiced, seeing her good conversation, and forwardness,
and tears; her lowliness, meekness, quietness of spirit, and
earnest love to God. And for twenty years she thus exercised
herself with him, as a fair lamb, a spotless dove.
“When the twentieth year was fulfilled, the devil was mad
against her, and lay in wait to get her into his net. There
was a man, in name religious, but not in truth, who frequently
came to consult Abraham. He saw the maid, and his heart
burned within him. He lay in wait for her a whole year, till
her heart was inflamed also: And opening the door of her cell,
she went out to him, and consented to his will. But no sooner
had she committed wickedness, than she rent her clothes,
smote her breast, and thought of putting an end to her own
life; for she said in herself, ‘Now I am dead, and I have lost
all my time and all my labour, and my austerity and my tears
are perished, and I have destroyed my own soul, and I have
brought sorrow upon the man of God, and am become a
laughing-stock to the devil: Why do I live any longer? Ah
me, what have I done ! Ah me ! from whence, how low am
I fallen How shall I be hid? Where shall I go? Into what
pit shall I cast myself? Where is the exhortation of the
blessed man, Keep thy soul spotless for thy immortal Bride
groom ? I dare no more look up to Heaven I am lost both to
God and men. I dare not approach that holy man, sinner as I
am, and full of uncleanness. Were I to make such an attempt,
surely fire would come out of that door, and consume me. It
is better for me to go where none knows me; for I am undone,
and there is no salvation for me!’ And rising up, she went
straight to another city, and became servant at an inn.
“A little before this, Abraham saw a vision;--a dragon,
great and terrible, rising out of his place; and, coming to his
cell, he found a dove, and devoured it, and then returned to
his place. The holy man, coming to himself, was much
troubled, and wept bitterly, and said, ‘Thou, Lord, knowest
all things; and thou only knowest what this vision meaneth.’
After two days he saw the same dragon again; and he came
out of his place to the blessed man, and, laying his head under
Abraham’s feet, burst asunder, and the dove was found alive
in the dragon's belly.
“Coming to himself, he called once and again, saying,
‘Child, where art thou? Behold, here are two days that
thou hast not opened thy mouth in the praise of God.”
Finding that none answered, and that she was not there, he
perceived the vision related to her; and he groaned in spirit,
and said, “O Saviour of the world, bring back this lamb into
thy fold, that my grey hairs come not down with sorrow to
the grave | Lord, despise not my supplication; but send
down thy hand, and take her out of the mouth of the dragon
that hath devoured her !’
“After a season he heard where she was; and, having
learned all things concerning her, he called one of his friends,
and said to him, ‘Bring me an horse and the habit of a
soldier:’ And having put it on, with a large cap on his head,
he left his cell, and rode away. Being come to the place,
he alighted, and went in; and, after a time, said to the inn
keeper, ‘Friend, I have heard thou hast a beautiful damsel
here: Call her to me, that I may rejoice with her. Being
called, she came. When the holy man saw her in her harlot’s
attire, he was melting into tears; but he refrained himself, that
she might not perceive it. After they sat down, she embraced
him, and kissed his neck; and she smelled the smell of his
cell, and called to mind past things; and, groaning deeply,
said, ‘Woe is me! What am I?’ The inn-keeper, being
astonished, said, “Mary, thou hast now been with us two years,
and I never heard thee groan before, or heard such a word
from thee. What is come to thee?” She answered, ‘Would
I had died three years since; then I had been happy.”
“Immediately Abraham said to him, ‘Prepare us a supper,
that we may rejoice together; for I am come from far for her
sake. After supper she said to him, ‘Let us go into the
chamber: And when they were come in, he saw a bed made
ready; and he sat upon it, and said, ‘Make fast the door.”
She made it fast, and came to him. Having taken hold of her,
so that she could not run away, he took off his cap, and said
to her, weeping, ‘My child, Mary, dost thou not know me?
Am not I he that brought thee up? Mary, what is come to
thee? Who hath destroyed thee, my daughter? Where are
thy prayers and thy tears, thy watching and holy exercise?
My child, when thou hadst sinned, why didst thou not tell me,
that I might have humbled myself for thee? My daughter,
why hast thou done this? Why hast thou forsaken thy
May, 1761.] JOURNAL. 59
father?” She remained in his hands as a lifeless stone, till he
said to her with tears, ‘Dost thou not speak to me, my child,
Mary? Dost thou not speak to me? Am I not come hither
for thy sake? I have besought the Lord concerning thee.’
Till midnight he continued exhorting and comforting her.
Then, coming a little to herself, she said to him weeping, “I
cannot look at thee, for I am defiled with sin.” The blessed
man replied, “On me be thy sin; only come, let us go to our
place.” She said to him, “If it be possible for me to repent,
and if God can accept my repentance, I come, and I fall
down, and kiss thy steps, wetting them with my tears, that
thou hast thus had compassion on me, a forlorn wretch, and
art come hither to draw me out of the mire of sin.” And
laying her head at his feet, she wept bitterly all the night;
saying, ‘What shall I render thee for all thy benefits?’
“Early in the morning he set her upon the horse, and went
before her with great joy. And being come to his place, he put
her in the inner cell; where she gladly resumed her former
exercise, with sackcloth and ashes, and much humiliation, with
mourning and watching, and ceaseless calling upon God: And
the merciful Lord gave her a sign that he accepted her repent
ance, healing many that were sick, through her prayers.
“Holy Abraham lived ten years after, beholding her good
conversation, and blessing, and praising, and magnifying God.
Then, having lived seventy years, he slept in peace. Mary
survived him thirty and five years, calling upon God night
and day; insomuch that all who passed by glorified God, who
saveth them that were gone astray.”
Among the believers, who met in the evening, God had
kindled a vehement desire of his full salvation. Inquiring
how it was that, in all these parts, we have scarce one living
witness of this, I constantly received, from every person, one
and the same answer:--“We see now, we sought it by our
works; we thought it was to come gradually; we never
expected to receive it in a moment, by faith, as we did justi
fication.” What wonder is it then, that you have been
fighting all these years as one that beateth the air?
Fri. 22.--I earnestly exhorted all who were sensible of their
wants, and athirst for holiness, to look unto Jesus, to come
to him just as they were, and receive all his promises. And
surely it will not be long before some of these also are fully
saved by simple faith.
60 REv. J. wesDEY’s [June, 1761.
Sat. 23.--I rode over to Placey. I was wet through,
both going and coming; but I did not repent of my journey;
such a number gathered together, a great part of whom could
rejoice in God. These were quite ripe for all the great and
precious promises, which they received with all gladness.
Mon. 25.--I rode to Shields, and preached in an open
place, to a listening multitude. Many of them followed me to
South-Shields; where I preached in the evening to almost
double the congregation. How ripe for the Gospel are these
also ! What is wanting but more labourers?
More! Why, is there not here (as in every parish in
England) a particular Minister, who takes care of all their
souls? There is one here who takes charge of all their
souls; what care of them he takes, is another question. It
may be, he neither knows nor cares, whether they are going
to heaven or hell. Does he ask man, woman, or child, any
question about it, from one Christmas to the next? O, what
account will such a Pastor give to the Great Shepherd in
that day?
Tues. 26.--I went on to Sunderland, and in the evening
preached in the new House. The next evening I preached at
Monkwearmouth.
Thur. 28.--About moon I preached at Biddick; and the
power of God was in the midst of his people; and more
eminently at Sunderland in the evening. After preaching I
met the believers, and exhorted them to “go on unto perfec
tion.” It pleased God to apply the plain words which were
spoken; so that all were athirst for him; objections vanished
away, and a flame was kindled almost in every heart.
Sun. 31.--I preached again, both morning and evening, in
Monkwearmouth church; but it would not near contain the
people, many of whom were constrained to go away. After
Evening Service I hastened to Newcastle, and exhorted a
willing multitude to “stand in the ways and see,” and “ask
for the old paths,” and “walk therein.”
In the week following I preached at many little places
round Newcastle. Friday, JUNE 5. I went to Prudhoe, where
there had been some jar in the society, occasioned by a few
who had lately espoused, and warmly defended, a new opinion.
I said not one word about it, but preached on, “There is
joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over
ninety and nine just persons who need no repentance.”
June, 1761.] JOURNAL. 61
Afterwards, perceiving their hearts were much softened, I
met the society, and exhorted them to beware of bitter zeal;
and to “walk in love, as Christ also loved us.” They were
ashamed before God, and (for the present at least) their
contentions were at an end.
In the evening I preached at Nafferton; and the next
morning rode to Winlington, where I had appointed to be
between twelve and one. They placed the stand exactly
fronting the sun, which shone very warm and very bright;
but almost as soon as I began, the clouds rose, and shadowed
us till I concluded. I preached at Swalwell at five, to such
a congregation as was never seen there before.
Mon. 8.--I rode to Hexham, and preached, at noon, in an
open place near the church. Some expected there would be
much disturbance; but there was none at all. We rode
thence over the mountains to Allandale, where I had not been
for several years. After preaching and meeting the society, I
took horse again, and, crossing another chain of mountains,
reached Weardale before eleven.
Tues. 9.--I preached at nine, but was obliged to stand
abroad, because of the multitude of people. The sun shone
full in my face; but after having spent a short time in prayer,
I regarded it not. I then met the society; and came just in
time to prevent their all turning Dissenters, which they were
on the point of doing, being quite disgusted at the Curate,
whose life was no better than his doctrine.
At noon I preached in Teesdale. Most of the men are
lead-miners, who awhile ago were turned out of their work for
following “this way.” By this means many of them got into
far better work; and some time after, their old master was
glad to employ them again.
We had a long stage from hence to Swaldale, where I found
an earnest, loving, simple people, whom I likewise exhorted not
to leave the church, though they had not the best of Ministers.
I then baptized a man and two women, who had been bred
among the Anabaptists; and I believe all of them received
such a blessing therein as they were not able to express.
Wed, 10.--I took horse at half-hour past three, and reached
Barnard-Castle soon after six. I preached at eight in a ground
adjoining to the town. Are these the people that a few years
ago were like roaring lions? They were now quiet as lambs;
nor could several showers drive them away till I concluded. In
the evening I preached at Brancepath, near Bishop-Auckland.
Most of the congregation, though I stood in the street, were
deeply attentive; only one, a kind of gentleman, seemed
displeased; but he had none to second him.
Fri. 12.--We had one of the most solemn watch-nights at
Newcastle which we have had for several years. Saturday,
13. I rode once more to Sunderland, and preached as usual
to a numerous congregation. Sunday, 14. After Mr. G. had
read Prayers, I spoke exceeding plain to as many as could
crowd into the church. And out of so many that are called,
will not some be chosen?
About three I preached at Gateshead-Fell; about five, at
the Garth-Heads; at each place to a larger congregation
than I ever saw there before. What a change is wrought in
this whole country ! And will it not be wrought in the whole
kingdom?
Mon. 15.--I rode to Durham, having appointed to preach
there at noon. The meadow, near the river side, was quite
convenient, and the small rain neither disturbed me nor the
congregation. In the afternoon I rode to Hartlepool; but I
had much ado to preach: My strength was gone as well as
my voice; and, indeed, they generally go together. Three days
in a week I can preach thrice a day without hurting myself;
but I had now far exceeded this, besides meeting classes and
exhorting the societies. I was obliged to lie down good part of
Tuesday: However, in the afternoon I preached at Cherington,
and in the evening at Hartlepool again, though not without
difficulty. Wednesday, 17. I rode to Stockton, where, a
little before the time of preaching, my voice and strength were
restored at once. The next evening it began to rain just as I
began to preach; but it was suspended till the service was
over: It then rained again till eight in the morning.
Fri. 19.--It was hard work to ride eight miles (so called)
in two hours and a half; the rain beating upon us, and the
by-road being exceeding slippery. But we forgot all this
when we came to the Grange; so greatly was God present with
his people. Thence we rode to Darlington. Here we were
under a difficulty again: Not half the people could come in,
and the rain forbade my preaching without. But at one (the
hour of preaching) the rain stopped, and did not begin again
till past two; so the people stood very conveniently in the
yard; and many did not care to go away. When I went in,
June, 1761.] JOURNAL, 63
they crowded to the door and windows, and stayed till I took
horse. At seven I preached at Yarm, and desired one of our
brethren to take my place in the morning.
Sat. 20.--At noon I applied those words, “Now abide
faith, hope, love; but the greatest of these is love.”
This evening also it rained at Hutton-Rudby, till seven,
the hour of preaching: But God heard the prayer; and from
the time I began we had only some scattering drops. After
sermon the society alone filled the new preaching-house; so
mightily has the word of God prevailed since Alexander
Mather laboured here.
Sun. 21.--I preached to a larger congregation than in the
evening, on, “Behold what manner of love the Father hath
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the children of
God!” I then rode to Osmotherley, where the Minister
read Prayers seriously, and preached an useful sermon. After
service I began in the church-yard: I believe many were
wounded and many comforted. After dinner I called on Mr.
Adams, who first invited me to Osmotherley. He was reading
the strange account of the two Missionaries who have lately
made such a figure--in the newspapers. I suppose the
whole account is just such another gross imposition upon the
public as the man’s gathering the people together to see him
go into the quart bottle. “Men seven hundred years old !”
And why not seven yards high? He that can believe it,
let him believe it.
At five I preached at Potto, a mile from Hutton. When I
began I was extremely weak; but God renewed my strength,
and so applied his word, that it seemed as if every one must
believe it. But the Scripture cannot be broken: Some seed
will still fall “by the way side,” and some “on stony ground.”
Mon. 22.--I spoke, one by one, to the society at Hutton
Rudby. They were about eighty in number; of whom near
seventy were believers, and sixteen (probably) renewed in love.
Here were two Bands of children, one of boys, and one of
girls, most of whom were walking in the light. Four of those
who seemed to be saved from sin were of one family; and all
of them walked holy and unblamable, adorning the doctrine
of God their Saviour.
At eleven I preached once more, though in great weakness
of body, and met the Stewards of all the societies. I then rode
to Stokesley, and, having examined the little society, went on
for Guisborough. The sun was burning hot; but, in a quarter
of an hour, a cloud interposed, and he troubled us no more.
I was desired by a gentleman of the town to preach in the
market-place; and there a table was placed for me, but it was
in a bad neighbourhood; for there was so vehement a stench
of stinking fish, as was ready to suffocate me, and the people
roared like the waves of the sea; but the voice of the Lord
was mightier; and in a few minutes the whole multitude
was still, and seriously attended while I proclaimed “Jesus
Christ, made of God unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption.”
Tues. 23.--I began about five, near the same place, and
had a great part of the same audience; yet they were not the
same. The change might easily be read in their countenance.
When we took horse, and just faced the sun, it was hard work
for man and beast; but about eight the wind shifted, and
blowing in our face, kept us cool till we came to Whitby.
In the evening I preached on the top of the hill, to which
you ascend by an hundred ninety and one steps. The congre
gation was exceeding large, and ninety-nine in an hundred
were attentive. When I began, the sun shone full in my face;
but he was soon clouded, and shone no more till I had done.
After meeting the society, I talked with a sensible woman,
whose experience seemed peculiar. She said: “A few days
before Easter last, I was deeply convinced of sin; and in
Easter week, I knew my sins were forgiven, and was filled
with “joy and peace in believing. But in about eighteen days
I was convinced in a dream of the necessity of a higher
salvation; and I mourned day and night, in agony of desire
to be throughly sanctified; till on the twenty-third day after
my justification, I found a total change, together with a clear
witness that the blood of Jesus had cleansed me from all
unrighteousness.”
Wed. 24.--I walked round the old Abbey, which, both with
regard to its size, (being, I judge, an hundred yards long,) and
the workmanship of it, is one of the finest, if not the finest,
ruin in the kingdom. Hence we rode to Robin Hood's Bay,
where I preached at six in the Lower-Street, near the quay.
In the midst of the sermon a large cat, frighted out of a
chamber, leaped down upon a woman’s head, and ran over the
heads or shoulders of many more; but none of them moved
or cried out, any more than if it had been a butterfly.
July, 1761.] JOURNAL, 65
Thur. 25.--I had a pleasant ride to Scarborough, the
wind tempering the heat of the sun. I had designed to
preach abroad in the evening; but the thunder, lightning, and
rain prevented: However, I stood on a balcony, and several
hundreds of people stood below; and, notwithstanding the
heavy rain, would not stir till I concluded.
Fri. 26.--I rode to Hull, and had there also the comfort
of finding some witnesses of the great salvation. I was con
strained to leave them early in the morning on Saturday, 27.
At seven I preached in Beverley; about one in Pocklington;
and at York in the evening, to the far genteelest audience I
have had since I left Edinburgh.
Mon. 29.--I met the classes, and found many therein who
were much alive to God: But many others were utterly dead;
which sufficiently accounts for the society’s not increasing.
Wed. JULY 1.--The stewards met from the societies in the
country. In the evening we all wrestled with God for the
revival of his work. Many found their hearts much enlarged
herein, and had confidence he would answer the prayer.
Thur. 2.--I set out early for North-Cave, twenty computed
miles from York. I preached there at nine to a deeply serious
congregation, and was much refreshed. At two I preached
to such another congregation at Thorpe, and concluded the
day by preaching and meeting the society at Pocklington.
Fri. 3.--We returned to York, where I was desired to
call upon a poor prisoner in the Castle. I had formerly
occasion to take notice of an hideous monster, called, a
Chancery Bill; I now saw the fellow to it, called, a Declara
tion. The plain fact was this: Some time since a man who
lived near Yarm assisted others in running some brandy.
His share was worth near four pounds. After he had wholly
left off that bad work, and was following his own business,
that of a weaver, he was arrested, and sent to York gaol;
and, not long after, comes down a Declaration, “that Jac.
Wh had landed a vessel laded with brandy and Geneva,
at the port of London, and sold them there, whereby he was
indebted to His Majesty five hundred and seventy-seven
pounds and upwards.” And to tell this worthy story, the
Lawyer takes up thirteen or fourteen sheets of treble stamped
paper. O England, England! will this reproach never be rolled
away from thee? Is there any thing like this to be found,
66 REv. J. wrsLEY’s [July, 1761.
either among Papists, Turks, or Heathens? In the name
of truth, justice, mercy, and common sense, I ask, 1. Why
do men lie for lying sake? Is it only to keep their hands
in 7 What need else, of saying it was the port of London,
when every one knew the brandy was landed above three
hundred miles from thence? What a monstrous contempt of
truth does this show, or rather hatred to it ! 2. Where is
the justice of swelling four pounds into five hundred and
seventy-seven ? 3. Where is the common sense of taking
up fourteen sheets to tell a story that may be told in ten
limes? 4. Where is the mercy of thus grinding the face of
the poor? thus sucking the blood of a poor, beggared
prisoner? Would not this be execrable villany, if the paper
and writing together were only six-pence a sheet, when they
have stripped him already of his little all, and not left him
fourteen groats in the world?
Sun. 5.--Believing one hinderance of the work of God in
York, was the neglect of field-preaching, I preached this
morning at eight, in an open place, near the city walls.
Abundance of people ran together, most of whom were deeply
attentive. One or two only were angry, and threw a few
stones; but it was labour lost; for none regarded them.
Mon. 6.--I rode to Tadcaster, and preached within, the rain
not suffering us to be abroad, as I intended. In the evening
I preached at Otley, and afterwards talked with many of
the society. There is reason to believe that ten or twelve of
these are filled with the love of God. I found one or two
more the next day at Fewston, a few miles north of Otley,
(where I preached at noon,) whom God had raised up to
witness the same good confession. And, indeed, the whole
congregation seemed just ripe for receiving all the promises.
Wed. 8.--I rode to Knaresborough, where it was expected
we should not meet with so friendly a reception. But the
Lord is King. Our own House being too small, I preached
in the assembly-room. Most of the people looked wild
enough when they came in; but they were tame before they
went out; and behaved as decently and seriously as the
congregation at Otley.
Indeed, the mob never was so furious here, as they were
formerly at Otley; where the good Magistrate directed, “Do
what you will to them, so you break no bones.” But may not
a man cut his neighbour's throat without breaking his bones?
July, 1761.] JOURNAL, 67
The remaining part of this week I preached at Guiseley,
Bingley, and Keighley. Sunday, 12. I had appointed to
be at Haworth; but the church would not near contain the
people who came from all sides: However, Mr. Grimshaw
had provided for this by fixing a scaffold on the outside of
one of the windows through which I went after Prayers,
and the people likewise all went out into the church-yard.
The afternoon congregation was larger still. What has God
wrought in the midst of those rough mountains !
Mon. 13.--At five I preached on the manner of waiting for
“perfect love;” the rather to satisfy Mr. Grimshaw, whom
many had laboured to puzzle and perplex about it. So once
more their bad labour was lost, and we were more united both
in heart and judgment than ever.
At noon I preached in Colne, once inaccessible to the
Gospel; but now the yard I was in would not contain the
people. I believe I might have preached at the Cross
without the least interruption.
About five I preached at Paddiham, another place eminent
for all manner of wickedness. The multitude of people
obliged me to stand in the yard of the preaching-house.
Over against me, at a little distance, sat some of the most
impudent women I ever saw : Yet I am not sure that God
did not reach their hearts; for
They roar'd, and would have blush'd, if capable of shame.
In the morning I preached at Bentley-Wood-Green, on,
“Be ye perfect, as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.”
Mr. G. afterwards told me, that this perfection he firmly
believed and daily prayed for, namely, the love of God and
man producing all those fruits which are described in our
Lord’s Sermon upon the mount.
About noon I preached at Bacup, a village in Rosendale.
The new preaching house is large, but not large enough to
contain the congregation. Soon after five I preached at
Heptonstall. The society here had been greatly hurt by two
Leaders getting into new opinions. One of them fell upon
me directly, for “denying the righteousness of Christ.” On
this we discoursed about an hour. The issue was, one of
them was quite convinced; and the other (to my no small
satisfaction) desired me to put a new Leader in his place.
Wed. 15.--About seven I preached at Ewood, and about
moon at Halifax. New opinions had done harm here also ;
but at this time all was quiet. I rode over to Bradford in
the afternoon, where I found an Anabaptist Teacher had
perplexed and unsettled the minds of several; but they are
now less ignorant of Satan’s devices.
Fri. 17.--I rode to Birstal, and was much comforted to
find many of our first children in this county who are not yet
weary of the good old way. May they continue therein unto
the day of the Lord Jesus !
Sat. 18.--At one I preached at South-Royd. The good
people had placed the stand so that the sun, which was very
hot, shone upon my head, and the wind, which was very cold,
blew in my neck; but it was all one: I was on my Master's
business; and great was our rejoicing in Him.
Sun. 19.--I preached in Birstal Room at eight. At one
we had thousands, the greatest part of whom were persons
“fearing God and working righteousness.” I rode thence to
Leeds, in order to preach a funeral sermon for Mary Shent,
who, after many severe conflicts, died in great peace. It
was one of the largest congregations which has been seen at
Leeds; to whom I spoke very plain from part of the Gospel
for the day, “Give an account of thy stewardship, for thou
mayest be no longer steward.”
I hastened back to the love-feast at Birstal. It was the
first of the kind which had been there. Many were surprised
when I told them, “The very design of a love-feast is a free
and familiar conversation, in which every man, yea, and
woman, has liberty to speak whatever may be to the glory of
God.” Several then did speak, and not in vain: The flame
ran from heart to heart, especially while one was declaring,
with all simplicity, the manner wherein God, during the
morning sermon, (on those words, “I will, be thou clean,”)
had set her soul at full liberty. Two men also spoke to the
same effect; and two others who had found peace with God.
We then joyfully poured out our souls before God, and
praised him for his marvellous works.
Mon. 20.--I came to a full explanation with that good
man Mr. V Lord, if I must dispute, let it be with the
children of the devil! Let me be at peace with thy children |
On Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, I preached at
the neighbouring towns. Friday, 24. In speaking from those
words, “In many things we offend all,” I observed, 1. As
July, 1761.] JOURNAL. 69
long as we live, our soul is connected with the body: 2. As
long as it is thus connected, it cannot think but by the help
of bodily organs: 3. As long as these organs are imperfect,
we are liable to mistakes, both speculative and practical:
4. Yea, and a mistake may occasion my loving a good man
less than I ought; which is a defective, that is, a wrong
temper : 5. For all these we need the atoming blood, as
indeed for every defect or omission. Therefore, 6. All men
have need to say daily, “Forgive us our trespasses.”
About one I preached at Bramley, where Jonas Rushford,
about fourteen years old, gave me the following relation:--
“ABoUT this time last year I was desired by two of our
neighbours, to go with them to Mr. Crowther's at Skipton,
who would not speak to them, about a man that had been
missing twenty days, but bid them bring a boy twelve or
thirteen years old. When we came in, he stood reading a
book. He put me into a bed, with a looking-glass in my
hand, and covered me all over. Then he asked me whom I
had a mind to see; and I said, “My mother. I presently
saw her with a lock of wool in her hand, standing just in the
place, and the clothes she was in, as she told me afterwards.
Then he bid me look again for the man that was missing,
who was one of our neighbours. And I looked and saw him
riding towards Idle, but he was very drunk; and he stopped
at the alehouse and drank two pints more, and he pulled out
a guinea to change. Two men stood by, a big man and a
little man; and they went on before him, and got two hedge
stakes; and when he came up, on Windle-Common, at the
top of the hill, they pulled him off his horse, and killed him,
and threw him into a coal-pit. And I saw it all as plain as
if I was close to them. And if I saw the men, I should know
them again.
“We went back to Bradford that night; and the next day
I went with our neighbours and showed them the spot where
he was killed, and the pit he was thrown into; and a man
went down and brought him up. And it was as I had told
them; his handkerchief was tied about his mouth, and
fastened behind his neck.”
Is it improbable only, or flatly impossible, when all the
circumstances are considered, that this should all be pure
fiction? They that can believe this, may believe a man's
getting into a bottle.
70 REv. J. wesDEY’s [July, 1761.
From Bramley I rode to Kippax. Mr. Venn came a little
after we were gone into the church. Mr. Romaine read
Prayers. I preached on, “Christ crucified, to the Jews a
stumbling-block, and to the Greeks foolishness.” O why
should they who agree in this great point, fall out about
smaller things?
Sat. 25.--About one, I preached at Seacroft, and found
several who believed God had saved them from sin. In the
evening I talked with twelve or fourteen of these particularly;
but I found not one who presumed to say that he did not
need the atoning blood: Nor could I hear of any more than
two persons that ever spoke in this manner; and these were
soon after, for that reason, expelled out of Otley society.
Sun. 26.--I preached at seven on, “Lord, if thou wilt,
thou canst make me clean.” And O what a flame did God.
kindle ! Many were “on fire, to be dissolved in love.”
About one I preached to the usual congregation at Birstal.
What a work is God working here also ! Six in one class
have, within this week, found peace with God; two this
morning in meeting the class. While I was praying on
Sunday evening that God would give us a token for good,
James Eastwood was set at full liberty; as were William
Wilson and Elizabeth his wife before, and Martha his
daughter, with Agnes Gooddel, on the Wednesday after. To
these were added, Joseph Newsam, and Richard Hellewell,
sixteen years of age. So that the oldest of our believers now
cry out, “We never saw it before on this fashion l”
Mon. 27.--I preached at Staincross about eleven; about
five, at Barley-Hall; the next morning, at Sheffield. In the
afternoon I rode on to Matlock-Bath. The valley which
reaches from the town to the bath is pleasant beyond expres
sion. In the bottom of this runs a little river, close to which
a mountain rises, almost perpendicular, to an enormous
height, part covered with green, part with ragged and naked
rocks. On the other side, the mountain rises gradually with
tufts of trees here and there. The brow on both sides is
fringed with trees, which seem to answer each other.
Many of our friends were come from various parts. At
six I preached standing under the hollow of a rock, on one
side of a small plain; on the other side of which was a tall
mountain. There were many well-dressed hearers, this being
the high season; and all of them behaved well. But as I
Aug. 1761.] JOURNAL. 71
walked back, a gentleman-like man asked me, “Why do you
talk thus of faith? Stuff, nonsense !” Upon inquiry, I
found he was an eminent Deist. What, has the plague crept
into the Peak of Derbyshire?
Wed. 29.--I preached at five near the Bath; in Wood
seats at two; and in the evening, at the end of the House in
Sheffield, to thrice as many people as it would have contained.
Thursday and Friday, I preached at Rotherham, in the shell
of the new House, which is an octagon. Pity our Houses,
where the ground will admit of it, should be built in any
other form. The congregation was larger than ever; the
society well united, and much alive to God.
Sat. AUGUST 1.--I rode to Clayworth, and, after preaching,
laboured all I could to reconcile two brothers, who had long
been quarrelling about their inheritance; but it was labour
lost. Indeed the reason of the thing was clear; but passion
is ever too hard for reason.
Hence I went on to Misterton; and, both in the evening
and morning, spoke to a lifeless, money-getting people, in a
sharper manner than ever I did before; and (I heard
afterward) with good effect.
Sun. 2.--I had the satisfaction of hearing Mr. Madan
preach an excellent sermon at Haxey. At two I preached
at Westwood-Side, to the largest congregation I ever
saw in the Isle of Axholme; and to nearly the same at
Epworth-Cross, as soon as the Church Service was ended.
After spending two days here, on Wednesday, 5, I preached
about nine at Ferry, and then rode on to Gainsborough.
I preached in the old hall to a mixed multitude, part
civil, part rude as bears. We rode home through heavy
rain, joined with much thunder and lightning, part of
which was just over our heads. But “the Lord sitteth
above the water floods.” So we came safe, only very wet, to
Epworth.
Thur. 6.--I preached about nine at Hatfield Woodhouse;
and about one at Sykehouse, to far the largest congregation
which has been seen there for many years. Boast who will,
that Methodism (the revival of true religion) is just coming
to nothing: We know better things, and are thankful to God
for its continual increase.
Sat. 8.-I preached at Winterton to such a congregation
as I suppose never met there before. From thence we rode
72 REv. J. wesDEY’s [Aug. 1761.
on to Barrow, where the mob was in readiness to receive us;
but their hearts failed; so they gave only two or three huzzas,
and let us pass by unmolested.
As soon as I came out to preach, we had another huzza;
but as more and more of the angry ones came within hearing,
they lost all their fierceness, and sunk into calmness and
attention. So I concluded my discourse with quietness and
satisfaction. In the evening I preached at Grimsby, where
I spent Sunday and Monday. Tuesday, 11. I preached at
two in Lorborough; in the evening at Elkington. The next
morning we rode to Horncastle, where Satan’s children had
threatened terrible things; but they could go no farther
than to give one feeble shout as we entered into the town.
As the House would not contain the congregation, I
preached on the outside of it; and there was no disturbance.
Indeed a silly, pert man spoke twice or thrice, but none
regarded him.
About one I preached at Sibsey, on the edge of the Fens.
There were a few wild colts here also; but all the rest (and
they were not a few) were serious and deeply attentive. So
were most of the congregation even at Boston, though much
astonished, as not being used to field-preaching.
Thur. 13.--I took a walk through the town. I think it is
not much smaller than Leeds; but, in general, it is far better
built. The church is indeed a fine building. It is larger,
loftier, nay, and rather more lightsome, than even St. Peter’s
at Norwich; and the steeple is, I suppose, the highest tower
in England, nor less remarkable for the architecture than the
height. The congregation in the evening was far more
numerous than the day before; and I trust God fixed the
arrows of conviction in not a few of their hearts.
We went forward, after preaching at a friend’s house, about
nine miles from Boston. Friday, 14. We rode to Billingford;
and on Saturday, to Norwich. After spending a few days
here, and a few more at Yarmouth and Colchester, on
Saturday, 22, I returned to London.
I found the work of God swiftly increasing here. The
congregations, in every place, were larger than they had been
for several years. Many were from day to day convinced of
sin. Many found peace with God. Many backsliders were
healed, yea, filled with joy unspeakable. And many believers
entered into such a rest, as it had not before entered into
Oct. 1761. JOURNAL. 73
their hearts to conceive. Meantime, the enemy was not
wanting in his endeavours to sow tares among the good seed.
I saw this clearly, but durst not use violence, lest, in plucking
up the tares, I should root up the wheat also.
Tues. SEPTEMBER 1.--Our Conference began, and ended
on Saturday. After spending a fortnight more in London,
and guarding both the Preachers and people against running
into extremes on the one hand or the other, on Sunday, 20,
at night, I took the machine, and on Monday, 21, came to
Bristol.
Here likewise I had the satisfaction to observe a consider
able increase of the work of God. The congregations were
exceeding large, and the people hungering and thirsting after
righteousness; and every day afforded us fresh instances of
persons convinced of sin, or converted to God. So that it
seems God was pleased to pour out his Spirit this year, on
every part both of England and Ireland; perhaps in a
manner we had never seen before; certainly not for twenty
years. O what pity, that so many, even of the children of
God, did not know the day of their visitation |
Sun. OcToBER. 4.--I preached at Kingswood, morning and
afternoon, but not, as I designed, under the sycamore-tree,
because of the rain. In the ensuing week I visited the
societies in Somersetshire. Sunday, 11. I observed God is
reviving his work in Kingswood: The society, which had
much decreased, being now increased again to near three
hundred members; many of whom are now athirst for full
redemption, which for some years they had almost forgot.
Tues. 13.--I preached at Newgate; at Kingswood in the
afternoon; and in the evening at North-Common. Here a
people are sprung up, as it were, out of the earth; most of
them employed in the neighbouring brass-works. We took
a view of these the next day; and one thing I learned here,
the propriety of that expression, Rev. i. 15: “His fect were
as fine brass, burning in a furnace.” The brightness of this
cannot easily be conceived: I have seen nothing like it but
clear white lightning.
Mon. 19.--I desired all those to meet me, who believed
they were saved from sin. There were seventecn or eighteen.
I examined them severally, as exactly as I could; and I could
not find any thing in their tempers (supposing they spoke
true) any way contrary to their profession.
74, REv. J. wesDEY’s [Nov. 1761.
Wed. 21.--I was desired by the condemned prisoners to
give them one sermon more. And on Thursday, Patrick
Ward, who was to die on that day, sent to request I would
administer the sacrament to him. He was one-and-twenty
years of age, and had scarce ever had a serious thought, till
he shot the man who went to take away his gun. From that
instant he felt a turn within, and never swore an oath more.
His whole behaviour in prison was serious and composed: He
read, prayed, and wept much; especially after one of his
fellow-prisoners had found peace with God. His hope
gradually increased till this day, and was much strengthened
at the Lord’s Supper; but still he complained, “I am not
afraid, but I am not desirous, to die. I do not find that
warmth in my heart. I am not sure my sins are forgiven.”
He went into the cart, about twelve, in calmness, but mixed
with sadness. But in a quarter of an hour, while he was
wrestling with God in prayer, (not seeming to know that any
one was near him,) “The Holy Ghost,” said he, “came upon
me, and I knew that Christ was mine.” From that moment
his whole deportment breathed a peace and joy beyond all
utterance, till, after having spent about ten minutes in private
prayer, he gave the sign.
Sun. 25.--I took a comfortable leave of Kingswood,
leaving both the society and School in a flourishing state;
and the next morning, of Bristol, leaving the society larger
than it had been for many years. Now, let zeal as well as
“brotherly love continue,” and it will not decrease any
more. Having travelled slowly through the intermediate
societies, on Saturday, 31, I came to London.
Sun. November 1.--I found the same spirit which I left
here, both in the morning and evening service. Monday, 2,
at five, I began a course of sermons on Christian Perfection.
At seven I began meeting the classes. Tuesday, 10. I
found the society at Deptford more alive than ever; a sure
consequence of which is their increasing in number. Thurs
day, 12. I rode to Brentford. Here likewise God is at work,
and sinners are converted to him. Saturday, 14. I spent an
hour with a little company near Grosvenor-Square. For many
years this has been the darkest, driest spot, of all in or near
London. But God has now watered the barren wilderness,
and it is become a fruitful field.
Mon. 16.--I retired to Lewisham, having many things to
Dec. 1761.] JOURNAL. 75
write. Friday, 20. I spent an hour at St. George's Hospital.
The behaviour of two or three patients there had done
unspeakable good. Deep prejudice was torn up by the
roots, and much good-will to the truth had succeeded it. O
what may not a single believer do, who seeks nothing but the
glory of God?
Mon. 23.--I went to Canterbury. The congregations
were larger than I ever remember; and many found a deeper
work of God in their hearts than ever they had known before.
Thursday, 26. I was desired to read part of Bishop
Pontopidan's “Natural History of Norway.” I soon found
he was a man of sense, yet credulous to an extreme; and
therefore I was the less surprised when I came to his craken
and sea-serpent. Of the former (an animal a mile round, to
which a poor whale is no more than a gudgeon) he gives no
proof, or shadow of proof; nothing but vague, uncertain
hearsays. “Two sailors,” he says, “made oath of seeing
part of the latter, seven or eight folds of his back. But I
did not talk with them myself; so I can lay little stress on
their evidence.” They might be weak men; they might be
frighted; yea, they were, by their own confession: Or they
might be men of no conscience: On any of which suppositions
their testimony is nothing worth.
Sat. 28.--We returned to London. Sunday, 29. We had
a comfortable lovefeast, at which several declared the blessings
they had found lately. We need not be careful by what
name to call them, while the thing is beyond dispute. Many
have, and many do daily experience an unspeakable change.
After being deeply convinced of inbred sin, particularly of
pride, anger, self-will, and unbelief, in a moment they feel all
faith and love; no pride, no self-will, or anger: And from
that moment they have continual fellowship with God, always
rejoicing, praying, and giving thanks. Whoever ascribes
such a change to the devil, I ascribe it to the Spirit of God:
And I say, let whoever feels it wrought, cry to God that it
may continue; which it will, if he walks closely with God;
otherwise it will not.
Preaching at Deptford, Welling, and Sevenoaks, in my
way, on Thursday, DECEMBER 3, I came to Shoreham.
There I read the celebrated “Life of St. Katherine, of
Genoa.” Mr. Lesley calls one a devil of a saint: I am sure
this was a fool of a saint; that is, if it was not the folly of
her historian, who has aggrandized her into a mere idiot.
Indeed we seldom find a saint of God's making sainted by
the Bishop of Rome. I preached at five to a small, serious
company; and the next day returned to London.
Mon. 7.--I rode to Colchester, and had the satisfaction
to find many of our brethren much alive to God. After
confirming them, as I could, in the ways of God, on Thursday
I returned home.
Sunday, 13, was a comfortable day, wherein several
prisoners were set at liberty. Saturday, 19. I visited many
near Oxford-Market and Grosvenor-Square, and found God
was still enlarging his work. More and more were convinced,
converted to God, and built up, day by day; and that,
notwithstanding the weakness of the instruments by whom
God was pleased to work.
Mon. 21.--I retired again to Lewisham, and wrote
“Farther Thoughts on Christian Perfection.” Had the
cautions given herein been observed, how much scandal had
been prevented ! And why were they not? Because my own
familiar friend was even now forming a party against me.
Fri. 25.--We began, as usual, at four. A few days since,
one who lived in known sin, finding heavy conviction, broke
away, and ran out, she knew not whither. She met one who
offered her a shilling a week to come and take care of her
child. She went gladly. The woman's husband, hearing
her stir between three and four, began cursing and swearing
bitterly. His wife said, “I wish thou wouldst go with her,
and see if any thing will do thee good.” He did so. In the
first hymn God broke his heart; and he was in tears all the
rest of the service. How soon did God recompense this poor
woman for taking the stranger in
Sat. 26.--I made a particular inquiry into the case of
Mary Special, a young woman then in Tottenham-Court
Road. She said, “Four years since I found much pain in
my breasts, and afterwards hard lumps. Four months ago
my left breast broke, and kept running continually. Growing
worse and worse, after some time I was recommended to St.
George's Hospital. I was let blood many times, and took
hemlock thrice a day: But I was no better; the pain and
the lumps were the same, and both my breasts were quite
hard, and black as soot; when, yesterday se’nnight, I went
to Mr. Owen's, where there was a meeting for prayer. Mr.
Jan. 1762.] JOURNAL. 77
Bell saw me, and asked, ‘Have you faith to be healed?” I
said, ‘Yes. He prayed for me, and in a moment all my
pain was gone. But the next day I felt a little pain again;
I clapped my hands on my breasts, and cried out, ‘Lord,
if thou wilt, thou canst make me whole.’ It was gone; and
from that hour I have had no pain, no soreness, no lumps,
or swelling; but both my breasts were perfectly well, and
have been so ever since.”
Now here are plain facts: 1. She was ill: 2. She is well:
3. She became so in a moment. Which of these can with
any modesty be denied ?
Tues. 29.--In order to remove some misunderstandings,
I desired all parties concerned to meet me. They did so; all
but T-- M--d, who flatly refused to come. Is this
only the first step toward a separation? Alas, for the man |
Alas, for the people | *
Thur. 31.--We concluded the year, as usual, with a
solemn watchnight. O may we conclude our lives in the
same manner, blessing and praising God!
Fri. JANUARY 1, 1762.--We had, I believe, pretty near
two thousand of the society at Spitalfields in the evening;
where Mr. Berridge, Maxfield, and Colley, assisted me. And
we found God was in the midst, while we devoted ourselves
to him in the most solemn and explicit manner.
Sat. 2.--I set out for Everton, in order to supply
Mr. Berridge's church in his absence. In my way I
preached at Rood-Farm, five-and-forty miles from London.
Afterwards, the moon shining bright, we had a pleasant ride
to Everton.
Sun. 3.-I read Prayers and preached, morning and
evening, to a numerous and lively congregation. I found the
people in general were more settled than when I was here
before; but they were in danger of running from east to
west. Instead of thinking, as many then did, that none can
possibly have true faith but those that have trances or visions,
they were now ready to think that whoever had any thing
of this kind had no faith.
Mon. 4.--After preaching to a large congregation at Wrest
lingworth, we rode on to Harston. I never preached a whole
sermon by moonlight before. However, it was a solemn
* These were the words I wrote at the time.
season; a season of holy mourning to some; to others, of
joy unspeakable.
Tues. 5.--I preached in Harston at nine, and about eleven
at Wiltstow, three miles farther, to a people just ripe for,
“Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden.”
In the afternoon we set out for Stoke, on the edge of Suffolk.
As we rode through Haverhill, we were saluted with one
huzza, the mob of that town having no kindness for
Methodists. But all was quiet at Stoke; for Sir H
A will suffer no disturbance there. The congregation
came from many miles round, and God was in the midst
of them. Their hearty prayers went up on every side; and
many felt the answer to them.
Wed. 6.--The largeness of the congregation at five showed
they were not forgetful hearers. I preached longer than I am
accustomed to do; but still they were not satisfied. Many
crowded after me into the dwelling-house. After speaking a
few words, I went to prayer. A cry began, and soon spread
through the whole company; so that my voice was lost.
Two seemed to be distressed above all the rest. We conti
nued wrestling with God, till one of them had a good hope,
and the other was “filled with joy and peace in believing.”
In the afternoon it blew a storm, by the favour of which we
came into Haverhill, quite unmolested. But, notwithstanding
wind and rain, the people crowded so fast into the preaching
house, that I judged it best to begin half an hour before the
time; by which means it contained the greater part of them.
Although they that could not come in made a little noise, it
was a solemn and an happy season.
Thur. 7.--Abundance of them came again at five, and
drank in every word. Here also many followed me into the
house, and hardly knew how to part. At nine I preached
at Steeple-Bumstead, three miles from Haverhill, to a
considerably larger congregation; and all were serious.
Hence we rode for Barkway, four miles from Royston. The
preaching-place was exceeding large; yet it was well filled,
and the people were wedged in as close as possible: And
many of them found that God was there, to their unspeakable
comfort.
Hence we rode to Barley, where I preached at one. A
middle-aged woman dropped down at my side, and cried
aloud for mercy. It was not long before God put a new
Jan. 1762.]- JOURNAL. 79
song in her mouth. At six in the evening I preached at
Melbourn. Here too God both wounded and healed. I laid
hold, after preaching, on a poor backslider, who quickly
melted into tears, and determined to return once more to
Him from whom she had deeply revolted.
Here I talked at large with one who thinks he is renewed
in love. Perhaps he is; but his understanding is so small,
his experience so peculiar, and his expressions so uncouth,
that I doubt very few will receive his testimony.
Sat. 9.--I rode to Potton. What has God wrought here
since I saw this town twenty years ago ! I could not then
find a living Christian therein; but wild beasts in abundance.
Now here are many who know in whom they have believed;
and no one gives us an uncivil word ' I preached at six to a
very numerous and serious congregation. What have we to
do to despair of any person or people?
Sun. 10.--I preached at six in the morning to nearly
the same congregation. I read Prayers and preached,
morning and afternoon, at Everton, and gave the sacrament
to a large number of communicants. At four we took horse,
and reached Grandchester a little before seven. Finding a
little company met together, I spent half an hour with them
exceedingly comfortably; and, through the blessing of God,
I was no more tired when I went to bed than when I arose
in the morning.
Mon. 11.--The house was throughly filled at five, and
that with serious and sensible hearers. I was sorry I had
no more time at this place; especially as it was so near
Cambridge, from whence many gentlemen used to come when
any Clergyman preached. But my work was fixed; so I
took horse soon after preaching, and rode to a village called
Botsamlode, seven miles from Cambridge. Here a large
congregation was soon assembled; and I had no sooner
named my text, “When they had nothing to pay, he frankly
forgave them both,” than a murmur ran through the whole
people, and many of them were in tears. This concern
increased as I went on; so that none appeared to be unmoved.
Qne just by me cried with a bitter cry; but in a short time
she shouted for joy. So did several others; so that it was
not easy to tell whether more were wounded or comforted.
Hence we rode to Lakenheath, and passed a comfortable
night. Tuesday, 12. Just as we set out, the storm, which
had been very high all night, brought on impetuous rain. It
was a good providence, 1. That we had now firm, sandy road,
not clay and miry fields, as yesterday; 2. That the wind was
behind us; otherwise I believe it would have been impossible
to go on. It was often ready to bear away man and beast:
However, in the afternoon we came safe to Norwich.
Wed. 13.--We rested from our labour. How can they who
never labour taste the sweetness of rest? Friday, 15. I
preached at Yarmouth. Saturday, 16. I transcribed the
society at Norwich; but two hundred of them I made no
account of, as they met no class. About four hundred
remained; half of whom appeared to be in earnest.
Tues. 19.--I rode to Bury, and was glad to find a little,
serious company still. But there cannot be much done here,
till we preach abroad, or at least in the heart of the town.
We are now quite at one end; and people will not come
from the other till they have first “tasted the good word.”
Thur. 21.--I rode to Colchester, and found a quiet,
loving, regular society. After spending a day with them, on
Saturday, 23, I cheerfully returned to London.
Wed. 27.--I had a striking proof that God can teach
by whom he will teach. A man full of words, but not of
understanding, convinced me of what I could never see
before, that anima est ex traduce; that all the souls of his
posterity, as well as their bodies, were in our first parent.
Fri. FEBRUARY 5.--I met at noon, as usual, those who
believe they are saved from sin, and warned them of the
enthusiasm which was breaking in, by means of two or
three weak though good men, who, from a misconstrued text
in the Revelation, inferred that they should not die. They
received the warning in much love. However, this gave
great occasion of triumph to those who sought occasion, so
that they rejoiced, as though they had found great spoil.
After preaching at Deptford, Welling, and Sevenoaks, on
Tuesday and Wednesday I rode on to Sir Thomas I’Anson’s,
near Tunbridge, and, between six and seven, preached in his
large parlour, which opens likewise into the hall. The plain
people were all attention. If the seed be watered, surely
there will be some fruit.
Sun. 14.--I buried the remains of Thomas Salmon, a good
and useful man. What was peculiar in his experience was, he
did not know when he was justified; but he did know when he
March, 1762.] JOURNAL. 81
was renewed in love, that work being wrought in a most
distinct manner. After this he continued about a year in
constant love, joy, and peace; then, after an illness of a few
days, he cheerfully went to God.
Monday, 15, and the following days, I spent in tran
scribing the list of the society. It never came up before to
two thousand four hundred: Now it contains above two
thousand seven hundred members.
Sun. 28.--We had a peculiar blessing at Spitalfields while
I was enforcing, “Now is the day of salvation.” Indeed
there is always a blessing when we cut off all delay, and come
to God now by simple faith.
Fri. MARCH 5.--I had a long conversation with Joseph
Rule, commonly called the White Quaker. He appeared to
be a calm, loving, sensible man, and much devoted to God.
Mon. 8.--I retired to Lewisham, to answer Dr. Horne’s
ingenious “Sermon on Justification by Works.” O that I
might dispute with no man! But if I must dispute, let it
be with men of sense.
Thur. 11.--I buried the remains of Mary Ramsey, a true
daughter of affliction, worn out by a cancer in her breast,
with a variety of other disorders. To these was added, for a
time, great darkness of mind; the body pressing down the
soul. Yet she did not murmur or repine, much less charge
God foolishly. It was not long before he restored the light
of his countenance; and shortly after she fell asleep.
Fri. 12.--The National Fast was observed all over London
with great solemnity. Surely God is well pleased even with
this acknowledgment that He governs the world; and even
the outward humiliation of a nation may be rewarded with
outward blessings.
Mon. 15.--I left London, though not without regret, and
went slowly through the societies to Bristol. Saturday, 27.
I heard a large account of the children near Lawford’s Gate,
which has made so much noise here. The facts are too
glaring to be denied. But how are they to be accounted
for? By natural or supernatural agency? Contend who list
about this.
Mon. 29.--I came to the New-Passage a little before
nine. The rain and wind increased much while we were on
the water: However, we were safe on shore at ten. I preached
about twelve in the new Room at Chepstow. One of the
congregation was a neighbouring Clergyman, who lived in
the same staircase with me at Christ-Church, and was then
far more serious than me. Blessed be God, who has looked
upon me at last! Now let me redeem the time !
In the afternoon we had such a storm of hail as I scarce
ever saw in my life. The roads likewise were so extremely
bad that we did not reach Hereford till past eight. Having
been well battered both by hail, rain, and wind, I got to bed
as soon as I could, but was waked many times by the clatter
ing of the curtains. In the morning I found the casement
wide open; but I was never the worse. I took horse at six,
with William Crane and Francis Walker. The wind was
piercing cold, and we had many showers of snow and rain;
but the worst was, part of the road was scarce passable; so
that, at Church-Stretton, one of our horses lay down, and
would go no farther. However, William Crane and I pushed
on, and before seven reached Shrewsbury.
A large company quickly gathered together: Many of them
were wild enough; but the far greater part were calm and
attentive, and came again at five in the morning.
Wed, 31.--Having been invited to preach at Wem, Mrs.
Glynne desired she might take methither in a post-chaise; but
in little more than an hour we were fast enough: However,
the horses pulled till the traces broke. I should then have
walked on had I been alone, though the mud was deep, and
the snow drove impetuously; but I could not leave my friend;
so I waited patiently till the man had made shift to mend the
traces; and the horses pulled amain; so that with much ado,
not long after the time appointed, I came to Wem.
I came : But the person who invited me was gone; gone
out of town at four in the morning; and I could find no
one who seemed either to expect or desire my company. I
inquired after the place where Mr. Mather preached; but it
was filled with hemp. It remained only to go into the
market-house: But neither any man, woman, nor child cared
to follow us; the north wind roared so loud on every side, and
poured in from every quarter. However, before I had done
singing, two or three crept in, and after them, two or three
hundred; and the power of God was so present among them,
that I believe many forgot the storm.
The wind grew still higher in the afternoon, so that it was
difficult to sit our horses; and it blew full in our face, but
April, 1762.] JOURNAL. 83
could not prevent our reaching Chester in the evening.
Though the warning was short, the room was full; and full of
serious, earnest hearers, many of whom expressed a longing
desire of the whole salvation of God.
Here I rested on Thursday. Friday, APRIL 2. I rode
to Parkgate, and found several ships; but the wind was
contrary. I preached at five in the small House they have
just built; and the hearers were remarkably serious. I gave
notice of preaching at five in the morning. But at half-hour
after four one brought us word that the wind was come fair,
and Captain Jordan would sail in less than an hour. We
were soon in the ship, wherein we found about threescore
passengers. The sun shone bright, the wind was moderate,
the sea smooth, and we wanted nothing but room to stir
ourselves; the cabin being filled with hops, so that we could
not get into it but by climbing over them on our hands and
knees. In the afternoon we were abreast of Holyhead. But
the scene was quickly changed: The wind rose higher and
higher, and by seven o’clock blew a storm. The sea broke
over us continually, and sometimes covered the ship, which
both pitched and rolled in an uncommon manner. So I was
informed; for, being a little sick, I lay down at six, and slept,
with little intermission, till near six in the morning. We
were then near Dublin Bay, where we went into a boat,
which carried us to Dunleary. There we met with a chaise
just ready, in which we went to Dublin.
I found much liberty of spirit in the evening while I was
enforcing, “Now is the day of salvation.” The congregation
was uncommonly large in the morning, and seemed to be
much alive. Many children, I find, are “brought to the
birth:” And shall there not be strength to bring forth ?
It was at this time that Mr. Grimshaw fell asleep. He
was born September 3, 1708, at Brindle, six miles south of
Preston, in Lancashire, and educated at the schools of
Blackburn and Heskin, in the same county. Even then
the thoughts of death and judgment made some impression
upon him. At eighteen he was admitted at Christ's College,
in Cambridge. Here bad example so carried him away, that
for more than two years he seemed utterly to have lost all
sense of seriousness; which did not revive till the day he was
ordained Deacon, in the year 1731. On that day he was much
affected with the sense of the importance of the ministerial
office; and this was increased by his conversing with some at
Rochdale, who met once a week to read, and sing, and pray.
But on his removal to Todmorden soon after, he quite
dropped his pious acquaintance, conformed to the world,
followed all its diversions, and contented himself with “doing
his duty” on Sundays.
But about the year 1734, he began to think seriously again.
He left off all his diversions; he began to catechise the young
people, to preach the absolute necessity of a devout life, and
to visit his people, not in order to be merry with them as
before, but to press them to seek the salvation of their souls.
At this period also he began himself to pray in secret four
times a day; and the God of all grace, who prepared his heart
to pray, soon gave the answer to his prayer; not, indeed, as
he expected: Not in joy or peace; but by bringing upon him
very strong and painful convictions of his own guilt, and
helplessness, and misery; by discovering to him what he did
not suspect before, that his heart was deceitful and desperately
wicked; and, what was more afflicting still, that all his duties
and labours could not procure him pardon, or gain him a title
to eternal life. In this trouble he continued more than three
years, not acquainting any one with the distress he suffered,
till one day, (in 1742,) being in the utmost agony of mind,
there was clearly represented to him, Jesus Christ pleading
for him with God the Father, and gaining a free pardon for
him. In that moment all his fears vanished away, and he
was filled with joy unspeakable. “I was mow,” says he,
“willing to renounce myself, and to embrace Christ for my
all in all. O what light and comfort did I enjoy in my own
soul, and what a taste of the pardoning love of God!”
All this time he was an entire stranger to the people called
Methodists, whom afterwards he thought it his duty to
countenance, and to labour with them in his neighbourhood.
He was an entire stranger also to all their writings, till he came
to Haworth, May 26, of this year. And the good effects of
his preaching soon became visible: Many of his flock were
brought into deep concern for salvation, were in a little time
after filled with peace and joy through believing; and (as in
ancient times) the whole congregation have been often seen
in tears on account of their provocations against God, and
under a sense of his goodness in yet sparing them.
His lively manner of representing the truths of God could
April, 1762.] JOURNAL, 85
not fail of being much talked of, and bringing many hundreds
out of curiosity to Haworth church; who received so much
benefit by what they heard, that, when the novelty was long
over, the church continued to be full of people, many of whom
came from far, and this for twenty years together.
Mr. Grimshaw was now too happy himself, in the knowledge
of Christ, to rest satisfied without taking every method he
thought likely to spread the knowledge of his God and Saviour.
And as the very indigent constantly made their want of better
clothes to appear in, an excuse for not going to church in the
day-time, he contrived, for them chiefly, a lecture on Sunday
evenings; though he had preached twice in the day before.
God was pleased to give great success to these attempts, which
animated him still more to spend and be spent for Christ. So
the next year he began a method, which was continued by him
for ever after, of preaching in each of the four hamlets he had
under his care three times every month. By this means the
old and infirm, who could not attend the church, had the
truth of God brought to their houses; and many, who were
so profane as to make the distance from the house of God a
reason for scarce ever coming to it, were allured to hear. By
this time the great labour with which he instructed his own
people, the holiness of his conversation, and the benefit which
very many from the neighbouring parishes had obtained by
attending his ministry, concurred to bring upon him many
earnest entreaties to come to their houses, who lived in
neighbouring parishes, and expound the word of God to souls
as ignorant as they had been themselves. This request
he did not dare to refuse: So that while he provided
abundantly for his own flock, he annually found opportunity
of preaching near three hundred times to congregations in
other parts.
And for a course of fifteen years, or upwards, he used to
preach every week, fifteen, twenty, and sometimes thirty times,
beside visiting the sick, and other occasional duties of his
function. It is not easy to ascribe such unwearied diligence,
chiefly among the poor, to any motive but the real one. He
thought he would never keep silence, while he could speak to
the honour of that God who had done so much for his soul.
And while he saw sinners perishing for lack of knowledge, and
no one breaking to them the bread of life, he was constrained,
notwithstanding the reluctance he felt within, to give up his
86 REv. J. wesDEY’s [April, 1762.
name to still greater reproach, as well as all his time and
strength, to the work of the ministry.
During this intense application to what was the delight of
his heart, God was exceeding favourable to him. In sixteen
years he was only once suspended from his labour by sickness;
though he dared all weathers, upon the bleak mountains, and
used his body with less compassion than a merciful man would
use his beast. His soul at various times enjoyed large
manifestations of God’s love; and he drank deep into his
Spirit. His cup ran over; and at some seasons his faith was
so strong, and his hope so abundant, that higher degrees of
spiritual delight would have overpowered his mortal frame.
In this manner Mr. Grimshaw employed all his powers and
talents, even to his last illness; and his labours were not in
vain in the Lord. He saw an effectual change take place in
many of his flock; and a restraint from the commission of sin
brought upon the parish in general. He saw the name of Jesus
exalted, and many souls happy in the knowledge of him, and
walking as became the Gospel. Happy he was himself, in
being kept by the power of God, unblamable in his conversa
tion: Happy in being beloved, in several of the last years of
his life, by every one in his parish; who, whether they would
be persuaded by him to forsake the evil of their ways, or no,
had no doubt that Mr. Grimshaw was their cordial friend.
Hence, at his departure a general concern was visible through
his parish. Hence his body was interred with what is more
ennobling than all the pomp of a royal funeral: For he was
followed to the grave by a great multitude, with affectionate
sighs, and many tears; who cannot still hear his much-loved
name, without weeping for the guide of their souls, to whom
each of them was dear as children to their father.
His behaviour, throughout his last sickness, was of a piece
with the last twenty years of his life: From the very first
attack of his fever, he welcomed its approach. His intimate
knowledge of Christ abolished all the reluctance nature feels
to a dissolution; and, triumphing in Him, who is the resur
rection and the life, he departed, April the 7th, in the fifty
fifth year of his age, and the twenty-first of his eminent
usefulness.
It may not be unacceptable to subjoin here one of his plain,
rough letters, to the society in London:--
April, 1762.] JOURNAL. 87
“Haworth, January 9, 1760.
“GRACE, mercy, and peace, be to you from God our
Father, and from our Lord Jesus. It is well with four sorts
of people, that you have had, or now have, to do with. It is
well with those of you in Christ who are gone to God: It
is well with those of you in Christ who are not gone to God:
It is well with those who earnestly long to be in Christ, that
they may go to God: It is well with those who neither desire
to be in Christ, nor to go to God. And it is only bad with
such who, being out of Christ, are gone to the devil. These
it is best to let alone, and say no more about them.*
“But, to be sure, it is well with the other four. It is
well with those of you who, being in Christ, are gone to God.
You Ministers and members of Christ have no more doubt
or pain about them. They are now, and for ever, out of the
reach of the world, flesh, and devil. They are gone “where
the wicked cease from troubling, and where the weary are at
rest. They are sweetly reposed in Abraham's bosom. They
dwell in His presence who hath redeemed them; where “there
is fulness of joy, and pleasures for evermore.’ They are
waiting the joyful morning of the resurrection, when their
vile bodies shall be made like unto his glorious body, shall
be re-united to their souls, shall receive the joyful sentence,
and inherit the kingdom prepared for them from the
foundation of the world.
“It is well also with those of you who are in Christ, though
not gone to God. You live next door to them. Heaven is
begun with you too. The kingdom of God is within you.
You feel it. This is a kingdom of righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost. It is begun in grace, and shall
terminate in glory. Yea, it is ‘Christ within you, the hope of
glory. Christ the rock, the foundation, laid in your hearts.
Hope in the middle, and glory at the top. Christ, hope, glory;
Christ, hope, glory. You are washed in the blood of the
Lamb, justified, sanctified, and shall shortly be glorified.
Yea, your lives are already ‘hid with Christ in God.’ You
have your conversation already in heaven. Already you ‘sit
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.” What heavenly sentences
are these ! What can come nearer Paradise? Bless the Lord,
O ye happy souls, and let all that is within you bless his holy
name. Sing unto the Lord so long as you live, and praise
your God while you have your being. And how long will
that be? Through the endless ages of a glorious eternity.
“O my dear brothers and sisters, this is my hope, and this
is my purpose. But to whom and to what are we indebted for
all this, and infinitely more than all the tongues and hearts of
men or angels can tell or conceive? To our Redeemer only,
and to his merits. Christ within us is Jesus to us. We were
poor, lost, helpless sinners, ‘aliens from the commonwealth of
Israel,” and ‘children of wrath; but Jesus lived, and Jesus
died, the just for the unjust, to bring us to the enjoyment of it.
“And what does all this require at our hands? Why,
infinitely more than we can render him to all eternity.
However, let us praise and glorify God in the best manner,
and with the best member that we have. Let us do it
constantly, cordially, cheerfully, so long as we live; and
then, no doubt, we shall do it in heaven for ever.
“Keep close, I beseech you, to every means of grace.
Strive to walk in all the ordinances and commandments of
God blameless, “giving all diligence to make your calling and
election sure: Add to your faith virtue; to virtue knowledge;
to knowledge temperance; to temperance patience; to patience
godliness; to godliness brotherly kindness; to brotherly
kindness charity.’--For ‘if these things,’ says St. Peter, ‘be
in you, and abound, they make you that you shall neither be
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ.” Thus you will give the best token of your thankful
ness to him for what he hath done for your souls; and you
shall, not long hence, in heaven sing his praise with your
happy brethren, gone thither before you.
“It is well, likewise, with all those of you who do truly
desire to be in Christ, that you may go to God. Surely he
owns you; your desires are from him; you shall enjoy his
favour. By and by you shall have peace with him through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Go forth by the footsteps of the flock, and
feed ye by the Shepherd's tents. Be constant in every means
of grace. He will be found of them that diligently seek him.
“Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.”
Though your sins be never so many, never so monstrous, all
shall be forgiven. He will have mercy upon you, and will
abundantly pardon. For where sin hath abounded, grace doth
much more abound. He who hath begun this good work in
you will accomplish it to your etermal good, and his eternal
April, 1762.] JOURNAL. 89
glory. Therefore, doubt not, fear not. A broken and a
contrite heart God will not despise. The deeper is your sorrow,
the nearer is your joy. Your extremity is God's opportunity.
It is usually darkest before day-break. You shall shortly find
pardon, peace, and plenteous redemption, and at last rejoice
in the common and glorious salvation of his saints.
“And, lastly, it is well for you, who meither truly desire to
be in Christ, nor to go to God; for it is well for you that you
are out of hell: It is well your day of grace is not utterly
past. Behold, now is your accepted time; behold, now is the
day of your salvation 1 O that you may employ the remainder
of it in working out your salvation with fear and trembling!
Now is faith to be had, saving faith; now you may be washed
from all your sins in the Redeemer’s blood, justified, sanctified,
and prepared for heaven. Take, I beseech you, the time
while the time is: You have now the means of grace to use;
the ordinances of God to enjoy; his word to read and hear;
his Ministers to instruct you; and his members to converse
with. You know not what a day may bring forth: You may
die suddenly. As death leaves you, judgment will find you:
And if you die as you are, out of Christ, void of true faith,
unregenerate, unsanctified, snares, fire and brimstone, storm
and tempest, God will rain upon you, (Psalm xi. 6,) as your
eternal, intolerable portion to drink.
“Suffer me, therefore, thus far, one and all of you. God's
glory and your everlasting welfare is all I aim at. What I look
for in return from you is, I confess, much more than I deserve,
-your prayers. Pray for me, and I will pray for you, who am
“Your affectionate brother,
APRIL 9.--(Being Good Friday.) I had almost lost my
voice by a cold : However, I spoke as I could till, before
twelve, (it being a watch-night,) I could speak near as well
as ever.
On Easter-Day we had uncommon congregations, as indeed
we have had all the week: And I observed a more stayed
and solid behaviour in most, than is usual in this kingdom.
Monday and Tuesday I was employed in visiting the classes;
and I was much comforted among them: There was such an
hunger and thirst in all who had tasted of the grace of God
after a full renewal in his image.
Sun. 18.--As often as I have been here, I never saw the
House throughly filled before: And the multitude did not
come together in vain. I think many will remember this day.
Mon. 19.--I left Dublin; and I could look back with satis
faction on the days I had spent therein. I had reason to
believe that God had been at work in a very uncommon
manner. Many of those who once contradicted and blasphemed
were now convinced of “the truth as it is in Jesus:” Many
who had long revolted from God had returned to him with
full purpose of heart. Several mourners had found peace
with God, and some believe he has saved them from all sin:
Many more are all on fire for this salvation; and a spirit
of love runs through the whole people.
I came in the evening to Newry, where I found a far different
face of things. Offences had broke the society in pieces, only
two-and-thirty being left of near an hundred. But God has a
few names left here also. Let these stand firm, and God will
maintain his own cause.
Wed. 21.--I rode to Carrickfergus. The violent rain kept
away the delicate and curious hearers. For the sake of these
I delayed the morning preaching till a quarter before nine:
But it was too early still for a great part of the town, who
could not possibly rise before ten. I added a few members
to the society, and left them in peace and love.
Where to preach in Belfast I did not know. It was too
wet to preach abroad; and a dancing-master was busily
employed in the upper part of the market-house; till at twelve
the sovereign put him out, by holding his court there. While
he was above, I began below, to a very serious and attentive
audience. But they were all poor; the rich of Belfast “cared
for none of these things.”
After dinner we rode to Newtown, and found another poor,
shattered society, reduced from fifty to eighteen members, and
most of those cold enough. In the evening I preached to a
large congregation in the market-house, on, “I will heal their
backsliding.” God fulfilled his word: Many were healed, and
many more deeply wounded. I had full employment among
them the next day; and on Saturday, 24, I left between
thirty and forty members, full of desire, and hope, and earnest
resolutions, not to be almost, but altogether, Christians.
About ten I preached at Comber, and then rode to Lisburn,
where, in the evening, I had many rich and genteel hearers.
Sunday, 25. The congregation was larger in the morning than
April, 1762.] JOURNAL, 91
the evening before, and many appeared to be deeply wounded.
O may none heal their wound slightly | But far the largest
congregation of all met in the evening; and yet I saw not a
scoffer, no, nor trifler, among them.
Mon. 26.--In the evening I preached to a large congregation
in the market-house at Lurgan. I now embraced the opportu
nity which I had long desired, of talking with Mr. Miller, the
contriver of that statue which was in Lurgan when I was there
before. It was the figure of an old man, standing in a case,
with a curtain drawn before him, over against a clock which
stood on the other side of the room. Every time the clock
struck, he opened the door with one hand, drew back the
curtain with the other, turned his head, as if looking round on
the company, and then said, with a clear, loud, articulate
voice, “Past one, two, three,” and so on. But so many came
to see this (the like of which all allowed was not to be seen
in Europe) that Mr. Miller was in danger of being ruined,
not having time to attend his own business; so, as none
offered to purchase it, or to reward him for his pains, he took
the whole machine in pieces: Nor has he any thought of ever
making anything of the kind again.
Tues. 27.--I preached in Lurgan at five; in Terryhugan
at ten; and at two in the market-house at Rich-Hill. I have
rarely seen so serious a congregation at a new place. At six I
preached in the new preaching-house at Clanmain, the largest
in the north of Ireland; and the people were all alive, being
stirred up by Mr. Ryan, once an attorney, but now living
upon his own estate.
Wed. 28.--The rain kept off the curious hearers, so that we
had few in the evening but earnest souls; after sermon we
had a love-feast. It was a wonderful time. God poured out
his Spirit abundantly. Many were filled with consolation,
particularly two who had come from Lisburn, (three-and
twenty Irish miles) one a lifeless backslider, the other a girl of
sixteen, who had been sometime slightly convinced of sin. God
restored him to the light of his countenance, and gave her a clear
evidence of his love; and indeed in so uncommon a manner,
that it seemed her soul was all love. One of our brethren was
constrained openly to declare, he believed God had wrought
this change in him. I trust he will not lightly cast away the
gift which God has given him. In the morning I left them.
rejoicing and praising God, and rode to Monaghan.
The commotions in Munster having now alarmed all
Ireland, we had hardly alighted, when some wise persons
informed the Provost there were three strange sort of men
come to the King's Arms. So the Provost with his officers
came without delay, to secure the north from so imminent a
danger. I was just come out, when I was required to return
into the house. The Provost asked me many questions, and
perhaps the affair might have turned serious, had I not had
two letters with me, which I had lately received; one from the
Bishop of Londonderry, the other from the Earl of Moira.
Upon reading these, he excused himself for the trouble he had
given, and wished me a good journey.
Between six and seven I preached at Coot-Hill, and in
the morning rode on to Enniskillen; the situation of which
is both pleasant and strong, as it is surrounded by a deep
and broad river; but fortifications it has none; no, nor so
much as an old Castle. The inhabitants glory that they
have no Papist in the town.
After riding round, and round, we came in the evening to
a lone house called Carrick-a-Beg. It lay in the midst of
horrid mountains; and had no very promising appearance.
However, it afforded corn for our horses, and potatoes for
ourselves. So we made an hearty supper, called in as many
as pleased of the family to prayers, and, though we had no
fastening either for our door or our windows, slept in peace.
Sat. MAY 1.--We took horse at five. The north-east
wind would have suited the first of January; and we had
soaking rain on the black mountains. However, before noon
we came well to Sligo.
None in Sligo, when I was there last, professed so much love
to me as Mr. Knox's family. They would willingly have had
me with them morning, moon, and night, and omitted no
possible mark of affection. But what a change! Mrs. K
went into the country the day before I came ; her brother and
his wife set out for Dublin, at the same time; he himself, and
the rest of his family, saw me, that is, at church, because they
could not help it;
But wonder'd at the strange man's face,
As one they ne'er had known.
I am sorry for their sake, not my own. Perhaps they may
wish to see me when it is too late.
Sun. 2.--I preached in the market-house, morning and
May, 1762.] JOURNAL. 93
evening. Abundance of the Dragoons were there; so were
many of the Officers, who behaved with uncommon seriousness.
Mon. 3.--In the evening a company of players began
acting in the upper part of the market-house, just as we began
singing in the lower. The case of these is remarkable. The
Presbyterians for a long time had their public worship here;
but when the strollers came to town, they were turned out;
and from that time had no public worship at all. On Tuesday
evening the lower part too was occupied by buyers and sellers
of oatmeal; but as soon as I began, the people quitted their
sacks, and listened to business of greater importance.
On the following days I preached at Carrick-on-Shannon,
Drumersnave, Cleg-Hill, Longford, and Abidarrig. Saturday,
8. Calling on a friend in our way, we had not sat down before
several of the neighbours, Papists as well as Protestants, came
in, supposing I was to preach. I was not willing to disappoint
them: And they all listened with deep attention.
Hence I rode to Athlone. I intended on Sunday, 9, to
preach abroad as usual; but the sharp wind made it imprac
ticable, and obliged me to keep in the House. The congre
gations, however, were large, both morning and evening; and
I found a little fruit of my labour.
Thur. 13.--I was in hopes even the Papists here had at
length a shepherd who cared for their souls. He was stricter
than any of his predecessors, and was esteemed a man of piety
as well as learning. Accordingly, he had given them strict
orders not to work on the Lord’s day; but I found he
allowed them to play as much as they pleased, at cards in
particular; nay, and averred it was their duty so to do, to
refresh both their bodies and minds. Alas, for the blind
leader of the blind! Has not he the greater sin?
Sun. 16.--I had observed to the society last week, that I
had not seen one congregation ever in Ireland behave so ill at
church as that at Athlone, laughing, talking, and staring
about during the whole service. I had added, “This is your
fault; for if you had attended the church, as you ought to
have done, your presence and example would not have failed
to influence the whole congregation.” And so it appeared:
1 saw not one to-day either laughing, talking, or staring
about; but a remarkable seriousness was spread from the one
cnd of the church to the other.
Mon. 17.--I preached at Ahaskra to all the Protestants in
or near the town. But their Priests would not suffer the
Papists to come. What could a Magistrate do in this case?
Doubtless he might tell the Priest, “Sir, as you enjoy liberty
of conscience, you shall allow it to others. You are not
persecuted yourself: You shall not persecute them.”
Tues. 18.--I preached at Ballinasloe about ten in the
morning, and in the evening at Aghrim. Thursday, 20. I
rode on to Hollymount. The sun was extremely hot, so that
I was much exhausted. But after a little rest, I preached in
the church-yard without any weariness.
Fri. 21.--I preached at Balcarrow church at ten to a
deeply serious congregation, and in the Court-House at
Castlebar in the evening. Sunday, 23. The chief family in
the town made a part of our congregation. And whether
they received any benefit thereby or no, their example may
bring others who will receive it.
Mon. 24.--I went with two friends, to see one of the greatest
natural wonders in Ireland,--Mount-Eagle, vulgarly called
Crow-Patrick. The foot of it is fourteen miles from Castlebar.
There we left our horses, and procured a guide. It was just
twelve when we alighted; the sun was burning hot, and we had
not a breath of wind. Part of the ascent was a good deal steeper
than an ordinary pair of stairs. About two we gained the top,
which is an oval, grassy plain, about an hundred and fifty yards
in length, and seventy or eighty in breadth. The upper part of
the mountain much resembles the Peak of Teneriffe. I think
it cannot rise much less than a mile perpendicular from the
plain below. There is an immense prospect on one side toward
the sea, and on the other over the land. But as most of it is
waste and uncultivated, the prospect is not very pleasing.
At seven in the evening I preached at Newport, and at six
in the morning. I then returned to Westport, and began
reading Prayers at ten. After sermon I had a little con
versation with Lord Westport, an extremely sensible man,
and would gladly have stayed with him longer, but that I
had promised to be at Castlebar; where, in the evening, I
preached my farewell sermon to a numerous congregation.
Wed, 26.--We took horse at four, to enjoy the cool of the
morning. At seven the sun was warm enough: I verily think
as warm as in Georgia. We could not have borne it, but the
wind was in our face. However, in the afternoon we got well to
Galway. There was a small society here, and (what is not com
June, 1762.] JOURNAL. 95
mon) all of them were young women. Between seven and eight
I began preaching in the Court-House to a mixed multitude of
Papists and Protestants, rich and poor, who appeared to be
utterly astonished. At five in the morning I preached again,
and spoke as plain as I possibly could. But to the far greater
part it seemed to be only “as the sound of many waters.”
Thur. 27.--We had another Georgian day; but having
the wind again full in our face, after riding about fifty English
miles, we got well to Ennis in the afternoon. Many being
ready to make a disturbance at the Court-House, I left them
to themselves, and preached over against Mr. Bindon’s house,
in great quietness.
Fri. 28.--I was informed, that a few days before, two
of Mr. B-’s maids went to bathe (as the women here
frequently do) in the river near his house. The water was
not above a yard deep; but there was a deep hole at a little
distance. As one of them dashed water at the other, she,
endeavouring to avoid it, slipped into the hole, and the first
striving to help her slipped in too: Nor was either of them
seen any more, till their bodies floated upon the water. Yet
after some hours, one of them was brought to life. But the
other could not be recovered.
The violent heat, which had continued for eight days, was
now at an end, the wind turning north. So on Saturday, 29,
we had a pleasant ride to Limerick. Sunday, 30. I preached
in the old camp. The pleasantness of the place, the calmness
of the evening, and the convenient distance from the town,
all conspired to draw the people together, who flocked from
every quarter. Many Officers, as well as abundance of
soldiers, were among them, and behaved with the utmost
decency. I preached the following evenings at the same place,
and that in great measure for the sake of the soldiers, it
being within a musket-shot of the place where they were
exercising. Nay, two evenings an Officer ordered a large body
to exercise on the very spot. But the moment I began they
laid down their arms, and joined the rest of the congregation.
Fri. JUNE 4.--I preached at noon in Balligarame, to a large
congregation, chiefly of Palatines. And so at Newmarket in
the evening, and the morning following. These have quite a
different look from the natives of the country, as well as a
different temper. They are a serious, thinking people. And
their diligence turns all their land into a garden.
Mon. 7.--I met a large number of children, just as much
acquainted with God, and with the things of God, as “a
wild ass’s colt,” and just as much concerned about them.
And yet who can believe that these pretty little creatures
have “the wrath of God abiding on them?”
Numberless crowds ran together about this time, to see
the execution of the poor deserter. And I believe some of
them retained serious impressions for near four-and-twenty
hours | But it was not so with the soldiers: Although they
walked one by one, close to the bleeding, mangled carcase,
most of them were as merry within six hours, as if they had
only seen a puppet-show.
Tues. 8.--I visited the classes, and wondered to find no
witness of the great salvation. Surely the flame which is
kindled in Dublin will not stop there. The next evening
God did indeed kindle it here; a cry went up on every side;
and the lively believers seemed all on fire to be “cleansed
from all unrighteousness.”
On Friday and Saturday I had much conversation with a
very noted person. But I found none in town who expected
that any good could be done to such a sinner as him ! Such
a sinner? Why, were we not all such? We were dead in
sin. And is he more than dead?
Sun. 13.--Being informed I had shot over the heads of
the soldiers, who did not “understand any thing but hell and
damnation,” I took my leave of them this evening by
strongly applying the story of Dives and Lazarus: They
seemed to understand this; and all but two or three boy
officers behaved as men fearing God.
Mon. 14.--I rode to Cork. Here I procured an exact
account of the late commotions. About the beginning of
December last, a few men met by night near Nenagh, in the
county of Limerick, and threw down the fences of some
commons, which had been lately inclosed. Near the same
time others met in the county of Tipperary, of Waterford,
and of Cork. As no one offered to suppress or hinder them,
they increased in number continually, and called them
selves Whiteboys, wearing white cockades, and white linen
frocks. In February there were five or six parties of
them, two or three hundred men in each, who moved up and
down, chiefly in the night; but for what end did not appear.
Only they levelled a few fences, dug up some grounds,
June, 1762.] JOURNAL. 97
and hamstrung some cattle, perhaps fifty or sixty in all. One
body of them came into Cloheen, of about five hundred foot,
and two hundred horse. They moved as exactly as regular
troops, and appeared to be throughly disciplined. They now
sent letters to several gentlemen, threatening to pull down their
houses. They compelled every one they met to take an oath
to be true to Queen Sive (whatever that meant) and the
Whiteboys; not to reveal their secrets: and to join them
when called upon. . It was supposed, eight or ten thousand
were now actually risen, many of them well armed; and that
a far greater number were ready to rise whenever they should
be called upon. Those who refused to swear, they threatened
to bury alive. Two or three they did bury up to the neck,
and left them; where they must quickly have perished, had
they not been found in time by some travelling by. At length,
toward Easter, a body of troops, chiefly light horse, were sent
against them. Many were apprehended and committed to
gaol; the rest of them disappeared. This is the plain, naked
fact, which has been so variously represented.
Thur. 17.--I rode about thirty English miles, through a
pleasant and well-cultivated country, to Youghall. It is finely
situated on the side of an hill, so as to command a wide sea
prospect. I preached in the evening at the Exchange.
Abundance of people attended; as did the far greater part
of them at five o’clock in the morning. I returned to Cork
on Friday. Sunday, 20. At the desire of Captain Taylor, I
went to Passage, and preached to many of the town’s people,
and as many of the sailors as could attend. On Monday and
Tuesday I visited the classes, and observed what was very
uncommon; in two years there was neither any increase nor
any decrease in this society. Two hundred and thirty-three
members I left, and two hundred and thirty-three I find.
Thur. 24.--I rode to Kinsale, and preached in the
Exchange to a considerable number of attentive hearers. In
the afternoon I rode to Bandon, and found the society much
lessened, and dead enough. Yet the congregation in the
main street was remarkably large, as well as deeply attentive.
So it was on Friday. Saturday, 26. I visited the classes,
and exhorted them to “be zealous and repent.” The word
sunk into their hearts; so that when we met in the evening,
they did not seem to be the same persons. They appeared
to breathe quite another spirit, every one stirring up his
neighbour. I know not when I have seen so deep and
general an impression made in so short a time.
Sun. 27.--I returned to Cork, and in the afternoon
preached on the Barrack-Hill. The congregation was such as
I had not seen at Cork for at least twelve years. One soldier
made some noise; but the Commanding Officer soon ordered
him into custody. The top of the walls being covered with
soldiers, made a solemn appearance. Let this preaching be
continued, and the work of God will quickly revive at Cork.
On Monday and Tuesday the congregation at the House
was far larger than on any week-day before. And there was
much life among the people, which perhaps was increased
by the epidemic disorder. This generally attacked first the
head; afterward the throat and the breast. Mr. Jones, who
had been drooping for some time, was seized with this three
weeks since. While I was at Youghall, he sent for a Physician,
who applied a blister to his head. In two or three days a
second Physician was called in; who told his relations he was
better and better. Returning from Bandon, and observing
what was prescribed, I could not help saying, “When a fever
neither intermits, nor remits, the bark is no better than
poison.” At hearing this, the Doctors were much displeased,
and declared again he was a great deal better. On Wednesday
morning, a little before two, his spirit returned to God.
So died honest Thomas Jones, secundum artem A man
whom God raised from nothing, by a blessing on his
unwearied diligence, to a plentiful fortune. Yet when riches
increased on every side, he did not set his heart upon them.
Some years since he retired from business, but was still fully
employed in building and in doing good. His natural temper
was rough, and so was his speech, which occasioned him
many trials. But notwithstanding this, he was generous
and compassionate, and never weary of well-doing. From
the beginning of his illness he was continually in prayer;
for some time with much fear and distress. But I saw no
signs of this after I came from Bandon: I believe his fears
were then all scattered; and he waited with calm, though
earnest, desire for the salvation of God.
Wed. 30.--I rode to Limerick. I had promised to come
again, if our brethren found a convenient place to build a
preaching-house. One now offered, proper in all respects.
Saturday, JULY 3. I met the society, and inquired what
July, 1762.] JOURNAL. 99
each was willing to subscribe: A considerable sum was
subscribed immediately.
Sunday, 4, was a day of solemn joy, equal to any I had seen
in Dublin. At the love-feast in the evening, it appeared that
God had now visited Limerick also. Five persons desired to
return thanks to God, for a clear sense of his pardoning love:
Several others, for an increase of faith, and for deliverance
from doubts and fears. And two gave a plain, simple
account, of the manner wherein God had cleansed their
hearts, so that they now felt no anger, pride, or self-will; but
continual love, and prayer, and praise.
Mon. 5.--I rode to Clonmell; and preached in the
evening, near the barrack-gate, to a wild, staring multitude,
many of whom would have been rude enough, but they stood
in awe of the soldiers.
Tues. 6.--I rode to Carrick-on-Suir. Having been informed
there was one family here also, wherein both the man and his
wife feared God, I immediately sent to the house: The woman
presently came, from whom I learned, that her husband died
the Saturday before, and left her with nothing but four little
children, and an unshaken confidence in God. Her words,
her look, her whole carriage, were of a piece, and showed the
dignity of Christian sorrow. I could not but admire, that
God should send me just at such a time ! And her tears
were turned into tears of joy.
In the evening I preached at Waterford, in a court adjoining
to the main street. Wednesday, 7. Four of the Whiteboys,
lately condemned for breaking open houses, were executed.
They were all, notwithstanding the absolution of their Priest,
ready to die for fear of death. Two or three of them laid
fast hold on the ladder, and could not be persuaded to let it go.
One in particular gave such violent shrieks, as might be heard
near a mile off. O what but love can cast out the fear of
death ! And how inexpressibly miserable is that bondage |
On this, and the two following days, God remembered
poor Waterford also. Several backsliders were healed; many
awoke out of sleep; and some mightily rejoiced in God their
Saviour.
Sat. 10.--We rode to Kilkenny, one of the pleasantest and
the most ancient cities in the kingdom; and not inferior to any
at all in wickedness, or in hatred to this way. I was therefore
glad of a permission to preach in the Town-Hall; where a
small, serious company attended in the evening. Sunday, 11.
I went to the cathedral; one of the best-built which I have
seen in Ireland. The pillars are all of black marble; but the
late Bishop ordered them to be white-washed! Indeed, marble
is so plentiful near this town, that the very streets are paved
with it.
At six in the evening I began preaching in the old Bowling
green, near the Castle. Abundance of people, Protestants and
Papists, gathered from all parts. They were very still during
the former part of the sermon; then the Papists ran together,
set up a shout, and would have gone further, but they were
restrained, they knew not how. I turned to them, and said,
“Be silent; or be gone!” Their moise ceased, and we heard
them no more: So I resumed, and went on with my discourse,
and concluded without interruption.
When I came out of the Green, they gathered again, and
gnashed upon me with their teeth: One cried out, “O what
is Kilkenny come to !” But they could go no farther. Only
two or three large stones were thrown; but none was hurt,
save he that threw them: For, as he was going to throw
again, one seized him by the neck, and gave him a kick and
a cuff, which spoiled his diversion.
Mon. 12.--I went to Dunmore-Cave, three or four miles
from Kilkenny. It is full as remarkable as Poole's Hole, or
any other in the Peak. The opening is round, parallel to the
horizon, and seventy or eighty yards across. In the midst
of this, there is a kind of arch, twenty or thirty feet high
By this you enter into the first cave, nearly round, and forty
or fifty feet in diameter. It is encompassed with spar stones,
just like those on the sides of Poole's Hole. On one side of
the cave is a narrow passage, which goes under the rock two
or three hundred yards; on the other, an hollow, which no
one has ever been able to find an end of. I suppose this hole
too, as well as many others, was formed by the waters of the
deluge, retreating into the great abyss, with which probably
it communicates.
Tues. 13.--I rode to Birr. About forty persons attended
in the evening, and half as many in the morning. I saw there
was but one way to do any good. So in the evening I preached
abroad. I had then hundreds of hearers, and God himself
spoke to many a cold heart. The next morning at five the
Room was full, and light sprung out of darkness; so that
July, 1762.] JOURNAL. 101
many poor withered souls began to revive, and rejoice again
in God their Saviour.
Thur. 15.--I took my old standing in the market-place at
Mountmellick; but the next evening the rain drove us into
the market-house. Afterward we had a joyful love-feast.
Indeed hitherto God has been pleased to mark all our way
with blessings.
Sat. 17.--I went on to poor dead Portarlington. And no
wonder it should be so, while the Preachers coop themselves up
in a room with twenty or thirty hearers. I went straight to the
market-place, and cried aloud, “Hearken I Behold, a sower
went forth to sow.” God made his word quick and powerful,
and sharp as a two-edged sword. Abundantly more than the
Room could contain were present at five in the morning. At
eight I began in the market-place again, on, “How shall I
give thee up, Ephraim ?” Solemn attention sat on every
face, and God repeated his call to many hearts.
In the evening I preached in the market-place at Tullamore.
Monday, 19. Between two and three in the morning was such
thunder and lightning as I never knew in Europe. The crack
and the flash were in the same instant. Most of the houses
shook; and yet no hurt was done in the whole town: But some
good was done; for at five o’clock the preaching-house was
quite filled; and the inward voice of the Lord was mighty
in operation. This also was “a glorious voice.”
Tues. 20.--We had our Quarterly Meeting at Cooly-Lough.
On Wednesday, I preached at Clara; Thursday, 22, at
Tyrrel's Pass; and on Friday went on to Edinderry. Here
I found some who had been long labouring in the fire, and
toiling to work themselves into holiness. To show them a more
excellent way, I preached on Rom. x. 6, 7, 8. They found this
was the very thing they wanted; and at the meeting of the
society, God confirmed the word of his grace in so powerful a
manner, that many wondered how they could help believing.
Sat. 24.--I rode to Dublin, and found the flame not only
continuing, but increasing. The congregation used to be
small on Saturday night; but it was as large now as formerly
on Sunday. Monday, 26. At five in the morning the
congregation was larger than it used to be in the evening.
And in these two days and a half, four persons gave thanks for
a sense of God’s pardoning mercy; and seven, (among whom
were a mother and her daughter,) for being perfected in love.
The person by whom chiefly it pleased God to work this
wonderful work, was John Manners, a plain man, of middling
sense, and not eloquent, but rather rude in speech; one who
had never before been remarkably useful, but seemed to be
raised up for this single work. And as soon as it was done,
he fell into a consumption, languished a while, and died.
I now found he had not at all exceeded the truth, in the
accounts he had sent me from time to time. In one of his
first letters, after I left the town, he says: “The work here
is such as I never expected to see. Some are justified or
sanctified, almost every day. This week three or four were
justified, and as many, if not more, renewed in love. The
people are all on fire. Such a day as last Sunday I never saw.
While I was at prayer in the society, the power of the Lord
overshadowed us, and some cried out, ‘Lord, I can believe l’
The cry soon became general, with strong prayers. Twice
I attempted to sing; but my voice could not be heard. I
then desired them to restrain themselves, and in stillness and
composure to wait for the blessing: On which all but two or
three, who could not refrain, came into a solemn silence. I
prayed again, and the softening power of grace was felt in
many hearts. Our congregations increase much, and I have
no doubt but we shall see greater things than these.”
Four days after, he writes: “The work of God increases.
every day. There is hardly a day but some are justified, or
sanctified, or both. On Thursday three came and told me
that the blood of Jesus Christ had cleansed them from all sin.
One of them told me she had been justified seven years, and
had been five years convinced of the necessity of sanctification.
But this easy conviction availed not. A fortnight since she
was seized with so keen a conviction, as gave her no rest till
God had sanctified her, and witnessed it to her heart.”
Three days after, (May 11,) he writes thus: “God still
continues his marvellous lovingkindness to us. On Sunday
last Dor. King entered into the rest. She had been seeking
it for some time; but her convictions and desires grew
stronger and stronger, as the hour approached. Awhile ago
she told me she grew worse and worse, and her inward
conflicts were greater than ever: But on the Lord's day she
felt an entire change, while these words were spoke to her
heart, ‘Thou art all fair, my love; there is no spot in thee.’
She now walks in sweet peace, and rejoices evermore. Her
July, 1762.] JOURNAL, 103
father received the blessing a few days before her, and is
exceeding happy.
“The fire catches all that come near. An old soldier, in
his return from Germany to the north of Ireland, fell in one
night with these wrestling Jacobs, to his great astonishment.
He was justified seventeen years ago, but afterward fell from it
for five years. As he was going to Germany, in the beginning
of the war, the Lord healed him in Dublin; and in spite of
all the distresses of a severe campaign, he walked in the light
continually. On his return through London, he was con
vinced of the necessity of sanctification; and soon after he
came hither, his heart was broken in pieces, while he was with
a little company who meet daily for prayer. One evening,
as they were going away, he stopped them, and begged they
would not go till the Lord had blessed him. They kneeled
down again, and did not cease wrestling with God, till he had
a witness that he was saved from all sin.
“The case of Mr. Timmins is no less remarkable. He had
been a notorious sinner. He was deeply wounded two months
since. Ten days ago, on a Friday, God spake peace to his
soul. The Sunday following, after a violent struggle, he sunk
down as dead. He was cold as clay. After about ten minutes
he came to himself, and cried, ‘A new heart, a new heart!”
He said he felt himself in an instant entirely emptied of sin,
and filled with God. Brother Barry, likewise, had been justified
but a few days, before God gave him purity of heart.”
May 15, he writes: “God still makes me a messenger
of good tidings. His work goes on. Our last night's meeting
was remarkable for the presence and power of God, while
several were relating what he had done. One said, “All
that day in which God delivered me, I felt the blessing just
at hand, but could not open my heart to receive it. I was fast
shut up, till, under the sermon in the evening, I felt God
open my heart, remove the bar of unbelief, and give me
power to receive the blessing freely.”
“There are now three places in the city, wherein as many
as have opportunity assemble day and night, to pour out
their souls before God, for the continuance and enlargement
of his work.”
“May 29.--Since my last account, many have been
sanctified, and several justified. One of the former is William
Moor. He was a long time struggling for the blessing; and
one night he was resolved not to go to bed without it. He
continued wrestling with God for two hours; when he felt
a glorious change, and the Spirit of God witnessing that the
work was done.
“We begin now to meet with opposition from every quarter.
Some say this is rank enthusiasm; others, that it is either a
cheat, or mere pride; others, that it is a new thing, and that
they can find no such thing in the Bible.”
“June 3.--The Lord increases his work, in proportion
to the opposition it meets with. Between Monday morning
and Tuesday night, I have had eight bills of thanksgiving;
for two justified, three renewed in love, and three backsliders
healed.”
“June 15.--There is no end of the mercies of God.
Three days of this week are gone, in which God has justified
five sinners. On Sunday, in the afternoon, I preached at
three in the Barrack-Square; and a more solemn time I have
not seen; the hearers were as many as my voice could reach,
and all remarkably attentive.
“In the evening a cry ran through the society, and four
were justified that night. Two of these, Alexander Tate
and his wife, were but lately joined. The power of God first
seized her, and constrained her to cry aloud, till she heard
the still small voice. He continued calling upon God, and
would not cease before God answered him also in the joy in
his heart.”
“Saturday, June 19.--We have had eight this week,
whose sins are blotted out, and two more have entered into
that rest. One of them says, she has enjoyed the love of
God nine years; but felt as great a difference between that
state, and the state she is now in, as if her soul was taken
into heaven l”
“June 26.--Last week eleven were justified, or sanctified,
and this week eleven more; eight of whom received remission
of sins, and three a clean heart: And a troop are waiting for
the moving of the water. Among them whom the power of
God has seized lately, are two eminent sinners, each of whom
lived with a woman to whom he was never married. One of
them already rejoices in God; the other mourns and will not
be comforted: But the women are gone: They put away
the accursed thing immediately.
“I had much fear about the children, lest our labour should
July, 1762.] JOURNAL. 105
be lost upon them; but I find we shall reap if we faint not.
Margaret Roper, about cight years old, has been thoughtful
for some time. The other day, while they were at family
prayer, she burst into tears and wept bitterly. They asked,
what was the matter. She said she was a great sinner, and
durst not pray. They bade her go to bed. She no sooner
came into the chamber, than she began crying, and clapping
her hands, so that they heard her across the street; but God
soon bound up her broken heart. Being asked how she felt
herself, she said, “Ten times better. Now I can love God.
I wish you would sit up and sing with me all might. She
has been happy ever since, and as serious as one of forty.”
“July 3.--Our joy is now quite full. The flame rises
higher and higher. Since Saturday last, eight sinners more
are freely justified, and two more renewed in love. Our
House was once large enough; now it is scarce able to contain
us: And we have not many in the society, who are not either
wrestling with God for his love, or rejoicing therein.”
Thus far the account of John Manners, quite unadorned,
but plain and sensible.
Upon farther examination I found three or four and forty
in Dublin, who seemed to enjoy the pure love of God: At
least forty of these had been set at liberty within four months.
Some others, who had received the same blessing, were
removed out of the city. The same, if not a larger number,
had found remission of sins. Nor was the hand of the Lord
shortened yet: He still wrought as swiftly as ever.
In some respects the work of God in this place was more
remarkable than even that in London. 1. It is far greater, in
proportion to the time, and to the number of people. That
society had above seven-and-twenty hundred members; this
not a fifth part of the number. Six months after the flame
broke out there, we had about thirty witnesses of the great
salvation. In Dublin there were above forty in less than four
months. 2. The work was more pure. In all this time,
while they were mildly and tenderly treated, there were none
of them headstrong or unadvisable; none that were wiser than
their Teachers; none who dreamed of being immortal or
infallible, or incapable of temptation; in short, no whimsical
or enthusiastic persons: All were calm and sober-minded.
I know several of these were, in process of time, moved
from their steadfastness. I am nothing surprised at this: It
was no more than might be expected: I rather wonder that
more were not moved. Nor does this, in any degree, alter
my judgment concerning the great work which God then
wrought.
Tues. 27.--I received a comfortable letter from Edinderry:
“When you came hither, Satan had gained such an advan
tage over us, that few, even of the society, would read your
sermons, saying, they were nothing but the Law; but God
has now taught us better. His power fell upon us first in
the preaching, but abundantly more when the society met.
At that time many who were in heaviness were filled with
consolation; and two of the old believers were constrained to
declare they believed God had cleansed them from all sin.”
Wed. 28.--I received farther accounts from Limerick; one
letter ran thus:---
“July 20, 1762.
“THERE is a glorious work going on at Limerick. Twelve
or fourteen have a clear sense of being renewed; several have
been justified this week; and on Sunday night, at the meeting
of the society, there was such a cry as I scarce ever heard.
before, such confession of sins, such pleading with the Lord,
and such a spirit of prayer, as if the Lord himself had been
visibly present among us. Some received remission of sins,
and several were just brought to the birth. All were in
floods of tears: They trembled, they cried, they prayed, they
roared aloud; all of them lying on the ground. I began to
sing; yet they could not rise, but sang as they lay along.
When we concluded, some of them could not go away, but
stayed in the House all night: And, blessed be our Lord,
they all hitherto walk worthy of their calling.”
Another writes:
“I will just tell you, the Lord has made your last visit
to us a great blessing. Such times were never before in
Limerick. The fire which broke out before you left us, is
now spreading on every side. Four were happy before you
left us; several others can now ‘rejoice evermore, and ‘pray
without ceasing:’ And this certainly they could not do, did
they not love God with all their heart.”
A third letter, dated July 25, says:
“BLEssED be God, his word runs swiftly. Last night his
power was present indeed; and another was assured that God,
who had before forgiven his sins, had now cleansed him from
Aug. 1762.] JOURNAL, 107
all unrighteousness. There are now ten women and thirteen
men who witness the same confession; and their lives agree
thereto. Eight have lately received the remission of their sins;
and many are on the full stretch for God, and just ready to
step into the pool.”--Hence it appears, that, in proportion to
the time, which was only three or four weeks, and the number
of hearers, (not one half, if a third part,) the work of God
was greater in Limerick than even in Dublin itself.
Thur. 29.--I was informed of a remarkable instance of
divine mercy. An harmless, unawakened young woman came
to one of the meetings for prayer in Dublin. While they
were praying, she felt herself a sinner, and began crying
aloud for mercy. And when they rose to go away, she cried
with a bitter cry, “What, must I go without Christ?”
They began praying again; and in a short time she was as
loud in praising God for his pardoning mercy.
No less remarkable was the case of Alexander Tate. He
and his wife were present, where a few were met for prayer.
Her sorrow was soon turned into joy. Her husband, who
was before little awakened, was just then cut to the heart, and
felt the wrath of God abiding on him: Nor did he cease
crying to God, till his prayers and tears were swallowed up
in thanksgiving. So here are two instances of persons both
convinced and converted in the same hour.
Sat. 31.--Although I never before felt such an union
of heart with the people of Dublin, yet believing my present
work in Ireland was ended, I cheerfully commended them to
God, and embarked on board the Dorset for Parkgate. We
weighed anchor at eight in the evening. Between nine and
ten on Sunday morning, the Captain asked me if I would
not go to prayers with them. All who were able to creep
out were willingly present. After prayers I preached on
Prov. iii. 17. We had scarce any wind when I began; but
while I was preaching it sprung up, and brought us to
Parkgate between six and seven.
Mon. AUGUST 2.--I rode on to Chester. Never was the
society in such a state before. Their jars and contentions
were at an end; and I found nothing but peace and love
among them. About twelve of them believed they were
saved from sin; and their lives did not contradict their
profession. Most of the rest were strongly athirst for God,
and looking for him continually.
Tues. 3.-I was desired to preach at Northwich; and one
had stuck up notices in all parts of the town. But what
place had they for me to preach in? Only a little room which
would hold about fifty people. Between twelve and one they
gathered from all parts, noisy and rude enough. I could not
stand in the yard without just facing the sun; so I stood at
the casement, that those without might hear, that is, if they
had a mind to it. But a great part of them had no such
intention: They came only either for sport or mischief.
However, they were pretty quiet till I had done. Our
friends would then have persuaded me to stay till the mob
was dispersed; but, as they grew louder and louder, I judged
it best to walk immediately through the midst of them.
Many things were thrown, but nothing touched me, till I
took horse and rode to Manchester.
Here I received letters from Congleton, in Cheshire, and
Burslem, in Staffordshire. Part of the former ran thus:--
“August 1, 1762.
“THE work of God for some time stood still here; but at
the love-feast, on the 21st of March last, (glory for ever be to
God!) there was an out-pouring of his Spirit among us.
Five persons were assured of their acceptance with God, of
whom, by his free grace, I was one; four believed he had not
only forgiven their sins, but likewise cleansed them from all
unrighteousness. Many more have since found him gracious
and merciful: Nor is his hand yet stayed at all.”
Part of the other is as follows:
“BEFoRE Mr. Furz came into these parts we were biting
and devouring one another; and many who once had known
God, were ‘in their works denying him. The society in
general was cold and dead; and only two were converted to
God in a whole year. But, glory be to God, the case is now
altered. Those grievances are removed. The power of God
is present with us; and the fire of his love is kindled among us.
We are very weak; but, blessed be God, we are all alive.
Many are crying out in the bitterness of their souls, ‘God be
merciful to me a sinner!’ Sometimes we have had two, at
other times six or seven, justified in one week; others find the
very remains of sin destroyed, and wait to be filled “with all
the fulness of God.’”
Wed. 4.--I rode to Liverpool, where also was such a work
Aug. 1762.] JOURNAL. 109
of God as had never been known there before. We had a
surprising congregation in the evening, and, as it seemed,
all athirst for God. This, I found, had begun here likewise
in the latter end of March; and from that time it had con
tinually increased, till a little before I came : Nine were
justified in one hour. The next morning I spoke severally
with those who believed they were sanctified. They were
fifty-one in all: Twenty-one men, twenty-one widows, or
married women, and nine young women or children. In
one of these the change was wrought three weeks after she
was justified; in three, seven days after it; in one, five
days; and in Sus. Lutwich, aged fourteen, two days only.
I asked Hannah Blakeley, aged eleven, “What do you
want now 2° She said, with amazing energy, the tears
running down her cheeks, “Nothing in this world, nothing
but more of my Jesus.” How often “out of the mouth of
babes and sucklings” dost thou “perfect praise !”
Fri. 6.--I was informed of the flame which had broken
out at Bolton. One writing to Mr. Furz, described a little
of it in the following words:--“Glory be to God, he is doing
wonders among us! Since you left us there have been
seven (if not more) justified, and six sanctified, at one
meeting. Two of these were, I think, justified and
sanctified in less than three days. O what a meeting was
our last class-meeting ! In three minutes, or less, God,
quite unexpectedly, convinced an old opposer of the truth,
and wounded many. I never felt the abiding presence of
God so exceeding powerful before.”
I preached at Macclesfield in the evening to a people ready
prepared for the Lord. An impetuous shower began just as
we came into the town; but it did us no hurt. Inquiring
how the revival here began, I received the following account:--
In March last, after a long season of dryness and barrenness,
one Monday night John Oldham preached. When he had
done, and was going away, a man fell down and cried aloud
for mercy. In a short time, so did several others. He
came back, and wrestled with God in prayer for them.
About twelve he retired, leaving some of the brethren, who
resolved to wrestle on till they had an answer of peace.
They continued in prayer till six in the morning; and nine
prisoners were set at liberty.
They met again the next night; and six or seven more were
filled with peace and joy in believing: So were one or two more
every night till the Monday following, when there was another
general shower of grace; and many believed that the blood
of Christ had cleansed them from all sin.
I spoke to these (forty in all) one by one. Some of them
said they received that blessing ten days, some seven, some
four, some three days, after they found peace with God; and
two of them the next day. What marvel, since one day is
with God as a thousand years?
The case of Ann Hooly was peculiar. She had often
declared, “The Methodists’ God shall not be my God. I will
sooner go to hell than I will go to heaven in their way.”
She was standing in the street with two young women, when
John Oldham, passing by, spoke to one and the other, and
went on. She burst into tears, and said, “What I am I so
great a sinner, that he won’t speak to me?” About twelve
he was sent for in haste. He found her in deep distress; but
continued in prayer till all her trouble was gone, and her
spirit rejoiced in God her Saviour. Yet three nights after
she was in much distress again, crying, “I have a wicked
heart, and I cannot rest till God takes it away.” He did
so in a few hours. Ever since she has been a pattern to all
the young people in the town. She was thirteen years old.
In about a year, her spirit returned to God.
Sat. 7.--I made one more trial at Northwich, preaching
in Mr. Page's yard. Abundance of people flocked together;
nor did any one oppose, or make the least disturbance. And
when I afterward rode quite through the town, I had not one
uncivil word.
In the evening I spoke with those at Manchester who
believed God had cleansed their hearts. They were sixty
three in number; to about sixty of whom I could not find
there was any reasonable objection.
Mon. 9.--I preached at Elland and Birstal in my way to
Leeds, where our Conference began on Tuesday morning;
and we had great reason to praise God for his gracious presence
from the beginning to the end.
Sun. 15.--I preached about one at Birstal, and in the
morning and evening at Leeds. I then rode about eighteen
miles. On Monday morning I preached at Sheffield, and in
the evening came to Derby. I had sent word that I did
not intend to preach; but, after I had rested awhile in my
Aug. 1762.] JOURNAL, 111
chamber, coming down and finding the house full of people,
I spoke to them half an hour in a familiar manner, and then
spent some time in prayer. I believe God touched some of
their hearts; indeed it seemed none were unmoved.
Tues. 17.--We rode to Northampton, the next day to
Sundon, and on Thursday, 19, to London. Friday, 20.
As I expected, the sower of tares had not been idle during
my five months’ absence; but I believe great part of his
work was undone in one hour, when we met at West-Street.
I pointed out to those who had more heat than light, the
snares which they had well nigh fallen into. And hitherto
they were of an humble teachable spirit. So for the present
the snare was broken.
Sat. 21.--My brother and I had a long conversation with
Mr. Maxfield, and freely told him whatever we disliked. In
some things we found he had been blamed without cause;
others he promised to alter; so we were throughly satisfied
with the conversation, believing all misunderstandings were
now removed.
Mon. 23.--I set out, and on Tuesday reached Bristol.
After spending two days there, on Friday, 27, I set out for
the west; and having preached at Shepton and Middlesey in
the way, came on Saturday to Exeter. When I began the
service there, the congregation (beside ourselves) were two
women, and one man. Before I had done, the Room was
about half full. This comes of omitting field-preaching.
Sun. 29.--I preached at eight on Southernay-Green, to
an extremely quiet congregation. At the cathedral we had
an useful sermon, and the whole service was performed with
great seriousness and decency. Such an organ I never saw or
heard before, so large, beautiful, and so finely toned; and the
music of “Glory be to God in the highest,” I think exceeded
the Messiah itself. I was well pleased to partake of the
Lord’s Supper with my old opponent, Bishop Lavington. O
may we sit down together in the kingdom of our Father !
At five I went to Southernay-Green again, and found a
multitude of people; but a lewd, profane, drunken vagabond
had so stirred up many of the baser sort, that there was much
noise, hurry, and confusion. While I was preaching, several
things were thrown, and much pains taken to overturn the
table; and after I concluded, many endeavoured to throw me
down, but I walked through the midst and left them.
Mon. 30.--We rode to Plymouth-Dock. Wednesday,
SEPTEMBER 1. I came about two to Poleperro, a little village
four hours’ ride from Plymouth-Passage, surrounded with
huge mountains. However, abundance of people had found
the way thither. And so had Satan too; for an old grey
headed sinner was bitterly cursing all the Methodists just as
we came into the town. However, God gave his blessing,
both to us and the congregation.
In the evening I preached at Medros; the next evening in
St. Austle; and on Friday, 3, at Mevagissey. Saturday, 4.
After preaching in Grampound, I rode on to Truro. I almost
expected there would be some disturbance, as it was market
day, and I stood in the street at a small distance from the
market. But all was quiet. Indeed both persecution and
popular tumult seem to be forgotten in Cornwall.
Sun. 5.--As I was enforcing, in the same place, those
solemn words, “God forbid that I should glory, save in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,” a poor man began to make
some tumult; but many cried out, “Constables, take him
away.” They did so, and the hurry was over. At one I
preached in the main street at Redruth, where rich and poor
were equally attentive. The wind was so high at five, that I
could not stand in the usual place at Gwennap. But at a
small distance was a hollow capable of containing many
thousand people. I stood on one side of this amphitheatre
toward the top, with the people beneath and on all sides, and
enlarged on those words in the Gospel for the day, (Luke
x. 23, 24,) “Blessed are the eyes which see the things that
ye see, and which hear the things that ye hear.”
Mon. 6.--I preached at Penryn; Tuesday, 7, at Porkellis
about one o’clock. Thence I rode on to Mullion, near the
Lizard-Point. A man who was a sinner gladly received us;
for he knew God had received him; having been deeply
convinced of sin the last time I preached near Helstone, and
not long after filled with peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.
A flame was kindled almost as soon as I began to speak,
which increased more and more, all the time I was preaching,
as well as during the meeting of the society. How tender
are the hearts of this people ! Such is the advantage of true
Christian simplicity |
Wed.8.--The congregation at St. John’s, near Helstone, was
thrice as large as when I was there before. The next day I
Sept. 1762.] JOURNAL. 113
preached at Crowan at noon, and at Penhale (in Breage) in
the evening. Friday, 10. I preached on St. Hilary-Downs,
to a congregation gathered from all parts. Abundance of
them were athirst for God: And he did not deceive their hope.
The cry of the mourners went up before him, and he sent
down an answer of peace.
Sat. 11.--I preached at one on the cliff, near Penzance, and
in the evening at Newlyn. Sunday, 12. At eight God was in
the midst, and many hearts were broken in pieces. Between
one and two I preached at Sancreet, where I never was before.
Abundance of strangers came from every side; and I believe
not many went empty away. Hence we rode to St. Just,
where I spent two comfortable nights, the congregations being
very large, evening and morning. Tuesday, 14. I preached
in Lelant about one, and, in the evening, near the Quay at
St. Ives. Two or three pretty butterflies came, and looked,
and smiled, and went away; but all the rest of the numerous
congregation behaved with the utmost seriousness.
Wed. 15.--We had our Quarterly Meeting. The next
day I appointed the children to meet. I expected twenty,
but I suppose we had fourscore; all of them wanting, many
desiring, instruction.
The more I converse with the believers in Cornwall, the
more I am convinced that they have sustained great loss for
want of hearing the doctrine of Christian Perfection clearly
and strongly enforced. I see, wherever this is not done, the
believers grow dead and cold. Nor can this be prevented, but
by keeping up in them an hourly expectation of being
perfected in love. I say an hourly expectation; for to expect
it at death, or some time hence, is much the same as not
expecting it at all.
Fri. 17.--At one I preached in Illogan; at six near Red
ruth, at a gentleman’s house, in a large court, shaded with trees.
It was so calm that hardly a leaf moved. Saturday, 18. I
preached once more in the street at Redruth, and in St. Agnes
in the evening. I preached again at eight in the morning,
and afterwards heard an excellent sermon at church, preached
by the Rector, Mr. Walker, elder brother to the late Mr.
Walker of Truro. He likewise gave notice of his design to
preach, in the afternoon, a funeral sermon for Mr. Phelps,
his late Curate, a man eminently humble, serious, and zealous
for God. He was snatched away by a fever three weeks since,
as was his predecessor, Mr. Vowler, three or four years
before; another upright, zealous servant of God, and
indefatigable in his labour. How strange a providence is
this ! Who can account for it? Did the God of love take
them away, that they might not, out of zeal for him, continue
to oppose their fellow-labourers in the Gospel?
Mr. Walker gave him his due praise, in a strong and pathetic
sermon, well wrote and well pronounced; concluding with,
“God grant me, (and I believe you will all join in the
petition,) like him to live, like him to die.”
Just as the Service was ended, it began to rain. The
wind also was exceeding high; this created some difficulty.
No house could contain the people, neither could I preach, as
before, on the top of the hill. I therefore made a halt at the
bottom. The congregation gathered round me in a few
minutes. We were tolerably sheltered from the wind, and
the rain ceased till I had done. I particularly advised all
that feared God to confirm their love to each other, and to
provoke each other, not to doubtful disputations, but to
love, and to good works.
The night came on soon after we were on horseback, and
we had eight miles to ride. In about half an hour, it was so
dark, I could not see my hand, and it rained incessantly.
However, a little after eight, God brought us safe to Cubert.
I preached at the Church-town the next day; and on
Tuesday, 21, rode on to Port-Isaac. Here the stewards of
the eastern Circuit met. What a change is wrought in one
year's time! That detestable practice of cheating the King is
no more found in our societies. And since that accursed thing
has been put away, the work of God has everywhere increased.
This society, in particular, is more than doubled: And
they are all alive to God. Friday, 24. About two I preached
at Trewalder, and found God was there also; but more
abundantly at Camelford, in the evening, as well as at five on
Saturday morning. In the afternoon, the rain intermitting,
I preached in the market-place; and it was a solemn season.
Sun. 26.--After preaching at eight I left Camelford, now
one of the liveliest places in Cornwall. About noon I preached
at Trewint. It was fifteen years since I preached there
before. Hence I rode to Launceston, to a people as dead as
those at Camelford were once. Yet how soon may these also
be quickened, by the voice that raiseth the dead!
Oct. 1762.] JOURNAL, 115
Mon. 27.--I rode to Mary-Week. It was a kind of fair
day; and the people were come far and near for wrestling and
other diversions. But they found a better way of employing
their time; for young and old flocked to church from all
quarters. The next day I preached at Mill-House; on
Wednesday, at Collumpton; and on Thursday, 30, in the
market-house at Tiverton.
About midnight I was waked by loud thunder, which
continued about a quarter of an hour at Tiverton. In other
places, we were afterwards informed, it continued great part
of the night. Yet by comparing various accounts, I found
the main shock was at the same time for near an hundred
miles. So it seems there was a train of clouds for at least
that space, which, by an electrical touch, were all discharged
at once.
Fri. OcroBER 1.--I preached at Taunton and Shepton
Mallet, and on Saturday, 2, rode on to Bristol. In the two
following weeks I visited as many as I could of the societies
in the country, as well as regulated those of Bristol and
Kingswood.
Sat. 16.--Being informed that James Oddie, coming
to Bristol, was stopped at Newport by a pleuritic fever, I
went to him directly: He recovered from that hour, and in
two or three days followed me to Bristol.
The next week I went to many of the societies in
Somersetshire. Monday, 25. I preached at one, in the
shell of the new House at Shepton-Mallet. In digging the
foundation they found a quarry of stone, which was more
than sufficient for the House. Thence I rode to Wincanton.
The rain prevented my preaching abroad; so I willingly
accepted the offer of a large meeting-house, where I preached
to a crowded audience, with much satisfaction; and again
at seven in the morning.
Abundance of rain fell in the night; so that in the morning
we were blocked up; the river which runs by the side of the
town not being fordable. At length we made a shift to lead
our horses over the foot-bridge. I preached at Coleford
about noon, and at Bristol in the evening.
Thur. 28.--One who had adorned the Gospel in life and
in death, having desired that I should preach her funeral
sermon, I went with a few friends to the house, and sang
before the body to the Room. I did this the rather, to show
my approbation of that solemn custom, and to encourage
others to follow it. As we walked, our company swiftly
increased, so that we had a very numerous congregation at
the Room. And who can tell, but some of these may bless
God for it to all eternity?
Many years ago my brother frequently said, “Your day of
Pentecost is not fully come; but I doubt not it will: And
you will then hear of persons sanctified, as frequently as you
do now of persons justified.” Any unprejudiced reader may
observe, that it was now fully come. And accordingly we
did hear of persons sanctified, in London, and most other
parts of England, and in Dublin, and many other parts of
Ireland, as frequently as of persons justified; although
instances of the latter were far more frequent than they had
been for twenty years before. That many of these did not
retain the gift of God, is no proof that it was not given them.
That many do retain it to this day, is matter of praise and
thanksgiving. And many of them are gone to Him whom
they loved, praising him with their latest breath; just in the
spirit of Ann Steed, the first witness in Bristol of the great
salvation; who, being worn out with sickness and racking
pain, after she had commended to God all that were round
her, lifted up her eyes, cried aloud, “Glory ! Hallelujah!”
and died.
J Oly RNAL
Fri. October 29, 1762.--I left Bristol, and the next day
came to London. Monday, NovEMBER 1. I went down to
Canterbury. Here I seriously reflected on some late occur
rences; and, after weighing the matter thoroughly, wrote as
follows:-
“WITHoUT any preface or ceremony, which is needless
between you and me, I will simply and plainly tell what I
dislike in your doctrine, spirit, or outward behaviour. When
I say yours, I include brother Bell and Owen, and those who
are most closely connected with them.
“1. I like your doctrine of Perfection, or pure love;
love excluding sin; your insisting that it is merely by faith;
that consequently it is instantaneous, (though preceded and
followed by a gradual work) and that it may be now, at this
instant.
“But I dislike your supposing man may be as perfect as
an angel; that he can be absolutely perfect; that he can be
infallible, or above being tempted; or that the moment he is
pure in heart, he cannot fall from it.
“I dislike the saying, this was not known or taught among
us till within two or three years. I grant you did not know it.
You have over and over denied instantaneous sanctification to
me; but I have known and taught it (and so has my brother,
as our writings show) above these twenty years.
“I dislike your directly or indirectly depreciating justifi
cation; saying, a justificd person is not in Christ, is not born
of God, is not a new creature, has not a new heart, is not
sanctified, not a temple of the Holy Ghost; or that he cannot
please God, or cannot grow in grace.
“I dislike your saying that one saved from sin needs
nothing more than looking to Jesus; needs not to hear or
think of any thing else; believe, believe, is enough; that he
needs no self-examination, no times of private prayer; needs
not mind little or outward things; and that he cannot be
taught by any person who is not in the same state.
“I dislike your affirming that justified persons in general
persecute them that are saved from sin; that they have
persecuted you on this account; and that for two years past
you have been more persecuted by the two brothers, than
ever you was by the world in all your life.
“2. As to your spirit, I like your confidence in God, and
your zeal for the salvation of souls.
“But I dislike something which has the appearance of
pride, of overvaluing yourselves, and undervaluing others;
particularly the Preachers; thinking not only that they are
blind, and that they are not sent of God, but even that they
are dead; dead to God, and walking in the way to hell; that
they are going one way, you another; that they have no life
in them. Your speaking of yourselves, as though you were
the only men who knew and taught the Gospel; and as if,
not only all the Clergy, but all the Methodists besides, were
in utter darkness.
“I dislike something that has the appearance of enthusiasm,
overvaluing feelings and inward impressions; mistaking the
mere work of imagination for the voice of the Spirit; expecting
the end without the means; and undervaluing reason,
knowledge, and wisdom in general.
“I dislike something that has the appearance of Anti
nomianism, not magnifying the Law, and making it honour
able; not enough valuing tenderness of conscience, and exact
watchfulness in order thereto; using faith rather as
contradistinguished from holiness, than as productive of it.
“But what I most of all dislike is, your littleness of love to
your brethren, to your own society; your want of union of heart
with them, and bowels of mercies toward them; your want
of meekness, gentleness, longsuffering; your impatience of
contradiction; your counting every man your enemy that
reproves or admonishes you in love; your bigotry, and
narrowness of spirit, loving in a manner only those that love
you; your censoriousness, proneness to think hardly of all
who do not exactly agree with you; in one word, your divisive
spirit. Indeed I do not believe that any of you either design
or desire a separation; but you do not enough fear, abhor,
and detest it, shuddering at the very thought: And all the
preceding tempers tend to it, and gradually prepare you for
Nov. 1762.] JOURNAL, 121
it. Observe, I tell you before. God grant you may
immediately and affectionately take the warning !
“3. As to your outward behaviour, I like the general tenor
of your life, devoted to God, and spent in doing good.
“But I dislike your slighting any, the very least Rules of
the Bands or society; and your doing anything that tends to
hinder others from exactly observing them. Therefore,
“I dislike your appointing such meetings as hinder others
from attending either the public preaching, or their class or
band; or any other meeting, which the Rules of the society,
or their office requires them to attend.
“I dislike your spending so much time in several meetings,
as many that attend can ill spare from the other duties of their
calling, unless they omit either the preaching, or their class,
or band. This naturally tends to dissolve our society, by
cutting the sinews of it.
“As to your more public meetings, I like the praying
fervently and largely for all the blessings of God; and I
know much good has been done hereby, and hope much more
will be done.
“But I dislike several things therein: 1. The singing, or
speaking, or praying, of several at once: 2. The praying to
the Son of God only, or more than to the Father: 3. The
using improper expressions in prayer; sometimes too bold, if
not irreverent; sometimes too pompous and magnificent,
extolling yourselves rather than God, and telling him what
you are, not what you want : 4. Using poor, flat, bald
hymns: 5. The never kneeling at prayer: 6. Your using
postures or gestures highly indecent: 7. Your screaming,
even so as to make the words unintelligible: 8. Your
affirming, people will be justified or sanctified just now :
9. The affirming they are, when they are not: 10. The
bidding them say, ‘I believe: 11. The bitterly condemning
any that oppose, calling them wolves, &c.; and pronouncing
them hypocrites, or not justified.
“Read this calmly and impartially before the Lord, in
prayer: So shall the evil cease, and the good remain; and
you will then be more than ever united to
“Your affectionate brother,
“Canterbury, Nov. 2, 1762. JoHN WESLEY.”
Sat. 6.--Having had more satisfaction here than I had had
for many years, I cheerfully commended the little flock to God.
In the way to London I read “The Death of Abel.” That
manner of writing, in prose run mad, I cordially dislike: Yet,
with all that disadvantage, it is excellent in its kind; as much
above most modern poems, as it is below “Paradise Lost.”
I had hopes of seeing a friend at Lewisham in my way; and
so I did; but it was in her coffin. It is well, since she finished
her course with joy. In due time I shall see her in glory.
Mon. 8.--I began visiting the classes; in many of which we
had hot spirits to deal with. Some were vehement for, some
against, the meetings for prayer, which were in several parts
of the town. I said little, being afraid of taking any step
which I might afterwards repent of One I heard of on
Friday, and five on Saturday, who, if I did not act as they
thought best, would leave the society. I cannot help it. I
must still be guided by my own conscience.
Tues. 16.--I preached at Deptford and Welling, and
Wednesday, 17, rode on to Sevenoaks. But it was with
much difficulty; for it was a sharp frost, and our horses could
very hardly keep their feet. Here, likewise, I found several
who believed that God had cleansed them from all sin; and
all of them (except perhaps one) lived so that one might.
believe them.
Fri. 19.--I called upon Jane Cooper, praising God in the
fires. The next day I saw her for the last time, in every
thing giving thanks, and overcoming all by the blood of the
Lamb. A day or two after she fell asleep.
From Monday, 22, to Friday, 26, I was employed in
answering the Bishop of Gloucester's book. Wednesday,
24. Being determined to hear for myself, I stood where I
could hear and see, without being seen. George Bell prayed,
in the whole pretty near an hour. His fervour of spirit I
could not but admire. I afterwards told him what I did not
admire; namely, 1. His screaming, every now and then, in
so strange a manner, that one could scarce tell what he said:
2. His thinking he had the miraculous discernment of spirits:
And, 3. His sharply condemning his opposers.
Thur. 25.--I buried the remains of Jane Cooper, a pattern
of all holiness, and of the wisdom which is from above; who
was snatched hence before she had lived five-and-twenty
years. In good time ! God, who knew the tenderness of
her spirit, took her away “from the evil to come.”
Mon. 29.--I retired, to transcribe my answer to Bishop
Dec. 1762.] JOURNAL. 123
Warburton. My fragments of time I employed in reading,
and carefully considering, the lives of Magdalen de Pazzi,
and some other eminent Romish saints. I could not but
observe, 1. That many things related therein are highly
improbable. I fear the relators did not scruple lying for the
Church, or for the credit of their Order: 2. That many of
their reputed virtues were really no virtues at all; being no
fruits of the love of God or man, and no part of the mind
which was in Christ Jesus: 3. That many of their applauded
actions were neither commendable nor imitable: 4. That
what was really good, in their tempers or lives, was so deeply
tinctured with enthusiasm, that most readers would be far
more likely to receive hurt than good from these accounts
of them.
Sat. DEc. 4.--At the desire of Mr. Maxfield, and the seeming
desire of themselves, I baptized two foreigners, (one of them
in a Turkish habit,) who professed themselves to have been
Turks. On this I then remarked, “They may be what they
profess, but I wait for farther evidence. Their story is
extremely plausible; it may be true, or it may not.”
Sun. 5.--To take away one ground of contention from
many well-meaning people, in preaching on, “The kingdom
of heaven is like a grain of mustard-seed,” I endeavoured to
show at large, in what sense sanctification is gradual, and in
what sense it is instantaneous: And (for the present, at least)
many were delivered from vain reasonings and disputings.
Monday, 6, and the following days, I corrected the notes
upon the Revelation. O, how little do we know of this
deep book At least, how little do I know ! I can barely
conjecture, not affirm any one point concerning that part of
it which is yet unfulfilled.
Wed. 8.--I had a second opportunity of hearing George
Bell. I believe part of what he said was from God, (this was
my reflection at that time,) part from an heated imagination.
But as he did not scream, and there was nothing dangerously
wrong, I did not yet see cause to hinder him.
All this time I observed a few of our brethren were diligently
propagating that principle, that none can teach those who are
renewed in love, unless he be in the state himself. I saw the
tendency of this; but I saw that violent remedies would not
avail.
Mon. 13.--I mentioned this to some of my friends, and told
them what would be the consequence. But they could not
believe it: So I let it rest; only desiring them to remember I
had told them before.
Sun. 19.-From Matt. xviii. 3, I endeavoured to show
those who use the word without understanding it, what
Christian simplicity properly is, and what it is not. It is
not ignorance or folly; it is not enthusiasm or credulity.
It is faith, humility, willingness to be taught, and freedom
from evil reasonings.
Tues. 21.--I had an opportunity of looking over the register
of St. Luke's Hospital; and I was surprised to observe, that
three in four (at least) of those who are admitted receive a
cure. I doubt this is not the case of any other lunatic
hospital either in Great Britain or Ireland.
Wed. 22.--I heard George Bell once more, and was
convinced he must not continue to pray at the Foundery.
The reproach of Christ I am willing to bear; but not the
reproach of enthusiasm, if I can help it.
Sat. 25.--We met at the chapel in Spitalfields, to renew
our covenant with God; and he did indeed appear in the
midst of the congregation, and answer as it were by fire.
Sun. 26.--That I might do nothing hastily, I permitted
George Bell to be once more (this evening) at the chapel in
West-street, and once more (on Wednesday evening) at the
Foundery. But it was worse and worse: He now spoke as
from God, what I knew God had not spoken. I therefore
desired that he would come thither no more.
I well hoped this would a little repress the impetuosity of a
few good but mistaken men; especially considering the case
of Benjamin Harris, the most impetuous of them all. A week
or two ago, as he was working in his garden, he was struck
raving mad. He continued so till Tuesday, December 21,
when he lay still and sensible, but could not speak; till, on
Wednesday morning, his spirit returned to God.
Fri. 31.--I now stood and looked back on the past year;
a year of uncommon trials and uncommon blessings.
Abundance have been convinced of sin; very many have
found peace with God; and in London only, I believe full
two hundred have been brought into glorious liberty. And
yet I have had more care and trouble in six months, than in
several years preceding. What the end will be, I know not;
but it is enough that God knoweth.
Jan. 1763.] JOURNAL. 125
Sat. JANUARY 1, 1763.--A woman told me, “Sir, I employ
several men. Now, if one of my servants will not follow my
direction, is it not right for me to discard him at once?
Pray, do you apply this to Mr. Bell.” I answered, “It is
right to discard such a servant; but what would you do if he
were your son?”
Wed. 5.--Having procured one who understood Spanish to
interpret, I had a long conversation with the supposed Turks.
One account they gave of themselves then; a second they
soon after gave to Mrs. G. I observed the account now given,
which I read over to them, in some particulars differed from
both. This increased my fear, though I still hoped the best;
till Mr. B. procured a Jew to talk with them, who understood
both Turkish and Spanish; upon whose questioning them
thoroughly, they contradicted all the accounts given before.
And upon the elder of them mentioning Solomon Selim, a
Jewish Merchant, of Amsterdam, one who knew him wrote to
Solomon about him; who answered, he had known him upwards
of fourteen years; that he was a Spanish Jew, a Physician
by profession; that some years since he had cured him of a
dangerous illness; in gratitude for which he had given him
ten pounds, to carry him over to England.
Fri. 7.--I desired George Bell, with two or three of his
friends, to meet me with one or two others. We took much
pains to convince him of his mistakes; particularly that which
he had lately adopted,--that the end of the world was to be on
February 28th; which at first he had earnestly withstood.
But we could make no impression upon him at all. He was
as unmoved as a rock.
Sun. 9.--I endeavoured (from 1 Cor. xii. 11, and the
following verses) to guard the sincere against all thoughts of
separating from their brethren, by showing what need all the
members of the body have of each other. But those who
wanted the caution most, turned all into poison.
Mon. 10.--I rode to Shoreham, and paid the last office of
love to Mrs. Perronet. Wednesday, 12. I returned to London,
and the next day strongly enforced, on a large congregation
at the Foundery, the words of Isaiah, (never more needful,)
“He that believeth shall not make haste.”
Mon. 17.--I rode to Lewisham, and wrote my sermon to
be preached before the Society for Reformation of Manners.
Sunday, 23. In order to check if not stop, a growing evil, I
preached on, “Judge not, that ye be not judged.” But it
had just the contrary effect on many, who construed it into
a satire upon G. Bell: One of whose friends said, “If the
devil had been in the pulpit, he would not have preached
such a sermon.”
All this time, I did not want for information from all
quarters, that Mr. M. was at the bottom of all this; that he
was the life of the cause; that he was continually spiriting
up all with whom I was intimate against me; that he told
them I was not capable of teaching them, and insinuated that
none was but himself; and that the inevitable consequence
must be a division in the society.
Yet I was not without hope that, by bearing all things, I
should overcome evil with good, till on Tuesday, 25, while I
was sitting with many of our brethren, Mrs. Coventry (then
quite intimate with Mr. M.) came in, threw down her ticket,
with those of her husband, daughters, and servants, and said
they would hear two doctrines no longer. They had often said
before, Mr. M. preached Perfection, but Mr. W. pulled it
down. So I did, that perfection of Benjamin Harris, G. Bell,
and all who abetted them. So the breach is made I The
water is let out. Let those who can, gather it up.
I think it was on Friday, 28, that I received a letter from
John Fox, and another from John and Elizabeth Dixon,
declaring the same thing. Friday, FEBRUARY 4. Daniel
Owens and G. Bell told me they should stay in the society
no longer. The next day, Robert Lee, with five or six of his
friends, spake to the same effect.
I now seriously considered whether it was in my power to
have prevented this. I did not see that it was; for though I
had heard, from time to time, many objections to Mr. M.'s
conduct, there was no possibility of clearing them up. Above
a year ago I desired him to meet me with some that accused
him, that I might hear them face to face; but his answer
was as follows:
“December 28, 1761.
“I HAVE considered the thing, since you spoke to me,
about meeting at Mrs. March's. And I do not think to be
there, or to meet them at any time. It is enough that I was
arraigned at the Conference.” (At which I earnestly defended
him, and silenced all his accusers.) “I am not convinced that
it is my duty to make James Morgan, &c., my judges. If
Feb. 1763.] JOURNAL, 127
you, Sir, or any one of them, have any thing to say to me
alone, I will answer as far as I see good.”
The next month I wrote him along letter, telling him mildly
all I heard or feared concerning him. He took it as a deep
affront; and in consequence thereof wrote as follows:-
“January 14, 1762.
“IF you call me proud or humble, angry or meek, it seems
to sit much the same on my heart. If you call me John or
Judas, Moses or Korah, I am content. As to a separation,
I have no such thought; if you have, and now (as it were)
squeeze blood out of a stone, be it to yourself.”
Several months after, hearing some rumours, I again wrote
to him freely. In his answer were the following words:
“September 23, 1762.
“ExPERIENCE teaches me daily, that they that preach
salvation from the nature of sin, will have the same treatment
from the others as they had and have from the world: But
I am willing to bear it. Your brother is gone out of town.
Had he stayed much longer, and continued, Sunday after
Sunday, to hinder me from preaching, he would have forced
me to have got a place to preach in, where I should not have
heard what I think the highest truths contradicted.”
In his next letter, he explained himself a little farther:
“October 16, 1762.
“WE have great opposition on every side. Nature, the
world, and the devil, will never be reconciled to Christian
perfection. But the great wonder is, that Christians will
not be reconciled to it; all, almost every one who call
themselves Ministers of Christ, or Preachers of Christ,
contend for sin to remain in the heart as long as we live,
as though it were the only thing Christ delighted to behold
in his members.
“I long to have your heart set at full liberty. I know
you will then see things in a wonderful different light from
what it is possible to see them before.”
The day after the first separation, viz., January 26, I
wrote him the following note:
“FoR many years I, and all the Preachers in connexion
with me, have taught that every believer may, and ought to
grow in grace. Lately, you have taught, or seemed to teach,
the contrary. The effect of this is, when I speak as I have
done from the beginning, those who believe what you say will
not bear it. Nay, they will renounce connexion with us; as
Mr. and Mrs. Coventry did last night. This breach lies
wholly upon you. You have contradicted what I taught
from the beginning. Hence it is, that many cannot bear it,
but when I speak as I always have done, they separate from
the society. Is this for your honour, or to the glory of God?
“O Tommy, seek counsel, not from man, but God; not
from brother B , but Jesus Christ! I am
“Your affectionate brother,
st J. W.”
Things now ripened apace for a farther separation; to
prevent which, (if it were possible,) I desired all our
Preachers, as they had time, to be present at all meetings,
when I could not myself, particularly at the Friday meeting
in the chapel at West-Street. At this Mr. M. was highly
offended, and wrote to me as follows:
“February 5, 1763.
“I wroTE to you to ask if those who before met at brother
Guilford's might not meet in the chapel. Soon after you
came to town, the Preachers were brought into the meeting,
though you told me again and again they should not come.”
(True; but since I said this, there has been an entire change
in the situation of things.) “Had I known this, I would
rather have paid for a room out of my own pocket. I am not
speaking of the people that met at the Foundery before;
though I let some of them come to that meeting. If you
intend to have the Preachers there to watch, and others that
I think very unfit, and will not give me liberty to give leave
to some that I think fit to be there, I shall not think it my
duty to meet them.” So from this time he kept a separate
meeting elsewhere.
Sun. 6.--Knowing many were greatly tempted on occasion
of these occurrences, I preached on, (1 Cor. x. 13,) “God
is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye
are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to
escape, that ye may be able to bear it.” In the evening we
had a love-feast, at which many spoke with all simplicity;
and their words were like fire. I hardly know when we have
had so refreshing a season.
Mon. 7.--One who is very intimate with them that had left
us, told me in plain terms, “Sir, the case lies here: They say
Feb. 1763.] JOURNAL, 129
you are only an hypocrite, and therefore they can have no
fellowship with you.”
So now the wonder is over. First, it was revealed to them,
that all the people were dead to God. Then they saw that all
the Preachers were so too; only, for a time, they excepted
me. At last they discern me to be blind and dead too. Now
let him help them that can
Thur. 10.--I rode to Brentford, expecting to find disagree
able work there also; but I was happily disappointed. Not
one seemed inclined to leave the society, and some were
added to it; and the congregation was not only quiet, but
more deeply attentive than is usual in this place.
Hence I rode, on Friday, 11, to Shoreham, and buried
the remains of Mrs. P., who, after a long, distressing illness,
on Saturday, the 5th instant, fell asleep.
Sat. 12.--I visited the classes at Snowsfields, where I was
told many would go away; but the time was not come. As
yet we have lost none; though some are held as by a single
hair.
Tues. 15.--I rode to Deptford, and found the society
there united in faith and love. During the sermon in the
afternoon, one poor mourner found peace with God. In the
evening I preached at Welling, and on Wednesday, 16, rode
on to Sevenoaks. Here I was grieved to find one who did
run well quite hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. But in
the evening, God looked upon him once more, and melted
him into tears of love.
Thur. 17.--Light from above broke into the heart of
another hard-hearted sinner. At the same time many were
delivered from doubts and fears, and “knew the things which
were freely given them of God.” On Friday I returned to
London.
Mon. 21.--Observing the terror occasioned by that
wonderful prophecy to spread far and wide, I endeavoured
to draw some good therefrom, by strongly exhorting the
congregation at Wapping, to “seek the Lord while he might
be found.” But at the same time I thought it incumbent
upon me to declare (as indeed I had done from the hour I
heard it) that “it must be false, if the Bible be true.”
The three next days I spent in the tedious work of tran
scribing the names of the society. I found about thirty of
those who thought they were saved from sin had separated
from their brethren. But above four hundred, who witnessed
the same confession, seemed more united than ever.
Mon. 28.--Preaching in the evening at Spitalfields, on,
“Prepare to meet thy God,” I largely showed the utter
absurdity of the supposition, that the world was to end that
night. But notwithstanding all I could say, many were afraid
to go to bed, and some wandered about in the fields, being
persuaded, that, if the world did not end, at least London
would be swallowed up by an earthquake. I went to bed at
my usual time, and was fast asleep about ten o’clock.
Mon. MARCH 7.--I took the machine for Norwich ; and
after spending a few quiet, comfortable days in Norwich,
Yarmouth, and Colchester, without any jar or contention, on
Saturday, 19, returned to London.
Mon. 28.--I retired to Lewisham, and wrote the sermon
on “Sin in Believers,” in order to remove a mistake which
some were labouring to propagate, -that there is no sin in
any that are justified.
Mon. APRIL 11.--Leaving things, as it seemed, pretty well
settled in London, I took the machine for Bristol, where,
on Tuesday, 19, I paid the last office of love to Nicholas
Gilbert, who was a good man, and an excellent Preacher;
and likely to have been of great use. But God saw it best
to snatch him hence by a fever, in the dawn of his usefulness.
Sat. 23.--I returned to London. On Thursday, 28, I
was at Westminster, where I had appointed to preach, when
word was brought me, about five in the afternoon, that Mr.
M d would not preach at the Foundery. So the breach
is made; but I am clear, I have done all I possibly could to
prevent it. I walked immediately away, and preached myself,
on, “If I am bereaved of my children, I am bereaved.”
That I may conclude this melancholy subject at once,
and have no need to resume it any more, I add a letter
which I wrote some time after, for the information of a
friend:--
“AT your instance I undertake the irksome task of looking
back upon things which I wish to forget for ever. I have
had innumerable proofs (though such as it would now be an
endless task to collect together) of all the facts which I
recite. And I recite them as briefly as possible, because I
do not desire to aggravate any thing, but barely to place it in
a true light.
April, 1763.] JOURNAL. 131
“1. Mr. Maxfield was justified while I was praying with
bim in Baldwin-Street, Bristol.
“2. Not long after he was employed by me as a Preacher
in London.
“3. Hereby he had access to Mrs. Maxfield, whom other
wise he was never likely to see, much less to marry; from
whence all his outward prosperity had its rise.
“4. He was by me (by those who did it at my instance)
recommended to the Bishop of Derry, to be ordained Priest,
who told him then, (I had it from his own mouth,) ‘Mr.
M , I ordain you to assist that good man, that he may
not work himself to death.’-
“5. When, a few years ago, many censured him much, I
continually and strenuously defended him; though to the ,
disgusting several of the Preachers, and a great number of
the people.
“6. I disgusted them, not barely by defending him, but
by commending him in strong terms, from time to time, both
in public and private, with regard to his uprightness, as well
as usefulness.
“7. All this time Mr. M was complaining (of which I
was frequently informed by those to whom he spoke) that he
was never so ill persecuted by the rabble in Cornwall, as by
me and my brother.
“8. Four or five years since, a few persons were appointed
to meet weekly at the Foundery. When I left London, I left
these under Mr. M.'s care, desiring them to regard him just
as they did me.
“9. Not long after I was gone, some of these had dreams,
visions, or impressions, as they thought, from God. Mr. M.
did not put a stop to these; rather he encouraged them.
“10. When I returned, I opposed them with my might,
and in a short time heard no more of them. Meanwhile I
defended and commended Mr. M., as before; and when I
left the town again, left them again under his care.
“ll. Presently visions and revelations returned: Mr. M.
did not discourage them. Herewith was now joined a
contempt of such as had them not, with a belief that they
were proofs of the highest grace.
“12. Some of our Preachers opposed them roughly. At
this they took fire, and refused to hear them preach, but
crowded after Mr. M. He took no pains to quench the fire,
but rather availed himself of it to disunite them from other
Preachers, and attach them to himself. He likewise continu
ally told them they were not to be taught by man, especially
by those who had less grace than themselves. I was told
of this likewise from time to time: But he denicd it; and I
would not believe evil of my friend.
“13. When I returned in October, 1763, I found the
society in an uproar, and several of Mr. M.’s most intimate
friends formed into a detached body. Enthusiasm, pride,
and great uncharitableness appeared in many who once had
much grace. I very tenderly reproved them. They would
not bear it; one of them, Mrs. C., cried out, “We will not
be brow-beaten any longer; we will throw off the mask.’
Accordingly, a few days after, she came, and, before an
hundred persons, brought me hers and her husband’s tickets,
and said, ‘Sir, we will have no more to do with you; Mr. M.
is our Teacher.’ Soon after, several more left the society,
(one of whom was George Bell,) saying, ‘Blind John is not
capable of teaching us; we will keep to Mr. M.’
“14. From the time that I heard of George Bell’s
prophecy, I explicitly declared against it both in private, in
the society, in preaching, over and over; and, at length, in
the public papers. Mr. M. made no such declaration; I
have reason to think he believed it. I know many of his
friends did, and several of them sat up the last of February,
at the house of his most intimate friend, Mr. Biggs, in full
expectation of the accomplishment.
“15. About this time, one of our Stewards, who, at my
desire, took the chapel in Snowsfields for my use, sent me
word the chapel was his, and Mr. Bell should exhort there,
whether I would or no. Upon this, I desired the next
Preacher there to inform the congregation that while things
stood thus, neither I nor our Preachers could in conscience
preach there any more.
“16. Nevertheless, Mr. M. did preach there. On this I
sent him a note, desiring him not to do it; and adding, “If
you do, you thereby renounce connexion with me.’
“17. Receiving this, he said, ‘I will preach at Snowsfields.”
He did so, and thereby renounced connexion. On this point,
and no other, we divided: By this act the knot was cut.
Resolving to do this, he told Mr. Clementson, ‘I am to
preach at the Foundery no more.’
May, 1763.] JOURNAL. 133
“18. From this time he has spoke all manner of evil of me,
his father, his friend, his greatest earthly benefactor. I cite
Mr. F r for one witness of this, and Mr. M n for
another. Did he speak evil of me to Mr. F one day
only? Nay, but every day for six weeks together. To Mr.
M m he said, (among a the and other things, which he
had been twenty years raking together,) ‘Mr. W. believed
and countenanced all which Mr. Bell said; and the reason
of our parting was this: He said to me one day, Tommy,
I will tell the people you are the greatest Gospel Preacher
in England; and you shall tell them I am the greatest.
For refusing to do this, Mr. W. put me away !’
“Now, with perfect calmness, and, I verily think, without
the least touch of prejudice, I refer it to your own judgment,
what connexion I ought to have with Mr. M., either till I am
satisfied these things are not so, or till he is thoroughly
sensible of his fault.”
Monday, MAY 2, and the following days, I was fully
employed in visiting the society, and settling the minds of
those who had been confused and distressed by a thousand
misrepresentations. Indeed, a flood of calumny and evil
speaking (as was easily foreseen) was poured out on every
side. My point was still to go straight forward in the work
whereto I am called.
Mon. 16.--Setting out a month later than usual, I judged
it needful to make the more haste; so I took post-chaises,
and by that means easily reached Newcastle, on Wednesday,
18. Thence I went on at leisure, and came to Edinburgh
on Saturday, 21. The next day I had the satisfaction of
spending a little time with Mr. Whitefield. Humanly
speaking, he is worn out; but we have to do with Him who
hath all power in heaven and earth.
Mon. 23.--I rode to Forfar; and on Tuesday, 24, rode on
to Aberdeen.
Wed. 25.--I inquired into the state of things here. Surely
never was there a more open door. The four Ministers of Aber
deen, the Minister of the adjoining town, and the three Minis
ters of Old-Aberdeen, hitherto seem to have no dislike, but
rather to wish us “good luck in the name of the Lord.” Most
of the town’s people as yet seem to wish us well; so that there is
no open opposition of any kind. O what spirit ought a Preacher
to be of, that he may be able to bear all this sunshine !
About noon I went to Gordon's Hospital, built near the town
for poor children. It is an exceeding handsome building, and
(what is not common) kept exceeding clean. The gardens are
pleasant, well laid out, and in extremely good order; but the
old bachelor who founded it has expressly provided that no
woman should ever be there.
At seven, the evening being fair and mild, I preached to a
multitude of people, in the College-Close, on, “Stand in the
ways and see, and ask for the old paths.” But the next
evening, the weather being raw and cold, I preached in the
College-Hall. What an amazing willingness to hear runs
through this whole kingdom | There want only a few zealous,
active labourers, who desire nothing but God; and they
might soon carry the Gospel through all this country, even
as high as the Orkneys.
Fri. 27.--I set out for Edinburgh again. About one I
preached at Brechin. All were deeply attentive. Perhaps a
few may not be forgetful hearers. Afterwards we rode on to
Broughty-Castle, two or three miles below Dundee. We
were in hopes of passing the river here, though we could not
at the town; but we found our horses could not pass till
eleven or twelve at night. So we judged it would be best
to go over ourselves and leave them behind. In a little time
we procured a kind of a boat, about half as long as a London
wherry, and three or four feet broad. Soon after we had put
off, I perceived it leaked on all sides, nor had we anything to
lade out the water. When we came toward the middle of the
river, which was three miles over, the wind being high, and
the water rough, our boatmen seemed a little surprised;
but we encouraged them to pull away, and in less than half
an hour we landed safe. Our horses were brought after us;
and the next day we rode on to Kinghorn-Ferry, and had
a pleasant passage to Leith.
Sun. 29.--I preached at seven in the High-School yard at
Edinburgh. It being the time of the General Assembly, which
drew together, not the Ministers only, but abundance of the
Nobility and Gentry, many of both sorts were present; but
abundantly more at five in the afternoon. I spake as plain
as ever I did in my life. But I never knew any in Scotland
offended at plain dealing. In this respect the North Britons
are a pattern to all mankind.
Mon. 30.--I rode to Dunbar. In the evening it was very
June, 1763.] JOURNAL. 135
cold, and the wind was exceeding high: Nevertheless, I would
not pen myself up in the Room, but resolved to preach in the
open air. We saw the fruit: Many attended, notwithstanding
the cold, who never set foot in the Room; and I am still
persuaded much good will be done here, if we have zeal and
patience.
Tues. 31.--I rode to Alnwick, and was much refreshed
among a people who have not the form only, but the spirit,
of religion, fellowship with God, the living power of faith
divine. Wednesday, JUNE 1. I went on to Morpeth, and
preached in a ground near the town, to far the most serious
congregation which I had ever seen there. At one I
preached to the loving colliers in Placey, and in the evening
at Newcastle.
Sat. 4.--I rode, though much out of order, to Sunderland,
and preached in the evening at the Room. I was much worse
in the night, but toward morning fell into a sound sleep, and
was refreshed. Sunday, 5. I designed to preach abroad this
morning; but the wind and rain hindered. So at eight I
preached in the Room again, purposing to preach in the
street at noon; but Mr. Goodday sent me word, he was
taken ill in the night, and begged I would supply his church:
So atten I began reading Prayers, though I was so exceeding
weak that my voice could scarce be heard; but as I went on,
I grew stronger; and before I had half done preaching I
suppose all in the church could hear.
The wind drove us into the House at Newcastle likewise;
that is, as many as the House would contain; but great
numbers were constrained to stand in the yard: However,
I suppose all could hear; for my weakness was entirely gone
while I was enforcing those important words, “If thou canst
believe, all things are possible to him that believeth.”
Mon. 6.--I rode to Barnard-Castle, and preached in the
evening, but to such a congregation, not only with respect to
number, but to seriousness and composure, as I never saw
there before. I intended, after preaching, to meet the society;
but the bulk of the people were so eager to hear more, that I
could not forbear letting in almost as many as the Room'
would hold; and it was a day of God’s power: They all
seemed to take the kingdom by violence, while they besieged
Heaven with vehement prayer.
Tues. 7.--So deep and general was the impression now
made upon the people, that even at five in the morning I was
obliged to preach abroad, by the numbers who flocked to hear,
although the northerly wind made the air exceeding sharp.
A little after preaching, one came to me who believed God
had just set her soul at full liberty. She had been clearly
justified long before; but said, the change she now experienced
was extremely different from what she experienced then; as
different as the noon-day light from that of day-break: That
she now felt her soul all love, and quite swallowed up in God.
Now suppose, ten weeks or ten months hence, this person
should be cold or dead, shall I say, “She deceived herself;
this was merely the work of her own imagination?” Not at
all. I have no right so to judge, nor authority so to speak.
I will rather say, “She was unfaithful to the grace of God,
and so cast away what was really given.”
Therefore that way of talking which has been very
common, of staying “to see if the gift be really given,”
which some take to be exceeding wise, I take to be exceeding
foolish. If a man says, “I now feel mothing but love,” and
I know him to be an honest man, I believe him. What
then should I stay to see? Not whether he has such a
blessing, but whether he will keep it.
There is something remarkable in the manner wherein God
revived his work in these parts. A few months ago the
generality of people in this Circuit were exceeding lifeless.
Samuel Meggot, perceiving this, advised the society at
Barnard-Castle to observe every Friday with fasting and
prayer. The very first Friday they met together, God
broke in upon them in a wonderful manner; and his work
has been increasing among them ever since. The neigh
bouring societies heard of this, agreed to follow the same
rule, and soon experienced the same blessing. Is not the
neglect of this plain duty (I mean, fasting, ranked by our
Lord with almsgiving and prayer) one general occasion of
deadness among Christians? Can any one willingly neglect
it, and be guiltless?
In the evening I preached at Yarm; but I found the good
doctrine of Christian Perfection had not been heard of there
for some time. The wildness of our poor brethren in London
has put it out of countenance above two hundred miles off; so
these strange advocates for perfection have given it a deeper
wound than all its enemies together could do!
June, 1763.] JOURNAL, 137
Wed. 8.--Just as I began preaching (in the open air, the
Room being too small even for the morning congregation) the
rain began; but it stopped in two or three minutes, I am
persuaded, in answer to the prayer of faith. Incidents of the
same kind I have seen abundance of times, and particularly
in this journey; and they are nothing strange to them who
seriously believe “the very hairs of your head are all
numbered.”
After preaching at Potto about moon, I rode to Thirsk,
intending to preach near the house where I alighted; but
several gentlemen of the town sent to desire I would preach
in the market-place: I did so, to a numerous congregation,
most of whom were deeply attentive. I hastened away after
preaching, and between nine and ten came to York.
Sat. 11.--I rode to Epworth, and preached at seven in the
market-place. Sunday, 12. I preached at the Room in the
morning; in the afternoon, at the market-place; and about one,
the congregation gathered from all parts in Haxey parish, near
Westwood-side. At every place I endeavoured to settle the
minds of the poor people, who had been not a little harassed
by a new doctrine which honest Jonathan C and his con
verts had industriously propagated among them,--that “there
is no sin in believers; but, the moment we believe, sin is
destroyed, root and branch.” I trust this plague also is stayed:
But how ought those unstable ones to be ashamed who are so
easily “tossed about with every wind of doctrine !”
I had desired Samuel Meggot to give me some farther
account of the late work of God at Barnard-Castle. Part
of his answer was as follows:
“June 7, 1763.
“WITHIN ten weeks, at least twenty persons in this town
have found peace with God, and twenty-eight the pure love of
God. This morning, before you left us, one found peace, and
one the second blessing; and after you was gone two more
received it. One of these had belonged to the society before;
but, after he turned back, had bitterly persecuted his wife,
particularly after she professed the being saved from sin.
May 29, he came, in a furious rage, to drag her out of the
society. One cried out, ‘Let us go to prayer for him.’ Pre
sently he ran away, and his wife went home. Not long after,
he came in like a madman, and swore he would be the death
of her. One said, ‘Are you not afraid lest God should smite
you?” He answered, ‘No; let God do his worst, I will make
an end of her, and the brats, and myself too, and we will all
go to hell together. His wife and children fell down, and
broke out into prayer. His countenance changed, and he was
as quiet as a lamb. But it was not long before a horrible
dread overwhelmed him; he was sore distressed: The hand
of God was upon him, and gave him no rest, day or night. On
Tuesday, in the afternoon, he went to her who prayed for him
when he came to drag his wife out, begging her, with a
shower of tears, to pray for his deliverance. On Thursday
he wrestled with God till he was as wet all over with sweat
as if he had been dipped in water. But that evening God
wiped away his tears, and filled him with joy unspeakable.
“This morning, while brother Story was at prayer, God
gave him a witness in himself, that he had purified his heart.
When he was risen from his knees, he could not help declaring
it. He now ran to his wife, not to kill her, but to catch her
in his arms, that they might praise God, and weep over one
another with tears of joy and love.”
Mon. 13.--Even in Epworth a few faithful servants of
Satan were left, who would not leave any stone unturned to
support his tottering kingdom. A kind of gentleman got a
little party together, and took huge pains to disturb the
congregation. He hired a company of boys to shout, and made
a poor man exceeding drunk, who bawled out much ribaldry
and nonsense, while he himself played the French horn. But
he had little fruit of his labour. I spoke a few words to their
champion, and he disappeared. The congregation was not at
all disturbed, but quietly attended to the end.
Wed. 15.--I rode to Doncaster; and at ten, standing in an
open place, exhorted a wild, yet civil, multitude to “seek the
Lord while he might be found.” Thence I went on to Leeds,
and declared, to a large congregation, “Now is the day of
salvation.” Thursday, 16. At five in the evening I preached
at Dewsbury, and on Friday, 17, reached Manchester. Here
I received a particular account of a remarkable incident :
An eminent drunkard of Congleton used to divert himself,
whenever there was preaching there, by standing over against
the House, cursing and swearing at the Preacher. One
evening he had a fancy to step in, and hear what the man had
to say. He did so; but it made him so uneasy that he could
not sleep all might. In the morning he was more uneasy still:
June, 1763.] JOURNAL. 139
He walked in the fields, but all in vain, till it came in his
mind to go to one of his merry companions, who was always
ready to abuse the Methodists. He told him how he was, and
asked what he should do. “Do !” said Samuel, “go and join
the society. I will; for I was never so uneasy in my life.”
They did so without delay. But presently David cried out,
“I am sorry I joined; for I shall get drunk again, and they
will turn me out.” However, he stood firm for four days: On
the fifth, he was persuaded by his old companions to “take
one pint,” and then another, and another, till one of them
said, “See, here is a Methodist drunk I’’ David started up,
and knocked him over, chair and all. He then drove the rest
out of the house, caught up the landlady, carried her out,
threw her into the kennel; went back to the house, broke
down the door, threw it into the street, and then ran into the
fields, tore his hair, and rolled up and down on the ground.
In a day or two was a love-feast: He stole in, getting behind,
that none might see him. While Mr. Furze was at prayer,
he was seized with a dreadful agony, both of body and mind.
This caused many to wrestle with God for him. In a while
he sprung up on his feet, stretched out his hands, and cried
aloud, “All my sins are forgiven l” At the same instant, one
on the other side of the Room cried out, “Jesus is mine !
And he has taken away all my sins.” This was Samuel H.
David burst through the people, caught him in his arms, and
said, “Come, let us sing the Virgin Mary’s Song: I never
could sing it before. ‘My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my
spirit doth rejoice in God my Saviour.’” And their following
behaviour plainly showed the reality of their profession.
Sat. 18.--I found the work of God was still greatly
increasing here; although many stumbling-blocks had been
thrown in the way, and some by those who were once strong
in grace. But this is no wonder: I rather wonder that there
are not abundantly more. And so there would be, but that
Satan is not able to go beyond his chain.
Mon. 20.--I preached at Maxfield about noon. As I had
not been well, and was not quite recovered, our brethren
insisted on sending me in a chaise to Burslem. Between four
and five I quitted the chaise and took my horse. Presently
after, hearing a cry, I looked back, and saw the chaise upside
down, (the wheel having violently struck against a stone,)
and well nigh dashed in pieces. About seven I preached to
a large congregation at Burslem: These poor potters, four
years ago, were as wild and ignorant as any of the colliers in
Kingswood. Lord, thou hast power over thy own clay.
Tues. 21.--I rode to Birmingham, and on Thursday to
Towcester. I would willingly have rested there; but our
brethren desiring me to go a little farther, I walked on (about
three miles) to Whittlebury. Here I found a truly loving
and simple people. I preached at the side of the new
preaching-house: I suppose most of the town were present.
Friday, 24. I took horse early, and in the afternoon came
once more safe to London.
About this time I received the following letter:--
“GoD is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever!
He was, is, and will be all in all! Being a minute part of the
whole, let me consider myself alone. Where was I before
my parents were born ? In the mind of Him who is all in
all. It was God alone that gave me a being amongst the
human race. He appointed the country in which I should
begin my existence. My parents were also his choice. Their
situation in mind, body, and estate was fully known to him.
My parents are answerable for my education in infancy.
My capacity was from above. That I improved so little
was mostly owing to my connexions; but partly to my own
inattention or idleness. In most things, whilst an infant,
whether good or evil, I was certainly passive; that is, I was
instructed or led by others, and so acted right or wrong.
In all the incidents of life, whether sickness, health, escapes,
crosses, spiritual or temporal advantages or disadvantages, I
can trace nothing of myself during my childhood. And till I
became a subject to my own will, perhaps I was innocent in
the eyes of infinite Justice; for the blood of Jesus Christ
certainly cleanseth from all original sin, and presents all
spotless, who die free from the guilt of actual transgression.
“At what time I became a subject to my own will, I
cannot ascertain; but from that time in many things I
offended. First, against my parents; next, against God!
And that I was preserved from outward evils, was not
owing to the purity of my own will; but the grace of Christ
preventing and overruling me.
“My natural will ever cleaved to evil; and if I had ever
any good in me, it came from above. What is called good
nature is a divine gift, and not from the corrupt root. My
June, 1763.] JOURNAL. 141
will could not produce good, and in various instances it was
in a manner annihilated, before grace could fix any good in
me. In other words, my will acts from the motions of the
old Adam where I transgress; but what is good in me is
from the grace of Christ, working whilst my own will is made
passive or unresisting. Thus my life has been so far holy, as
I gave up my own will, and lived in God, who is all in all.
“From the time I could sin, I trace the divine goodness in
preserving me from innumerable evils, into which my own will
would have led me. The unknown temptations and evils
perhaps are infinitely more numerous than the known. If my
will was only not resisting, when I received or did any good,
how little was it concerned in my conviction, my conversion,
my peace, and the sphere of life I engaged in after receiving
such divine blessings? My concern about my soul’s welfare,
the time of my conversion, the Ministers raised up to be the
instruments of it, the place of my first hearing the Gospel,
and various other circumstances, that instrumentally brought
about those great and blessed events in my life, were no more
from any thing in myself, than my birth and education.
Rather, my will was overpowered, and grace triumphed over it.
“From these reflections I conclude, that whatever blessings
I have enjoyed as to parents, country, education, employ
ments, conversion, connexions in life, or any exterior or interior
circumstance,--all came from God, who is all in all! And
whatever in my past life is matter of repentance and lamentation
has arose chiefly from my corrupt will, though partly from a
defective judgment ever prone to err ! So that, upon the
whole, I have great cause to be thankful that God has been
so much the all in all of my life; at the same time I must
bewail that I ever followed my own corrupt will in any thing.
“My present state of life I believe is from God. In a bad
state of health, out of employment, and retired from all engage
ments in the world, I use the means for my recovery, and it is
not from any evil principle that I am a cipher: But I cannot
yet obtain health, business, or a sphere of usefulness. Nor
can I ascertain how far I am culpable as to being what I am.
My present duty is, submission to the divine will. I study
for improvement, and pray for such blessings as I want. Is
not God all in all as to my present state? I have no desire
so strong as this: ‘Let thy blessed will be done in and upon
me!’ And the prayer which governs my soul continually is,
O may my will die day by day; and may God in Christ
Jesus be all in all to me, and in me and mine, during our
life, in our last moments, and to all eternity Amen.”
Finding it was not expedient to leave London during the
ferment which still continued by reason of Mr. M.'s separation
from us, I determined not to remove from it before the
Conference. This began on Tuesday, JULY 19, and ended
on Saturday, 23. And it was a great blessing that we had
peace among ourselves, while so many were making
themselves ready for battle.
Mon. AUGUST 1.--I began visiting the classes again, and
found less loss than might reasonably have been expected;
as most of those who had left us spake all manner of evil,
without either fear or shame. Poor creatures ! Yet “he
that betrayed” them into this “hath the greater sin.”
Mon. 15.--I went in the one-day machine to Bath, where
one of our friends from Bristol met me (as I had desired) in
the afternoon, and took me thither in a post-chaise. Wed
nesday, 17. Being informed that the boat at the Old-Passage
would go over at six o'clock, I took horse at four, and came
to the Passage a few minutes after six: But they told us
they would not pass till twelve, and I had appointed to preach
in Chepstow at eleven. So we thought it best to try the
New-Passage. We came thither at seven, and might probably
have stayed till noon, had not an herd of oxen come just in
time to the other side. In the boat which brought them over,
we crossed the water, and got to Chepstow between ten and
eleven. As it had rained almost all the day, the House
contained the congregation. Hence we rode to Coleford.
The wind being high, I consented to preach in their new
Room; but, large as it was, it would not contain the people,
who appeared to be not a little affected, of which they gave a
sufficient proof, by filling the Room at five in the morning.
Thur. 18.--We breakfasted at a friend’s, a mile or two
from Monmouth, and rode to Crick-Howell, where I intended
to dine; but I found other work to do. Notice had been
given that I would preach, and some were come many miles
to hear. So I began without delay, and I did not observe
one light or inattentive person in the congregation. When
we came to Brecknock, we found it was the Assize week; so
that I could not have the Town-Hall, as before, the Court
being to sit there at the very time when I had appointed to
JMug. 1763.] JOURNAL. 143
preach: So I preached at Mr. James's door; and all the
people behaved as in the presence of God.
Fri. 19.--I preached near the market-place, and afterwards
rode over to Trevecka. Howell Harris’s house is one of the
most elegant places which I have seen in Wales. The little
clapel, and all things round about it, are finished in an
uncommon taste; and the gardens, orchards, fish-ponds, and
mount adjoining, make the place a little paradise. He thanks
God for these things, and looks through them. About sixscore
persons are now in the family; all diligent, all constantly
employed, all fearing God and working righteousness. I
preached at ten to a crowded audience, and in the evening at
Brecknock again; but to the poor only: The rich (a very few
excepted) were otherwise employed.
Sat. 20.--We took horse at four, and rode through one of
the pleasantest countries in the world. When we came to
Trecastle, we had rode fifty miles in Monmouthshire and
Brecknockshire; and I will be bold to say, all England
does not afford such a line of fifty miles’ length, for fields,
meadows, woods, brooks, and gently-rising mountains, fruitful
to the very top. Carmarthenshire, into which we came soon
after, has at least as fruitful a soil; but it is not so pleasant,
because it has fewer mountains, though abundance of brooks
and rivers. About five I preached on the Green at Carmarthen,
to a large number of deeply attentive people. Here two
gentlemen from Pembroke met me, with whom we rode to St.
Clare, intending to lodge there; but the inn was quite full: So
we concluded to try for Larn, though we knew not the way,
and it was now quite dark. Just then came up an honest man
who was riding thither, and we willingly bore him company.
Sun. 21.--It rained almost all the morning. However, we
reached Tenby about eleven. The rain then ceased, and I
preached at the Cross to a congregation gathered from many
miles round. The sun broke out several times and shone
hot in my face, but never for two minutes together. About
five I preached to a far larger congregation at Pembroke.
A few gay people behaved ill at the beginning; but in a
short time they lost their gaiety, and were as serious as their
neighbours.
Wed. 24.--I rode over to Haverfordwest. Finding it was
the Assize week, I was afraid the bulk of the people would be
too busy to think about hearing sermons. But I was mistaken;
I have not seen so numerous a congregation since I set out of
London; and they were, one and all, deeply attentive. Surely
some will bring forth fruit.
Thur. 25.--I was more convinced than ever, that the
preaching like an Apostle, without joining together those
that are awakened, and training them up in the ways of God,
is only begetting children for the murderer. How much
preaching has there been for these twenty years all over
Pembrokeshire! But no regular societies, no discipline, no
order or connexion; and the consequence is, that nine in ten
of the once-awakened are now faster asleep than ever.
Fri. 26.--We designed to take horse at four, but the rain
poured down, so that one could scarce look out. About six,
however, we set out, and rode through heavy rain to St. Clare.
Having then little hopes of crossing the sands, we determined
to go round by Carmarthen; but the hostler told us we might
save several miles, by going to Llansteffan's Ferry. We
came thither about noon, where a good woman informed us
the boat was aground, and would not pass till the evening: So
we judged it best to go by Carmarthen still. But when we
had rode three or four miles, I recollected that I had heard
speak of a ford, which would save us some miles’ riding.
We inquired of an old man, who soon mounted his horse,
showed us the way, and rode through the river before us.
Soon after my mare dropped a shoe, which occasioned so
much loss of time, that we could not ride the sands, but were
obliged to go round, through a miserable road, to Llanellos.
To mend the matter, our guide lost his way, both before we
came to Llanellos and after; so that it was as much as we
could do, to reach Bocher-Ferry, a little after sunset.
Knowing it was impossible then to reach Penreese, as we
designed, we went on straight to Swansea.
Sat. 27.--I preached at seven to one or two hundred
people, many of whom seemed full of good desires. But as
there is no society, I expect no deep or lasting work.
Mr. Evans now gave me an account from his own knowledge,
of what has made a great noise in Wales:--“It is common in
the congregations, attended by Mr. W. W., and one or two
other Clergymen, after the preaching is over, for any one that
has a mind, to give out a verse of an hymn. This they sing over
and over with all their might, perhaps above thirty, yea, forty
times. Meanwhile the bodies of two or three, sometimes ten or
Aug. 1763.] JOURNAL. 145
twelve are violently agitated; and they leap up and down,
in all manner of postures, frequently for hours together.” I
think, there needs no great penetration to understand this.
They are honest, upright men, who really feel the love of
God in their hearts. But they have little experience, either
of the ways of God, or the devices of Satan. So he serves
himself of their simplicity, in order to wear them out, and to
bring a discredit on the work of God.
About two I preached at Cowbridge, in the Assembly
room, and then went on to Llandaff. The congregation was
waiting; so I began without delay, explaining to them the
righteousness of faith. A man had need to be all fire, who
comes into these parts, where almost every one is cold as ice:
Yet God is able to warm their hearts, and make rivers run in
the dry places.
Sun. 28.--I preached once more in W church; but
it was hard work. Mr. H. read the Prayers (not as he did
once, with such fervour and solemnity as struck almost every
hearer, but) like one reading an old song, in a cold, dry,
careless manner; and there was no singing at all. O what
life was here once | But now there is not one spark left.
Thence I rode to Cardiff, and found the society in as
ruinous a condition as the Castle. The same poison of
Mysticism has well-nigh extinguished the last spark of life
here also. I preached in the Town-Hall, on, “Now God
commandeth all men every where to repent.” There was a
little shaking among the dry bones; possibly some of them
may yet “come together and live.”
Mon. 29.--At noon I preached again at Llandaff, and in
the evening at Aberthaw. I found the most life in this
congregation that I have found any where in Glamorganshire.
We lodged at F Castle; so agreeable once; but how
is the scene changed ! How dull and unlovely is every place
where there is nothing of God!
Tues. 30.--I preached in the Castle at Cardiff, and
endeavoured to lift up the hands that hung down. A few
seemed to awake, and shake themselves from the dust: Let
these go on, and more will follow.
I came to Chepstow, Wednesday, 31, just at noon, and began
preaching immediately at Mr. Cheek’s door. The sun shone
full in my face, extremely hot; but in two or three minutes the
clouds covered it. The congregation was large, and behaved
well; perhaps some may be “doers of the word.” When we
went into the boat at the Old-Passage, it was a dead calm;
but the wind sprung up in a few minutes, so that we reached
Bristol in good time.
Thur. SEPTEMBER 1.--I began expounding a second time,
after an interval of above twenty years, the first Epistle of St.
John. How plain, how full, and how deep a compendium of
genuine Christianity
Sat. 3.--I described the one undivided “fruit of the
Spirit; ” one part of which men are continually labouring to
separate from the other; but it cannot be ; none can retain
peace or joy without meekness and long-suffering; nay, nor
without fidelity and temperance. Unless we have the whole,
we cannot long retain any part of it.
Sun. 4.--I preached on the quay, where multitudes
attended who would not have come to the other end of the
city. In the afternoon I preached near the new Square. I
find no other way to reach the outcasts of men. And this
way God has owned, and does still own, both by the
conviction and conversion of sinners.
Wed, 7.--I preached at Pensford about eight, and it began
raining almost as soon as I began preaching; but I think
none went away. At noon I preached at Shepton-Mallet, to
a numerous, nay, and serious, congregation; and about six
in a meadow at Wincanton. I suppose this was the first
field-preaching which had been there. However, the people
were all quiet, and the greater part deeply attentive.
Thur. 8.--At nine I preached in the same place, to a far
more serious audience. Between eleven and twelve I preached
at Westcomb, and in the evening at Frome. How zealous to
hear are these people; and yet how little do they profit by
hearing ! I think this will not always be the case. By and
by we shall rejoice over them.
Wed. 14.--I preached at Bath, on, “Now is the day of
salvation.” I was afterwards not a little refreshed by the
conversation of one lately come from London, notwith
standing an irregularity of thought, almost peculiar to herself.
How much preferable is her irregular warmth, to the cold
wisdom of them that despise her ! How gladly would I be
as she is, taking her wildness and fervour together |
In the evening the congregation at Coleford was all alive,
and great part of them were present again in the morning.
Sept. 1763.] JOURNAL, 147
The next evening we had a love-feast, at which many were not
able to contain their joy and desire, but were constrained to
cry aloud, and praise God for the abundance of his mercies.
Sat. 17.--I preached on the Green at Bedminster. I am
apt to think many of the hearers scarce ever heard a
IMethodist before, or perhaps any other Preacher. What but
field-preaching could reach these poor sinners? their souls also precious in the sight of God?
And are not
Sun. 18.--I preached in the morning in Princess-Street,
to a mumerous congregation. Two or three gentlemen, so
called, laughed at first; but in a few minutes they were as
serious as the rest. On Monday evening I gave our brethren
a solemn caution, not to “love the world, neither the things
of the world.” This will be their grand danger: As they
are industrious and frugal, they must needs increase in
goods. This appears already: In London, Bristol, and most
other trading towns, those who are in business have increased
in substance seven-fold, some of them twenty, yea, an
hundred-fold. What need, then, have these of the strongest
warnings, lest they be entangled therein, and perish !
Fri. 23.--I preached at Bath. Riding home we saw a
coffin, carrying into St. George's church, with many children
attending it. When we came near, we found they were our
own children, attending the corpse of one of their school-fellows,
who had died of the small-pox; and God thereby touched
many of their hearts in a manner they never knew before.
Mon. 26.--I preached to the prisoners in Newgate, and in
the afternoon rode over to Kingswood, where I had a solemn
watch-night, and an opportunity of speaking closely to the
children. One is dead, two recovered, seven are ill still;
and the hearts of all are like melting wax.
Tues. 27.--I took my leave of the congregation at Bristol,
by opening and applying those words, (by which no flesh
living shall be justified,) “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself.” I believe an eminent Deist, who was present, will
not easily forget that hour; he was (then at least) deeply
affected, and felt he stood in need of an “Advocate with the
Father.”
Wednesday, and Thursday evening, I spent at Salisbury;
and with no small satisfaction. Friday, 30. I preached about
one at Whitchurch, and then rode to Basingstoke. Even
here there is at length some prospect of doing good. A large
number of people attended, to whom God enabled me to
speak strong words; and they seemed to sink into the hearts
of the hearers.
Sat. OCTOBER 1.--I returned to London, and found our
house in ruins, great part of it being taken down, in order to a
thorough repair. But as much remained as I wanted: Six
foot square suffices me by day or by night.
I now received a very strange account from a man of sense,
as well as integrity:--
“I asked M. S. many questions before she would give me
any answer. At length, after much persuasion, she said, “On
old Michaelmas-Day was three years, I was sitting by myself
at my father's, with a Bible before me; and one, whom I took
to be my uncle, came into the room, and sat down by me.
He talked to me some time, till, not liking his discourse, I
looked more carefully at him: He was dressed like my uncle;
but I observed one of his feet was just like that of an ox.
Then I was much frighted, and he began torturing me sadly,
and told me he would torture me ten times more, if I would
not swear to kill my father, which at last I did. He said he
would come again, on that day four years, between half-hour
past two and three o’clock.
“‘I have several times since strove to write this down;
but when I did, the use of my hand was taken from me. I
strove to speak it; but whenever I did, my speech was taken
from me, and I am afraid I shall be tormented a deal more
for what I have spoken now.’
“Presently she fell into such a fit as was dreadful to look
upon. One would have thought she would be torn in pieces.
Several persons could scarce hold her; till, after a time, she
sunk down as dead.
“From that Michaelmas-Day she was continually
tormented with the thought of killing her father, as likewise
of killing herself, which she often attempted, but was as
often hindered. Once she attempted to cut her own throat;
once to throw herself into Rosamond’s Pond; several times to
strangle herself, which once or twice was with much difficulty
prevented.
“Her brother, fearing lest she should at last succeed in her
attempt, and finding her fits come more frequently, got a strait
waistcoat made for her, such as they use at liedlam. It was
made of strong ticking, with two straps on the shoulders, to
Oct. 1763.] JOURNAL. 149
fasten her down to the bed; one across her breast, another
across her middle, and another across her knees. One
likewise was buckled on each leg, and fastened to the side of
the bed. The arms of the waistcoat drew over her fingers,
and fastened like a purse. In a few minutes after she was
- thus secured, her brother, coming to the bed, found she was
gone. After some time, he found she was up the chimney, so
high that he could scarce touch her feet. When Mary Loftis
called her, she came down, having her hands as fast as ever.
“The night after, I fastened her arms to her body with
new straps, over and above the rest. She looked at me and
laughed; then gave her hands a slight turn, and all the
fastenings were off.
“In the morning Mr. Spark came: On our telling him
this, he said, ‘But I will take upon me to fasten her so that
she shall not get loose.’ Accordingly, he sent for some
girth-web, with which he fastened her arms to her sides; first
above her elbows, round her body; them below her elbows;
then he put it round each wrist, and braced them down to
each side of the bedstead: After this she was quiet a might
and a day; then all this was off like the rest.
“After this we did not tie her down any more, only watched
over her might and day. I asked the Physician that attended
her, whether it was a matural disorder. He said, ‘Partly
natural, partly diabolical.” We then judged there was no
remedy but prayer, which was made for her, or with her,
continually; though while any were praying with her, she
was tormented more than ever.
“The Friday before Michaelmas-Day last, Mr. W. came to
see her. He asked, “Do you know me?” She said, ‘No, you
all appear to me like Blackamoors.” “But do not you know
my voice?’ ‘No; I know no one's voice, except Molly
L--’s.’ “Do you pray God to help you?’ ‘No, I can’t
pray. God will never help me. I belong to the devil; and
he will have me: He will take me, body and soul, on
Monday.’ ‘Would you have me pray for you?” “No
indeed : For when people pray, he torments me worse than
ever. In her fits she was first convulsed all over, seeming in
an agony of pain, and screaming terribly. Then she began
cursing, swearing, and blaspheming in the most horrid
manner. Then she burst into vehement fits of laughter; then
sunk down as dead. All this time she was quite senseless;
then she fetched a deep sigh, and recovered her sense and
understanding, but was so weak that she could not speak to
be heard, unless you put your ear almost close to her mouth.
“When Mr. W. began praying, she began screaming, so
that a mob quickly gathered about the house. However, he
prayed on, till the convulsions and screaming ceased, and she
came to her senses much sooner than usual. What most
surprised us was, that she continued in her senses, and soon
after began to pray herself.
“On Sunday evening Mr. W. came again, asked her many
questions, pressed her to call upon God for power to believe,
and then prayed with her. She then began to pray again, and
continued in her senses longer than she had dome for a month
before; but still insisted, the devil would come the next day,
between two and three, and take her away.
“She begged me to sit up with her that night, which I
willingly did. About four in the morning, she burst out into
a flood of tears, crying, ‘What shall I do? What shall I
do? I cannot stand this day. This day I shall be lost. I
went to prayer with her, and exhorted her to pray for faith,
and her agony ceased.
“About half-hour after ten, ten of us came together, as we
had agreed the day before. I said, ‘Is there any among you
who does not believe that God is able and willing to deliver
this soul?” They answered with one voice, ‘We believe he
both can and will deliver her this day.’ I then fastened her
down to the bed on both sides, and set two on each side to
hold her if need were. We began laying her case before the
Lord, and claiming his promise on her behalf. Immediately
Satan raged vehemently. He caused her to roar in an uncom
mon manner; then to shriek, so that it went through our
heads; then to bark like a dog. Then her face was distorted
to an amazing degree, her mouth being drawn from ear to
ear, and her eyes turned opposite ways and starting as if
they would start out of her head. Presently her throat was
so convulsed, that she appeared to be quite strangled; then
the convulsions were in her bowels, and her body swelled as
if ready to burst. At other times she was stiff from head to
foot, as an iron bar; being at the same time wholly deprived
of her senses and motion, not even breathing at all.
Soon after her body was so writhed, one would have thought
all her bones must be dislocated.
Oct. 1763.] JOURNAL. 151
“We continued in prayer, one after another, till about
twelve o’clock. One then said, ‘I must go; I can stay no
longer. Another and another said the same, till we were upon
the point of breaking up. I said, ‘What is this? Will you
all give place to the devil? Are you still ignorant of Satan’s
devices? Shall we leave this poor soul in his hands?”
Presently the cloud vanished away. We all saw the snare,
and resolved to wrestle with God till we had the petition we
asked of him. We began singing an hymn, and quickly
found his Spirit was in the midst of us; but the more earnestly
we prayed, the more violently the enemy raged. It was with
great difficulty that four of us could hold her down:
Frequently we thought she would have been torn out of our
arms. By her looks and motions we judged she saw him in
a visible shape. She laid fast hold on Molly L s and me,
with inexpressible eagerness; and soon burst into a flood
of tears, crying, ‘Lord, save, or I perish ! I will believe.
Lord, give me power to believe; help my unbelief!’ After
wards she lay quiet for about fifteen minutes. I then asked,
“Do you now believe Christ will save you? And have you
a desire to pray to him?” She answered, ‘I have a little
desire, but I want power to believe.” We bid her keep
asking for the power, and looking unto Jesus. I then gave
out an hymn, and she earnestly sung with us those words:
O Sun of Righteousness, arise,
With healing in thy wing;
To my diseased, my fainting soul,
Life and salvation bring !
“I now looked at my watch and told her, ‘It is half-hour
past two: This is the time when the devil said he would come
for you.’ But, blessed be God, instead of a tormentor, he sent
a comforter. Jesus appeared to her soul, and rebuked the
enemy, though still some fear remained; but at three it was
all gone, and she mightily rejoiced in the God of her salvation.
It was a glorious sight. Her fierce countenance was changed,
and she looked innocent as a child: And we all partook of
the blessing; for Jesus filled our souls with a love which mo
tongue can express. We then offered up our joint praises to
God, for his unspeakable mercies, and left her full of faith,
and love, and joy in God her Saviour.”
Sun. 2.--All this week I endeavoured to confirm those who
had been shaken as to the important doctrine of Christian
Perfection, either by its wild defenders, or wise opposers, who
much availed themselves of that wildness. It must needs be
that such offences will come; but “woe unto him by whom
the offence cometh !”
Mon. 10.--I set out for Norwich, taking Hertford in my
way, where I began preaching between ten and eleven. Those
who expected disturbance were happily disappointed; for the
whole congregation was quiet and attentive. I doubt not but
much good may be dome even here, if our brethren live what
we preach.
In the evening I preached in the new Room at Bedford,
where we at last see some fruit of our labour. Tuesday, 11.
I rode through miserable roads to Cambridge, and thence
to Lakenheath. The next day I reached Norwich, and found
much of the presence of God in the congregation, both this
evening and the next day. On Friday evening I read to them
all, the Rules of the Society, adding, “Those who are resolved
to keep these Rules may continue with us, and those only.”
I then related what I had done since I came to Norwich
first, and what I would do for the time to come; particularly
that I would immediately put a stop to preaching in the time
of Church Service. I added, “For many years I have had
more trouble with this society, than with half the societies in
England put together. With God’s help, I will try you one
year longer; and I hope you will bring forth better fruit.”
Sun. 16.--Notwithstanding the notice I had given over
and over, abundance of people came to the Tabernacle at two
in the afternoon, the usual time of preaching; and many of these
lambs roared like lions; but it was no more than I expected.
Monday, 17. I found, at Yarmouth, a little, loving, earnest
company. In the evening both the House and the yard were
pretty well filled with attentive hearers. Tuesday, 18. I
read over that surprising book, “The Life of Mr. William
Lilly.” If he believed himself, as he really seems to have
done, was ever man so deluded ? Persuaded that Hermeli,
the Queen of the Fairies, Micol Regina Pygmaeorum, and
their fellows, were good angels! How amazing is this ! And
is it not still more amazing that some of the greatest and
most sensible men in the nation should not only not scruple
to employ him, but be his fast friends upon all occasions?
Wed. 19.--I returned to Norwich, and found the ferment
a little abated. I was much pleased with the Leaders in the
Oct. 1763.] JOURNAL. 153
evening, a company of steady, lively, zealous persons; and
indeed with most of the society with whom I have conversed,
none of whom seem to have lost ground since I was here last.
Sun. 23.--I met the society, for the first time, immediately
after the morning preaching. Afterwards I went to church,
with a considerable number of the people, several of whom,
I suppose, had not been within those walls for many years. I
was glad to hear a plain, useful sermon; and especially for
the sake of those who, if they had been offended at first,
would hardly have come any more. In the evening God
made bare his arm, and his word was sharp as a two-edged
sword. Before I had concluded my sermon, the mob made
a little disturbance; but let us only get the lambs in order,
and I will quickly tame the bears.
Mon. 24.--I rode to Bury. Here the mob had for some
time reigned lords paramount; but a strange gentleman from
London, who was present one evening, when they were in
high spirits, took them in hand, and prosecuted the matter so
effectually that they were quelled at once.
Tues. 25.--I rode to Colchester, and found a strange
ferment in the society, occasioned by the imprudence of*
who had kindled a flame which he could not quench, and set
every man’s sword against his brother. I heard them all face
to face, but to no purpose: They regarded neither Scripture
nor reason. But, on Thursday evening, at the meeting of
the society, God was entreated for them. The stony hearts
were broken ; anger, revenge, evil-surmising, fled away: The
hearts of all were again united together, and his banner over
us was love.
It may be of use to insert part of a letter, which I received
about this time:
“IN reading your Notes on Heb. xii., a while since, I was
struck with your exposition of the ninth verse: ‘Perhaps
these expressions, fathers of our flesh and Father of spirits,
intimate that our earthly fathers are only the parents of our
bodies; our souls not being derived from them, but rather
created by the immediate power of God, and infused into the
body from age to age. But meeting with a curious old book,
which asserts a contrary doctrine, I hope you will pardon my
freedom in transcribing, and begging your thoughts upon it.
“‘That souls are not immediately infused by God, but
mediately propagated by the parent, is proved, 1. From the
divine rest; And he rested on the seventh day from all the
work which he had made : (Gen. ii. 2:) 2. From the blessing
mentioned Gen. i. 28; And God blessed them, and said unto
them, Be fruitful, and multiply; for this does not relate to a
part, but to the whole, of man: 3. From the generation of
Seth; And Adam begat a son in his own likeness, after his
image; (Gen. v. 3;) for this image principally consisted in
the soul:4. From the procession of the soul from the parent,
mentioned Gen. xlvi. 26; All the souls which came out
of his loins: 5. From the very consideration of sin; for they
are infused, (1.) Either pure, and then, (i.) They will either
be free from original sin, the primary seat of which is the
soul; and so God will be cruel in condemning the soul for
what it is not guilty of; or, (ii.) We must suppose the impure
body to pollute the soul, which is absurd: Or, (2.) They are
infused impure; and, in that case, God will be the cause
of impurity, which is impossible. This is further proved from
the doctrine of regeneration; for that which is regenerated was
also generated or begotten; but the whole man is regenerated,
therefore the whole man is generated. Compare John iii.
6, That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which
is born of the Spirit is spirit; and Eph. iv. 23, And be
renewed in the spirit of your mind.
“‘That the human soul is propagated by the parents toge
ther with the body, is further proved, 1. By the creation of
Eve, whose soul is not said to have been breathed into her
by God: 2. From the confession of David; Behold, I was
shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me;
(Psalm li. 5;) which words cannot possibly relate to the body
only: 3. From our redemption: What Christ did not assume,
he did not redeem; if, therefore, he did not assume his
soul, together with his body, from the Virgin Mary, our
souls are not redeemed by Christ; which is evidently false:
4. From similar expressions, Job x. 8, Thy hands have
made and fashioned me; and Psalm cxxxix. 13, For thou
hast possessed my reins; thou hast covered me in my
mother’s womb ; where God is said to have formed us with
his own hands, which yet is no otherwise done than mediately
by generation: 5. From the nature of the begetter and the
begotten: They are of one species; but the man who
begets consisting of a soul and body, and a body without a
soul, are not of one species.
Nov. 1763.] JOURNAL. 155
“‘Again, supposing the soul to be infused by the Deity,
either, 1. It will be free from sin, and so God himself will be
accused as guilty of injustice, in condemning a pure spirit, and
infusing it into an impure body; or, 2. He will be accounted
the author of the soul’s pollution, by uniting it, a pure spirit,
to an impure body, in order that it should be polluted:
3. A double absurdity will follow upon this supposition;
viz., (1.) The organical parts of man only will be slaves to sin:
(2.) The immortal spirit would be corrupted by the mortal
body: (3.) Or if the soul, being thus infused, be polluted by
sin, it will follow, that God is expressly assigned to be the
cause of sin; which is the highest blasphemy.’”
Fri. 28.--At the request of the little society there, I rode
round by Braintree. Here I met with one who was well
acquainted with the Honourable Mr. If he answers
the character Mr. S gives, he is one of the most amiable
men in the world. O, what keeps us apart? Why cannot we
openly give each other the right hand of fellowship?
Sat. 29.--I returned to London. Sunday, 30, I now, for
the first time, spoke to the society freely concerning Mr. M.,
both with regard to his injustice in the affair of Snowsfields,
and his almost unparalleled ingratitude to me. But I never
expect one that is false to God to be true to an human
friend.
Wed. NovEMBER 2.--I spent an agreeable hour with old
venerable Mr. How striking is a man of sense,
learning, and piety, when he has well nigh finished his course,
and yet retains all his faculties unimpaired ! His grey
hairs are indeed “a crown of honour.”
In this neighbourhood I learned the particulars of a
remarkable occurrence:--On Friday, August 19, a
gentleman who was at Lisbon during the great earthquake,
walking with his friend near Brighthelmstone, in Sussex,
and looking south-west toward the sea, cried out, “God grant
the wind may rise; otherwise we shall have an earthquake
quickly. Just so the clouds whirled to and fro, and so the
sky looked that day at Lisbon.” Presently the wind did
rise, and brought an impetuous storm of rain and large
hail. Some of the hail-stones were larger than hen-eggs. It
moved in a line about four miles broad, making strange
havoc, as it passed quite over the land, till it fell into the
river, not far from Sheerness. And wherever it passed it
left an hot sulphurous steam, such as almost suffocated those
it reached.
Thur. 3.--I returned to London. Saturday, 5. I spent
some time with my old friend, John Gambold. Who but
Count Zinzendorf could have separated such friends as we
were ? Shall we never unite again?
Sun. 13.--I found much of the power of God in preaching,
but far more at the Lord’s Table. At the same time one who
had been wandering from God for many years, and would
fain have been with us, but could not, found that the Spirit
of God was not hindered, or confined to one place. He found
Out , the poor backslider, in his own house, and revealed
Christ anew in his heart.
Tues. 15.--I visited Joseph Norbury, a good old soldier
of Jesus Christ. I found him just on the wing for paradise,
having rattled in the throat for some time. But his speech
was restored when I came in, and he mightily praised God
for all his mercies. This was his last testimony for a good
Master. Soon after he fell asleep.
On Friday I finished visiting the classes, and observed that
since February last an hundred and seventy-five persons
have been separated from us. An hundred and six left us
on Mr. M.'s account: Few of them will return till they are
deeply humbled.
Here I stood and looked back on the late occurrences.
before Thomas Walsh left England, God began that great
work which has continued ever since without any considerable
intermission. During the whole time, many have been con
vinced of sin, many justified, and many backsliders healed. But
the peculiar work of this season has been, what St. Paulcalls “the
perfecting of the saints.” Many persons in London, in Bristol,
in York, and in various parts, both of England and Ireland,
have experienced so deep and universal a change, as it had not
before entered into their hearts to conceive. After a deep
conviction of inbred sin, of their total fall from God, they have
been so filled with faith and love, (and generally in a moment,)
that sin vanished, and they found from that time, no pride,
anger, desire, or unbelief. They could rejoice evermore, pray
without ceasing, and in everything give thanks. Now, whether
we call this the destruction or suspension of sin, it is a glorious
work of God: Such a work as, considering both the depth and
extent of it, we never saw in these kingdoms before.
Dec. 1763.] JOURNAL. 157
It is possible, some who spoke in this manner were
mistaken: And it is certain, some have lost what they then
received. A few (very few, compared to the whole number)
first gave way to enthusiasm, then to pride, next to prejudice
and offence, and at last separated from their brethren. But,
although this laid a huge stumbling-block in the way, still
the work of God went on. Nor has it ceased to this day in
any of its branches. God still convinces, justifies, sanctifies.
We have lost only the dross, the enthusiasm, the prejudice
and offence. The pure gold remains, faith working by love,
and, we have ground to believe, increases daily.
Mon. 21.--I buried the remains of Joseph Norbury, a
faithful witness of Jesus Christ. For about three years he
has humbly and boldly testified, that God had saved him from
all sin: And his whole spirit and behaviour in life and death
made his testimony beyond exception. DECEMBER 1. All
the leisure hours I had in this and the following months,
during the time I was in London, I spent in reading over
our Works with the Preachers, considering what objections
had been made, and correcting whatever we judged wrong,
either in the matter or expression.
Mon. 5.--I rode to Shoreham, and preached in the evening
to a more than usually serious company. The next evening
they were considerably increased. The small-pox, just broke
out in the town, has made many of them thoughtful. O let
not the impression pass away as the morning dew !
Wed. 7.--I rode to Staplehurst, where Mr. Ch , who
loves all that love Christ, received us gladly. At six the
congregation, gathered from many miles round, seemed just
ripe for the Gospel: So that (contrary to my custom in a
new place) I spoke merely of “the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ.” Thursday, 8. In returning to London I was
throughly wet; but it did me no hurt at all.
Fri. 16.--I spent an agreeable hour, and not unprofitably,
in conversation with my old friend, John Gambold. O how
gladly could I join heart and hand again! But, alas ! thy
heart is not as my heart!
Sat. 17.--I dined at Dr. G 's, as friendly and courteous
as Dr. Doddridge himself. How amiable is courtesy joined
with sincerity ! Why should they ever be divided?
Wed. 21.--I took my leave of the Bull-and-Mouth, a
barren, uncomfortable place, where much pains has been taken
158 Rev. J. wesDEY’s [Jan. 1764.
for several years: I fear, to little purpose, Thursday, 22.
I spent a little time in a visit to Mr. M ; twenty years
ago a zealous and useful Magistrate, now a picture of human
mature in disgrace; feeble in body and mind; slow of speech
and of understanding. Lord, let me not live to be useless!
Mon. 26.--I began preaching at a large, commodious place
in Bartholomew-Close. I preached there again on Wednes
day, and at both times with peculiar liberty of spirit. At every
place this week I endeavoured to prepare our brethren for
renewing their covenant with God.
Sun. JANUARY 1, 1764.--We met in the evening for that
solemn purpose. I believe the number of those that met was
considerably larger than it was last year. And so was the
blessing: Truly the consolations of God were not small
with us. Many were filled with peace and joy; many with
holy fear, and several backsliders were healed.
On some of the following days, I visited the little societies
near London. Thursday, 12. I preached at Mitcham; and
in the afternoon rode to Dorking. But the gentleman to
whose house I was invited, seemed to have no desire I should
preach. So that evening I had nothing to do. Friday, 13.
I went at noon into the street; and in a broad place, not far
from the market-place, proclaimed “the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ.” At first two or three little children were the
whole of my congregation: But it quickly increased, though
the air was sharp, and the ground exceeding wet: And all
behaved well but three or four grumbling men, who stood so
far off that they disturbed none but themselves.
I had purposed to preach there again in the morning; but
a violent storm made it impracticable. So, after preaching
at Mitcham in the way, I rode back to London.
Mon. 16.--I rode to High-Wycombe, and preached to a
more numerous and serious congregation than ever I saw
there before. Shall there be yet another day of visitation to
this careless people?
A large number was present at five in the morning: But
my face and gums were so swelled I could hardly speak.
After I took horse, they grew worse and worse, till it began
to rain. I was then persuaded to put on an oil-case hood,
which (the wind being very high) kept rubbing continually
on my cheek, till both pain and swelling were gone.
Between twelve and one we crossed Ensham-Ferry. The
Feb. 1764.] JOURNAL, 159
water was like a sea on both sides. I asked the ferryman,
“Can we ride the causeway?” He said, “Yes, Sir; if you
keep in the middle.” But this was the difficulty, as the whole
causeway was covered with water to a considerable depth.
And this in many parts ran over the causeway with the swift
ness and violence of a sluice. Once my mare lost both her fore
feet, but she gave a spring, and recovered the causeway:
Otherwise we must have taken a swim; for the water on either
side was ten or twelve feet deep. However, after one or two
plunges more, we got through, and came safe to Witney.
The congregation in the evening, as well as the next day,
was both large and deeply attentive. This is such a people as
I have not seen,--so remarkably diligent in business, and,
at the same time, of so quiet a spirit, and so calm and civil
in their behaviour.
Thur. 19.--I rode through Oxford to Henley. The people
here bear no resemblance to those of Witney. I found a wild,
staring congregation, many of them void both of common sense
and common decency. I spoke exceeding plain to them all, and
reproved some of them sharply. Friday, 20. I took (probably
my final) leave of Henley, and returned to London.
Mon. 23.--I rode to Sundon, and preached in the evening
to a very quiet and very stupid people. How plain is it, that
even to enlighten the understanding is beyond the power of
man After all our preaching here, even those who have
constantly attended no more understand us than if we had
preached in Greek.
Thur. 26.--Returning from Bedford, I tried another way
to reach them. I preached on, “Where their worm dieth not,
and the fire is not quenched;” and set before them the
terrors of the Lord, in the strongest manner I was able. It
seemed to be the very thing they wanted. They not only
listened with the deepest attention, but appeared to be more
affected than I had ever seen them by any discourse whatever.
IVed. FEBRUARY 1.--I buried the remains of William Hurd,
a son of affliction for many years, continually struggling with
inward and outward trials. But his end was peace.
Thur. 2.--I preached again in the Foundery, which had
been repairing for several weeks. It is not only firm and
safe, (whereas before the main timbers were quite decayed,) but
clean and decent, and capable of receiving several hundreds
JT1Ore.
Sun. 5.--I began Mr. Hartley’s ingenious “Defence of the
Mystic Writers.” But it does not satisfy me. I must still
object, 1. To their sentiments. The chief of them do not
appear to me to have any conception of church communion.
Again, they slight not only works of piety, the ordinances of
God, but even works of mercy. And yet most of them, yea,
all that I have seen, hold justification by works. In general,
they are “wise above what is written,” indulging themselves in
many unscriptural speculations. I object, 2. To their spirit,
that most of them are of a dark, shy, reserved, unsociable
temper. And that they are apt to despise all who differ from
them, as carnal, unenlightened men. I object, 3. To their
whole phraseology. It is both unscriptural, and affectedly
mysterious. I say, affectedly; for this does not necessarily
result from the nature of the things spoken of St. John
speaks as high and as deep things as Jacob Behmen. Why
then does not Jacob speak as plain as him?
Mon. 6.--I opened the new chapel at Wapping, well filled
with deeply attentive hearers. Thursday, 16. I once more
took a serious walk through the tombs in Westminster Abbey.
What heaps of unmeaning stone and marble ! But there
was one tomb which showed common sense; that beautiful
figure of Mr. Nightingale, endeavouring to screen his lovely
wife from Death. Here indeed the marble seems to speak,
and the statues appear only not alive.
After taking Brentford, Deptford, Welling, and Seven
oaks, in my way, on Thursday, 23, I rode to Sir Thomas
I'Anson’s, (at New-Bounds, two miles beyond Tunbridge,)
just quivering on the verge of life, helpless as a child, but
(as it seems) greatly profited by this severe dispensation. The
hall, stair-case, and adjoining rooms, just contained the people
in the evening. One poor backslider, whom Providence had
brought thither, was exceedingly wounded. I left her
resolved to set out once more, if haply God might heal her.
Fri. 24.--I returned to London. Wednesday, 29. I heard
“Judith,” an Oratorio, performed at the Lock. Some parts of
it were exceeding fine; but there are two things in all modern
pieces of music, which I could never reconcile to common sense.
One is singing the same words ten times over; the other,
singing different words by different persons, atone and the same
time. And this in the most solemn addresses to God, whether
by way of prayer or of thanksgiving. This can never be
1March, 1764.] JOURNAL. 161
defended by all the musicians in Europe, till reason is quite
out of date.
Mon. MARCH 12.--I set out for Bristol. Friday, 16. I
met several serious Clergymen. I have long desired that there
might be an open, avowed union between all who preach those
fundamental truths, Original Sin, and Justification by Faith,
producing inward and outward holiness; but all my endeavours
have been hitherto ineffectual. God’s time is not fully come.
Mon. 19.--I set out for the north. We reached Stroud
about two in the afternoon. How many years were we beating
the air in this place ! one wrong-headed man pulling down all
we could build up. But since he is gone, the word of God
takes root, and the society increases both in number and
strength. Tuesday, 20. At seven I preached in Painswick.
For many years an honest, disputing man greatly hindered
the work of God here also, subverting the souls that were
just setting out for heaven. But since God took him to
himself His word has free course, and many sinners are
converted to Him. We rode hence over the top of the bleak
mountains to Stanley, where an earnest congregation was
waiting. From Stanley to Evesham we were to go as we
could, the lanes being scarce passable. However, at length
we got through. I never before saw so quiet a congregation
in the Town-Hall, nor yet so numerous. I designed after
wards to meet the society at our Room; but the people
were so eager to hear, that I knew not how to keep them
out. So we had a large congregation again. And again
God gave us his blessing.
Wed. 21.--After riding about two hours and an half from
Evesham, we stopped at a little village. We easily perceived
by the marks he had left, that the man of the house had
been beating his wife. I took occasion from thence to speak
strongly to her, concerning the hand of God, and his design
in all afflictions. It seemed to be a word in season. She
appeared to be not only thankful, but deeply affected.
We had an exceeding large congregation at Birmingham, in
what was formerly the playhouse. Happy would it be if all
the playhouses in the kingdom were converted to so good an
use. After service the mob gathered, and threw some dirt
and stones at those who were going out. But it is probable
they will soon be calmed, as some of them are in gaol already.
A few endeavoured to make a disturbance the next evening
during the preaching; but it was lost labour; the congre
gatioa would not be diverted from taking earnest heed to the
things that were spoken.
Fri. 23.--I rode to Dudley, formerly a den of lions, but now
as quiet as Bristol. They had just finished their preaching
house, which was thoroughly filled. I saw no trifler; but
many in tears. Here I met with a remarkable account of a
child, the substance of which was as follows:-
“John B , about ten years old, was sometime since
taken ill. He often asked how it was to die. His sister told
him, “Some children know God; and then they are not
afraid to die.’ He said, ‘What! children as little as me?’
She answered, ‘Your sister Patty did; and she was less than
you.’ At which he seemed to be much affected. Sunday
was fortnight he took his bed, but was not able to sleep.
Soon after, he said, “We shall soon be with angels and
archangels in heaven. What signifies this wicked world?
Who would want to live here that might live with Christ?”
The maid said, ‘I wish I was married to Christ.’ He said,
“Being married to Christ is coming to Christ, and keeping
with him: All may come to him. I am happy, I am happy.”
His sister asked, “Do you love God?” He answered, ‘Yes,
that I do. She asked, “And do you think God loves you?”
He replied, ‘Yes, I know he does.’
“The next evening she said, ‘How are you, Jacky, when
you are so happy?” He said, stroking his breast down with
his hand, “Why like as if God was in me. O my sister,
what an happy thing it was that I came to Dudley ! I am
quite happy when I am saying my prayers; and when I
think on God, I can almost see into heaven.’
“Tuesday night last she asked, ‘Are you afraid to die?’
He said, ‘I have seen the time that I was; but now I am
not a bit afraid of death, or hell, or judgment; for Christ is
mine. I know Christ is my own. He says, What would you
have? I would get to heaven: I will get to heaven as soon
as I can. And as well as I love you all, when I am once got
to heaven, I would not come to you again for ten thousand
worlds. Soon after he said, ‘If God would let me do as the
angels do, I would come and watch over you. I will, if God
will let me; and when you are ready, I will come and fetch
you to heaven; yea, if God would let me, I would fly all over
the world, to fetch souls to heaven.”
March, 1764.] JOURNAL. 163
“He asked his cousin if she had seen the King; and added,
‘I have; indeed I have not seen King George, but I have
seen a better King; for I have seen the King of heaven and
earth.’ His health since that time has been in some measure
recovered; but he continues in the same spirit.”
Sat. 24.--We came once more to our old flock at Wednes
bury. The congregation differed from most that we have lately
seen. It almost entirely consisted of such as had repented, if
not also believed the Gospel. Sunday, 25. At eight I preached
in the Room, though it would by no means contain the congre
gation; but the north-east wind was so extremely sharp that it
was not practicable to preach abroad. At one it drove us like
wise into the house at Darlaston; that is, as many as it could
contain. At five there was such a congregation at Wednes
bury as I have not seen since I left London. But I found my
voice would have commanded twice the number, while I
declared, “The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in
thy heart; that is, the word of faith which we preach.”
Mon. 26.--I was desired to preach at Walsal. James Jones
was alarmed at the motion, apprehending there would be much
disturbance. However, I determined to make the trial. Coming
into the House, I met with a token for good. A woman was
telling her neighbour why she came : “I had a desire,” said she,
“to hear this man; yet I durst not, because I heard so much
ill of him; but this morning I dreamed I was praying earnestly,
and I heard a voice, saying, ‘See the eighth verse of the first
chapter of St. John. I waked, and got my Bible and read,
‘He was not that light, but was sent to bear witness of that
light. I got up, and came away with all my heart.”
The House not being capable of containing the people, about
seven I began preaching abroad; and there was no opposer, no,
nor a trifler to be seen. All present were earnestly attentive.
How is Walsal changed ! How has God either tamed the
wild beasts, or chained them up !
In the afternoon I came to Ashby-de-la-Zouch. The House
and yard contained the people tolerably well. I saw but one
trifler among all, which, I understood, was an Attorney. Poor
man ' If men live what I preach, the hope of his gain is lost.
Tues. 27.--We rode to Donnington, where a great multi
tude earnestly attended, while I explained and enforced,
“God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ.”
164 Rev. J. wesDEY’s [March, 1764.
Hence we rode to Derby. Mr. Dobinson believed it would
be best for me to preach in the market-place, as there seemed
to be a general inclination in the town, even among people of
fashion, to hear me. He had mentioned it to the Mayor, who
said he did not apprehend there would be the least disturbance;
but if there should be any thing of the kind, he would take
care to suppress it. A multitude of people were gathered at
five, and were pretty quiet till I had named my text. Then
“the beasts of the people” lifted up their voice, hallooing and
shouting on every side. Finding it impossible to be heard, I
walked softly away. An innumerable retinue followed me;
but only a few pebble-stones were thrown, and no one hurt at
all. Most of the rabble followed quite to Mr. D--’s house;
but, it seems, without any malice prepense; for they stood
stock-still about an hour, and then quietly went away.
At seven I met the society, with many others, who earnestly
desired to be present. In the morning most of them came
again, with as many more as we could well make room for;
and indeed they received the word gladly. God grant they
may bring forth fruit!
Wed. 28.--Between eleven and twelve I preached at
Alferton, twelve miles from Derby, and in the evening at
Sheffield, to many more than could hear, on, “Now is the
day of salvation.” In the morning I gave a hearing to several
of the society who were extremely angry at each other. It
surprised me to find what trifles they had stumbled at; but
I hope their snare is broken.
In the evening, while I was enlarging upon the righteous
ness of faith, the word of God was quick and powerful.
Many felt it in their inmost soul; one backslider in particular,
who was then restored to all she had lost, and the next
morning believed she was saved from sin.
Fri. 30.--I met those who believe God has redeemed
them from all their sins. They are about sixty in number.
I could not learn that any among them walk unworthy of
their profession. Many watch over them for evil; but
they “overcome evil with good.” I found nothing of self
conceit, stubbornness, impatience of contradiction, or London
enthusiasm, among them. They have better learned of
Him that was meek and lowly of heart, to “adorn the doctrine
of God their Saviour.”
In the evening I preached in the new House at Rotherham,
April, 1764.] JOURNAL. 165
on the sure foundation, “Ye are saved through faith.” It
was a season of strong consolation to many. One who had
been some time groaning for full redemption, now found
power to believe that God had fulfilled her desire, and set her
heart at liberty.
Sat. 31.--An odd circumstance occurred during the
morning preaching. It was well only serious persons were
present. An ass walked gravely in at the gate, came up to
the door of the House, lifted up his head and stood stock-still,
in a posture of deep attention. Might not “the dumb beast
reprove” many who have far less decency, and not much
more understanding?
At noon I preached (the Room being too small to contain
the people) in a yard, near the bridge, in Doncaster. The wind
was high and exceeding sharp, and blew all the time on the side
of my head. In the afternoon I was seized with a sore throat,
almost as soon as I came to Epworth: However, I preached,
though with some difficulty; but afterward I could hardly speak.
Being better the next day, Sunday, APRIL 1, I preached
about one at Westwood-side, and soon after four, in the
market-place at Epworth, to a numerous congregation. At
first, indeed, but few could hear; but the more I spoke, the
more my voice was strengthened, till, toward the close, all my
pain and weakness were gone, and all could hear distinctly.
Mon. 2.--I had a day of rest. Tuesday, 3. I preached,
about nine, at Scotter, a town six or seven miles east of
Epworth, where a sudden flame is broke out, many being
convinced of sin almost at once, and many justified. But
there were many adversaries stirred up by a bad man, who
told them, “There is no law for Methodists.” Hence
continual riots followed; till, after a while, an upright
Magistrate took the cause in hand, and so managed both the
rioters and him who set them at work, that they have been
quiet as lambs ever since.
Hence we rode to Grimsby, once the most dead, now the
most lively, place in all the county. Here has been a large and
swift increase both of the society and hearers, so that the House,
though galleries are added, is still too small. In the morning,
Wednesday, 4, I explained at large the nature of Christian
Perfection. Many who had doubted of it before were fully
satisfied. It remains only to experience what we believe.
In the evening the Mayor and all the Gentry of the town
were present; and so was our Lord in an uncommon manner.
Some dropped down as dead; but, after a while, rejoiced with
joy unspeakable. One was carried away in violent fits. I
went to her after the service. She was strongly convulsed from
head to foot, and shrieked out in a dreadful manner. The
unclean spirit did tear her indeed; but his reign was not long.
In the morning both her soul and body were healed, and she
acknowledged both the justice and mercy of God.
Thur. 5.--About eleven I preached at Elsham. The two
persons who are the most zealous and active here are the
steward and gardener of a gentleman, whom the Minister
persuaded to turn them off unless they would leave “this
way.” He gave them a week to consider of it; at the end of
which they calmly answered, “Sir, we choose rather to want
bread here, than to want “a drop of water hereafter.” He
replied, “Then follow your own conscience, so you do my
business as well as formerly.”
Fri. 6.--I preached at Ferry at nine in the morning, and
in the evening; and, about noon, in Sir N. H.’s hall, at
Gainsborough. Almost as soon as I began to speak, a cock
began to crow over my head; but he was quickly dislodged,
and the whole congregation, rich and poor, were quiet and
attentive.
Sun. 8.--I set out for Misterton, though the common road
was impassable, being all under water; but we found a way to
ride round. I preached at eight, and I saw not one inattentive
hearer. In our return, my mare, rushing violently through a
gate, struck my heel against a gate-post, and left me behind
her in an instant, laid on my back at full length. She stood
still till I rose and mounted again; and neither of us was hurt
at all.
Mon. 9.--I had designed to go by Authorp-Ferry and
Winterton to Hull; but we had not gone far before the
wind rose, so that we judged it would be impossible to pass
the Trent at Authorp; so we turned back, and went by
Ouston and Brigg. The rain beat vehemently upon us all
the way. When we came to Brigg, despairing of being able
to cross the Humber, we thought it best to turn aside to
Barrow. When I was here last, the mob was exceeding rude
and noisy; but all the people were now quiet and attentive.
I was much pleased with their spirit and their behaviour.
and could not be sorry for the storm.
April, 1764.] JOURNAL. 167
Tues. 10.--The wind abating, we took boat at Barton, with
two such brutes as I have seldom seen. Their blasphemy, and
stupid gross obscenity, were beyond all I ever heard. We
first spoke to them mildly; but it had no effect. At length we
were constrained to rebuke them sharply; and they kept
themselves tolerably within bounds, till we landed at Hull. I
preached at five, two hours sooner than was expected: By
this means we had tolerable room for the greatest part of them
that came; and I believe not many of them came in vain.
Wed. 11.--Between eight and mine I began preaching at
Beverley, in a room which is newly taken. It was filled from
end to end, and that with serious hearers. Perhaps even these
may know the day of their visitation.
About one I began at Pocklington. Here, likewise, all
were quiet, and listened with deep attention. When I came
to York, at five in the afternoon, I was fresher than at seven
in the morning. During the preaching many were not a
little comforted; and one old follower of Christ, more than
seventy years of age, was now first enabled to call him Lord
by the Holy Ghost.
I found that a most remarkable deadness had overspread
this people, insomuch that not one had received remission of
sins for several months last past. Then it is high time for
us to prophesy on these dry bones, that they may live. At
this I more immediately pointed in all my following discourses;
and I have reason to believe God spoke in his word: To
him be all the glory !
Thur. 12.--I spent an hour with John Manners, weak
in body, but not in spirit. He is fairly worn out in a good
service, and calmly waits till his change shall come.
Sun. 15.--In the evening many even of the rich were
present, and seriously attentive. But, O! how hardly shall
these enter into the kingdom | how hardly escape from “the
desire of other things l’’
Mon. 16.--I preached at Tollerton at one. The
congregation was large and serious. Some were deeply
affected, and wept much: Many received comfort.
At six I began preaching in the street at Thirsk. The
congregation was exceeding large. Just as I named my
text, -“What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole
world and lose his own soul?”--a man on horseback, who
had stopped to see what was the matter, changed colour and
trembled. Probably he might have resolved to save his
soul, had not his drunken companion dragged him away.
Tues. 17.--In consequence of repeated invitations, I rode
to Helmsley. When I came, Mr. Conyers was not at home;
but, his housekeeper faintly asking me, I went in. By the
books lying in the window and on the table, I easily perceived
how he came to be so cold now, who was so warm a year ago.
Not one of ours, either verse or prose, was to be seen, but
several of another kind. O that our brethren were as zealous
to make Christians as they are to make Calvinists /
He came home before dinner, and soon convinced me that
the Philistines had been upon him. They had taken huge
pains to prejudice him against me, and so successfully, that
he did not even ask me to preach: So I had thoughts of
going on; but in the afternoon he altered his purpose, and
I preached in the evening to a large congregation. He
seemed quite surprised; and was convinced for the present,
that things had been misrepresented. But how long will
the conviction last? Perhaps till next month.
Wed. 18.--I called upon another serious Clergyman, Vicar
of a little town near Pickering. He immediately told me
how he had been received by warm men “to doubtful
disputations.” He said, this had for a time much hurt his
soul; but that now the snare was broken.
About one I preached at Smainton, eight or nine miles
beyond Pickering, to a small, but deeply serious congregation.
When I came to Scarborough, though the wind was very
high and very sharp, the multitude of people constrained me
to preach abroad; and all, but a few noisy children, behaved
remarkably well.
Thur. 19.--The Room was filled at five; and the congrega
tion this evening was larger than the last. How is the face
of things changed here within a year or two ! The society
increased four-fold: Most of them alive to God, and many
filled with love; and all of them enjoy great quietness,
instead of noise and tumult, since God put it into the heart
of an honest Magistrate to still the madness of the people.
I wrote a letter to-day, which after some time I sent to
forty or fifty Clergymen, with the little preface annexed:--
“REv. S1R,
“NEAR two years and a half ago, I wrote the following
letter. You will please to observe, 1. That I propose no more
April, 1764.] JOURNAL, 169
therein than is the bounden duty of every Christian. 2. That
you may comply with this proposal, whether any other does
or not. I myself have endeavoured so to do for many years,
though I have been almost alone therein, and although many,
the more earnestly I talk of peace, the more zealously make
themselves ready for battle. I am, Reverend Sir,
“Your affectionate Brother,
“IT has pleased God to give you both the will and the
power to do many things for his glory; although you are often
ashamed you have done so little, and wish you could do a
thousand times more. This induces me to mention to you
what has been upon my mind for many years, and what I
am persuaded would be much for the glory of God, if it
could once be effected; and I am in great hopes it will be,
if you heartily undertake it, trusting in him alone.
“Some years since God began a great work in England;
but the labourers were few. At first those few were of one
heart; but it was not so long. First one fell off, then
another and another, till no two of us were left together in
the work, besides my brother and me. This prevented much
good, and occasioned much evil. It grieved our spirits, and
weakened our hands; it gave our common enemies huge
occasion to blaspheme. It perplexed and puzzled many
sincere Christians; it caused many to draw back to perdition;
it grieved the Holy Spirit of God.
“As labourers increased, disunion increased. Offences
were multiplied; and instead of coming nearer to, they stood
farther and farther off from, each other; till, at length, those
who were not only brethren in Christ, but fellow-labourers in
his Gospel, had no more connexion or fellowship with each
other, than Protestants have with Papists.
“But ought this to be? Ought not those who are united to
one common Head, and employed by Him in one common work,
to be united to each other ! I speak now of those labourers who
are Ministers of the Church of England. These are chiefly,--
“Mr. Perronet, Romaine, Newton, Shirley;
“Mr. Downing, Jesse, Adam;
“Mr. Talbot, Riland, Stillingfleet, Fletcher;
“Mr. Johnson, Baddily, Andrews, Jane;
“Mr. Hart, Symes, Brown, Rouquet;
170 REv. J. wesDEY’s [April, 1764.
“Mr. Sellon;
“Mr. Venn, Richardson, Burnet, Furly;
“Mr. Conyers, Bently, King;
“Mr. Berridge, Hicks, J. W., C. W., John Richardson,
Benjamin Colley: Not excluding any other Clergyman, who
agrees in these essentials,--
“I. Original Sin.
“II. Justification by Faith.
“III. Holiness of Heart and Life; provided their life be
answerable to their doctrine.
“‘But what union would you desire among these?” Not
an union in opinions. They might agree or disagree, touching
absolute decrees on the one hand, and perfection on the other.
Not an union in expressions. These may still speak of the
imputed righteousness, and those of the merits, of Christ.
Not an union with regard to outward order. Some may still
remain quite regular, some quite irregular; and some partly
regular, and partly irregular. But these things being as they
are, as each is persuaded in his own mind, is it not a most
desirable thing that we should,--
“1. Remove hinderances out of the way? Not judge
one another, not despise one another, not envy one another?
Not be displeased at one another's gifts or success, even
though greater than our own? Not wait for one another's
halting, much less wish for it, or rejoice therein?
“Never speak disrespectfully, slightly, coldly, or unkindly
of each other; never repeat each other’s faults, mistakes, or
infirmities, much less listen for and gather them up ; never
say or do anything to hinder each other’s usefulness, either
directly or indirectly? Is it not a most desirable thing that
we should,--
“2. Love as brethren ? Think well of and honour one
another? Wish all good, all grace, all gifts, all success, yea,
greater than our own, to each other? Expect God will
answer our wish, rejoice in every appearance thereof, and
praise him for it? Readily believe good of each other, as
readily as we once believed evil?
“Speak respectfully, honourably, kindly of each other;
defend each other’s character; speak all the good we can of
each other; recommend one another where we have influence;
each help the other on in his work, and enlarge his influence
by all the honest means he can 7
April, 1764.] JOURNAL. 171
“This is the union which I have long sought after; and
is it not the duty of every one of us so to do? Would it not
be far better for ourselves? A means of promoting both our
holiness and happiness? Would it not remove much guilt
from those who have been faulty in any of these instances?
and much pain from those who have kept themselves pure?
Would it not be far better for the people, who suffer severely
from the clashings and contentions of their leaders, which
seldom fail to occasion many unprofitable, yea, hurtful,
disputes among them? Would it not be better even for
the poor, blind world, robbing them of their sport, ‘O they
cannot agree among themselves!’ Would it not be better
for the whole work of God, which would then deepen and
widen on every side?
“‘But it will never be; it is utterly impossible. Certainly
it is with men. Who imagines we can do this? that it can be
effected by any human power? All nature is against it, every
infirmity, every wrong temper and passion; love of honour
and praise, of power, of pre-eminence; anger, resentment,
pride; long contracted habit, and prejudice lurking in ten
thousand forms. The devil and all his angels are against it.
For if this takes place, how shall his kingdom stand? All the
world, all that know not God, are against it, though they may
seem to favour it for a season. Let us settle this in our
hearts, that we may be utterly cut off from all dependence
on our own strength or wisdom.
“But surely “with God all things are possible;’ therefore
* all things are possible to him that believeth;’ and this union
is proposed only to them that believe, that show their faith
by their works.
“When Mr. C. was objecting the impossibility of ever
effecting such a union, I went up stairs, and after a little
prayer opened Kempis on these words:--Expecta Dominum :
Viriliter age : Noli diffidere: Noli discedere; sed corpus et
animam expone constanter pro glorid Dei.” I am, dear Sir,
“Your affectionate servant,
“Scarborough, April 19, 1764.”
* Wait for the Lord. Quit thyself like a man. Yield not to distrust. Be
unwilling to depart; but constantly expose body and soul for the glory of
God.-EDIT.
I received three letters in answer to this, though not at the
same time, part of which I gladly subjoin :
“I AM not insensible of the happy consequences it might
produce, if ‘those who agree in preaching that capital doctrine,
By grace are ye saved through faith, would maintain a free
intercourse with each other;’ and if it could by any means be
accomplished, it is doubtless an event most devoutly to be
wished. It is what I always have shown the greatest readiness
to, and what I have laboured at for these several years past,
within my little sphere: And though my success hitherto,
through causes which I will not pretend to assign, has by no
means equalled my hopes; yet I shall heartily rejoice, if, at
length, it may please God to make you the instrument of
effecting so important a design. For my own part, I despise
no man for his opinion; however, I may be most closely
attached (as every one is) to those whose judgment most
nearly harmonizes with my own: And if I can bear anything,
it is contradiction; so long as I am allowed the common
liberty of answering for myself, without being treated with
reproach or scorn for any heterodox notions I may be supposed
to maintain.
“I shall very gladly go half way to London at any time, to
give a meeting to a number of Ministers, of any denomination,
that may be brought together with this pious intention; and
I think I may answer for Mr. Johnson’s concurrence. Will
you forgive me, if, for once, I presume to suggest what (I
apprehend) may be most conducive on such an occasion to
our general profit and edification?
“1. Let one of the books of the New Testament be made
choice of previous to our interview, for the subject of our
conference when we meet, not with a view of displaying our
critical talents on every word or verse that occurs, but of
pointing out those things which necessarily enter into the plan
of apostolical preaching. 2. Let every one settle this in his
heart beforehand, to expect contradiction, at the same time
resolving to bear it calmly for the Lord's sake; and, seeing we
naturally carry about us an accursed spirit of selfishness, pride,
and impatience, that is ready to take fire at the most trivial
offence, let us make it a point beforehand, daily to lament this
our wretchedness of disposition at the throne of grace, earnestly
beseeching the Lord to prepare us all for our intended confer
April, 1764.] JOURNAL, 173
ence, by enduing us with the spirit of meekness, forbearance,
humility, and love. 3. Let every one consent to renounce
any favourite phrase, term, or mode of speech, that is not
scriptural, if required so to do by those who dissent from him:
Because whatever doctrine cannot maintain its ground without
the aid of humanly-invented words, is not of God.
“I have unbosomed myself to you in the frankest manner,
with a view to promote that happy intercourse which you wish
to establish; and if you imagine it will answer any good
purpose, you are welcome to show this letter to any of the
Ministers you have had in your eye, and to disclose to them
largely all you know of, dear Sir,
“Your affectionate friend and brother,
“REv. AND DEAR SIR,
“I RECEIVED your printed letter, and should rejoice to
see the union proposed therein take place; but I must own I
am an infidel concerning it. Daily experience convinces me
more and more, that the zeal for opinions and charity, non
bene conveniunt, nec in und sede morantur.* It has well
nigh destroyed all Christian love, zeal, and holiness among
us: I have met with greater trials from these bigots within
this twelvemonth, than I have met with from all other
opposers for fifteen years. Many that once would almost
have plucked out their own eyes and given them to me, are
now ready to pluck out my eyes.
“I really am tired of preaching to an ungrateful, gain
saying people. Pray for me, dear Sir, for my hands hang
down exceedingly. I am
“Your unworthy brother,
“MY REv. AND DEAR BROTHER, Shoreham.
“YoURs of the 15th instant gave me both pain and
pleasure.
“I was highly delighted with your ardent wishes and
endeavours for promoting the spirit of the Gospel among the
Preachers and other professors of it; but deeply concerned at
the disappointment and opposition you have met with.
“It has been always a leading principle with me, (and I
pray God confirm and strengthen it more and more) to love
* Do not well agree, and never remain together in the same place.-EDIT.
all those labourers of Christ, who give proof by their diligence,
their holy and heavenly behaviour, that they love our Lord
Jesus Christ in sincerity, even though their sentiments in
many things should differ from mine.
“And, therefore, though it be absurd to expect an entire
union of sentiments in all things, yet the endeavouring, by
every Christian method, to “keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace,’ is the indispensable duty of all Christians.
Where this spiritual peace and union are not, there faith
working by love is not; and where this divine faith is wanting,
there Christ is wanting; there his Spirit is wanting; and then,
neither circumcision nor uncircumcision will avail us anything.
“In this melancholy situation, whilst we are strangers to the
divine fruits of the Holy Spirit, let our gifts and talents be what
they may, let us speak with the tongues of men and of angels;
we are yet nothing in the sight of God! Nay, though his
Spirit should spread the Gospel, by our ministry, in the hearts
of thousands; yet our own souls will remain but a barren
wilderness; and Christ may say, ‘I never knew you.’
“How ought we therefore always to pray, that the peace
of God may ever rule in our hearts; that we may be rooted
and grounded in love; and that we may constantly follow
after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith
one may edify another !
“This is the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and may God impress
it thoroughly upon the minds and hearts of all! And may the
poor despised flock grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ ! I am, dear Sir,
“Yours most affectionately,
APRIL 20.--(Being Good Friday.) We had a parting
blessing at five. I then rode to Robin Hood's Bay, and
about two preached in the little Square. A poor madman,
literally such, came up to me just as I began, and sat down
quietly till I had done. At six I preached in the new House
at Whitby, ill containing the congregation. Here God does
still make bare his arm, and sinners are continually converted
to him.
Sat. 21.--I visited one who was ill in bed; and, after having
buried seven of her family in six months, had just heard that
the eighth, her beloved husband, was cast away at sea. I asked,
“Do not you fret at any of those things?” She said, with a
April, 1764.] JOURNAL. 175
lovely smile upon her pale cheek, “O, no! How can I fret at
any thing which is the will of God? Let him take all besides:
He has given me himself. I love, I praise him every moment.”
Let any that doubts of Christian Perfection look on such a
spectacle as this! One in such circumstances rejoicing
evermore, and continually giving thanks.
APRIL 22.--(Being Easter-Day.) I preached in the Room
at five and at eight. There were such a number of communi
cants at church, as, it was supposed, had not been there these
fifty years. In the evening I preached under the cliff, for the
sake of those who were not able to get up the hill. The skirts
of the congregation could not hear, though my voice was clear
and loud. But the bulk of them seemed both to hear and
understand. How ripe for the Gospel is this place !
Mon. 23.--After preaching at five, I met the select society,
who seem all to have tasted of the same blessing. I then
rode to Guisborough, and about eleven preached in a meadow
to a large and serious congregation: But not more serious
than that in the street at Stokesley, to whom I declared, in
the afternoon, “Jesus Christ, made of God unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.” I was a little
tired before I came to Hutton. But it was over, when I saw
the huge congregation, among whom I found a greater
blessing than either at Stokesley or Guisborough. I then
met the society, gathered from all parts. Afterwards I met
the select society: And when they were gone, I was just as
fresh as when I set out in the morning.
Tues. 24.--I preached about noon at Potto, and in the
evening in the new House at Yarm, by far the most elegant
in England. A large congregation attended at five in the
morning, and seemed to be just ripe for the exhortation, “Let
us go on unto perfection.” I had indeed the satisfaction of
finding most of the believers here athirst for full redemption.
In the evening I preached at Stockton. The rain was
suspended while I was enforcing those awful words, “Now
God commandeth all men everywhere to repent.” Friday, 27.
I was obliged to preach abroad at five; as also in Darlington
at noon, and at Barnard-Castle in the evening; where many
hearts were bowed down before the Lord.
Sat. 28.--I rode to Newcastle. Here I received a short
letter from John Johnson at York:--“This evening, about a
quarter before seven, it pleased God to take to himself our
dear brother, John Manners, after a time of remarkable
affliction, and as remarkable patience. He was clearly
sensible to the last, as well as solidly happy, saying, ‘The
way is quite clear; my heart is at liberty.’”
Sun. 29.--The ground being wet with heavy rain, I
preached in the House both morning and evening. I soon
found what spirit the people were of. No jar, no contention
is here; but all are peaceably and lovingly striving together
for the hope of the Gospel. And what can hurt the
Methodists, so called, but the Methodists? Only let them not
fight one another, let not brother lift up sword against brother,
and “no weapon formed against them shall prosper.”
Mon. 30.--I received a letter from Cornwall, wherein were
these words:--“Yesterday I preached to a large congregation
at St. John’s. The occasion was this :--One of our friends
came into Mr. Thomas’s a few days since. After speaking a
little upon business, he said, ‘What need have we to watch !’
Presently sitting down, he added, ‘There is but one step
between me and death, and died.”
Wed. May 2--I talked with M. L., a remarkable monu
ment of divine mercy. She is about two-and-twenty, and has
about six hundred pounds a year in her own hands. Some
months since God spoke peace to her soul, while she was
wrestling with him in private prayer. This was never entirely
taken from her, even while she was almost alone. But she was
often dull and faint, till she broke through all hinderances,
and joined heart and hand with the children of God.
Tues. 8.--We rode over the wild Moors to Wolsingham.
It proved to be the fair-day. So I had hearers from all
parts. In the evening I preached to the simple, loving,
earnest people at Barnard-Castle. If all to whom we preach
were of this spirit, what an harvest would ensue !
Wed. 9.--I was invited to breakfast by Mr. F , a.
neighbouring gentleman. I found we had been school-fellows
at the Charter-House: And he remembered me, though I
had forgot him. I spent a very agreeable hour with a serious
as well as sensible man.
About noon I preached to a large congregation in Teesdale,
and to a still larger in Weardale in the evening. The next
day, after preaching at Prudhoe and Nafferton, I returned to
Newcastle.
Tues. 15.--I rode to South-Shields, and was persuaded to
May, 1764.] JOURNAL. 177
preach in the House. It was well I did, for about the middle
of the sermon there was a violent shower. But it was quite
fair at six, while I preached at North-Shields to a very large
and yet very serious congregation. How is the scene changed
since my brother preached here, when the people were ready
to swallow him up ! O what has God wrought in this land
within four or five and twenty years!
Fri. 18.--I received much satisfaction in conversing with the
most honourable member of our society,-Henry Jackson, now
in the ninety-fifth or ninety-sixth year of his age. He put me
in mind of that venerable man, Mr. Eliot, of New-England;
who frequently used to say to his friends, a few years before
he went to God, “My memory is gone; my understanding is
gone; but I think I have more love than ever.”
Sat. 19.--I preached to the poor colliers at Placey, who
are still a pattern to all the country. We rode home by a
great house I had frequently heard of. The front is truly
noble. In the house I saw nothing remarkable, but what
was remarkably bad: Such pictures as an honest Heathen
would be ashamed to receive under his roof; unless he
designed his wife and daughters should be common prostitutes.
And this is the high fashion | What an abundant proof of
the taste of the present age |
Sun. 20.--Between eight and nine I preached in Gateshead,
to a listening multitude. I believe their number was doubled
at the Fell, about two in the afternoon. About five I preached
to such another congregation on the outside of Pandon-Gate.
I know not that I ever before preached to three such congrega
tions in one day: Such as obliged me to speak to the utmost
extent of my voice, from the first word to the last. But it
was all one, as I was no more tired in the evening than if I
had sat still all day.
Mon. 21.--I took my leave of Newcastle; and about noon
preached in the market-place at Morpeth. A few of the
hearers were a little ludicrous at first; but their mirth was
quickly spoiled. In the evening I preached in the Court
IHouse at Alnwick, where I rested the next day. Wednesday,
23. I rode over the sands to Holy-Island, once the famous
seat of a Bishop; now the residence of a few poor families,
who live chiefly by fishing. At one side of the town are the
ruins of a cathedral, with an adjoining monastery. It appears
to have been a lofty and elegant building, the middle aisle
being almost entire. I preached in what was once the market
place, to almost all the inhabitants of the island, and distributed
some little books among them, for which they were exceeding
thankful. In the evening I preached at Berwick-upon-Tweed;
the next evening at Dunbar; and on Friday, 25, about ten,
at Haddington, in Provost D.’s yard, to a very elegant congre
gation. But I expect little good will be done here; for we
begin at the wrong end: Religion must not go from the
greatest to the least, or the power would appear to be of men.
In the evening I preached at Musselborough, and the next
on the Calton-Hill, at Edinburgh. It being the time of the
General Assembly, many of the Ministers were there. The
wind was high and sharp, and blew away a few delicate ones.
But most of the congregation did not stir till I had concluded.
Sun. 27.--At seven I preached in the High-School yard,
on the other side of the city. The morning was extremely
cold. In the evening it blew a storm. However, having
appointed to be on the Calton-Hill, I began there to an huge
congregation. At first, the wind was a little troublesome;
but I soon forgot it. And so did the people for an hour and
a half, in which I fully delivered my own soul.
Mon. 28.--I spent some hours at the General Assembly,
composed of about an hundred and fifty Ministers. I was
surprised to find, 1. That any one was admitted, even lads,
twelve or fourteen years old: 2. That the chief speakers were
Lawyers, six or seven on one side only: 3. That a single
question took up the whole time, which, when I went away,
seemed to be as far from a conclusion as ever, namely, “Shall
Mr. Lindsay be removed to Kilmarnock parish or not?”
The argument for it was, “He has a large family, and this
living is twice as good as his own.” The argument against
it was, “The people are resolved not to hear him, and will
leave the kirk if he comes.” If then the real point in view
had been, as their law directs, majus bonum Ecclesiae,”
instead of taking up five hours, the debate might have been
determined in five minutes.
On Monday and Tuesday I spoke to the members of the
society severally. Thursday, 31. I rode to Dundee, and, about
half an hour after six, preached on the side of a meadow
near the town. Poor and rich attended. Indeed, there is
* The greater benefit of the Church.-EDIT,
June, 1764.] JOURNAL, } 79
seldom fear of wanting a congregation in Scotland. But the
misfortune is, they know everything: So they learn nothing.
Fri. JUNE 1.--I rode to Brechin, where Mr. Blair received
me in the most friendly manner. In the afternoon I preached
on the side of an hill near the town, where we soon forgot the
cold. I trust there will be not only a knowing, but a loving,
people in this place.
About seven Mr. B. was occasionally mentioning what had
lately occurred in the next parish. I thought it worth a
farther inquiry, and therefore ordered our horses to be
brought immediately. Mr. B. guided us to Mr. Ogilvie’s
house, the Minister of the parish; who informed us that a
strange disorder had appeared in his parish, between thirty
and forty years ago; but that nothing of the kind had been
known there since, till some time in September last. A boy
was then taken ill, and so continues still. In the end of
January, or beginning of February, many other children were
taken, chiefly girls, and a few grown persons. They begin
with an involuntary shaking of their hands and feet. Then
their lips are convulsed; next their tongue, which seems to
cleave to the roof of the mouth. Then the eyes are set,
staring terribly, and the whole face variously distorted. Pre
sently they start up, and jump ten, fifteen, or twenty times
together straight upward, two, three, or more feet from the
ground. Then they start forward, and run with amazing
swiftness, two, three, or five hundred yards. Frequently they
run up, like a cat, to the top of an house, and jump on the
ridge of it, as on the ground. But wherever they are, they
never fall, or miss their footing at all. After they have run
and jumped for some time, they drop down as dead. When
they come to themselves, they usually tell when and where
they shall be taken again: Frequently, how often and where
they shall jump, and to what places they shall run.
I asked, “Are any of them near?” He said, “Yes, at
those houses.” We walked thither without delay. One of
them was four years and half old; the other about eighteen.
The child, we found, had had three or four fits that day,
running and jumping like the rest, and in particular leaping
many times from a high table to the ground without the least
hurt. The young woman was the only person of them all,
who used to keep her senses during the fit. In answer to
many questions, she said, “I first feel a pain in my left foot,
then in my head; then my hands and feet shake, and I
cannot speak; and quickly I begin to jump or run.” While we
were talking, she cried out, “O, I have a pain in my foot: It
is in my hand: It is here, at the bending of my arm. O,
my head my head my head !” Immediately her arms were
stretched out, and were as an iron bar: I could not bend one
of her fingers; and her body was bent backward; the lower
part remaining quite erect, while her back formed exactly a
half circle,--her head hanging even with her hips. I was going
to catch her; but one said, “Sir, you may let her alone, for
they never fall.” But I defy all mankind to account for her
not falling, when the trunk of her body hung in that manner.
In many circumstances this case goes far beyond the
famous one mentioned by Boerhaave; particularly in that,--
their telling before, when and how they should be taken again.
Whoever can account for this upon natural principles, has my
free leave : I cannot. I therefore believe, if this be in part
a natural distemper, there is something preternatural too.
Yet supposing this, I can easily conceive, Satan will so dis
guise his part therein, that we cannot precisely determine,
which part of the disorder is natural, and which preternatural.
Sat. 2.--I rode to Aberdeen, and preached in the evening
in the College-Hall, and at seven in the morning, Sunday,
3. At four in the afternoon I preached to a crowded audience
in the College kirk, at Old-Aberdeen. At seven I preached in
the College close, at New-Aberdeen. But the congregation
was so exceeding large, that many were not able to hear.
However, many did hear, and I think feel, the application
of, “Thou art not far from the kingdom of God.”
We want nothing here but a larger House. And the
foundation of one is laid already. It is true, we have little
money, and the society is poor; but we know in whom we
have believed.
Thur. 7.--I rode over to Sir Archibald Grant's, twelve
computed miles from Aberdeen. It is surprising to see how
the country between is improved even within these three years.
On every side the wild dreary moors are ploughed up, and
covered with rising corn. All the ground near Sir Archibald’s,
in particular, is as well cultivated as most in England. About
seven I preached. The kirk was pretty well filled, though
upon short notice. Certainly this is a nation “swift to hear,
and slow to speak,” though not “slow to wrath.”
June, 1764.] JOURNAL. 181
Mr. Grant, a gentleman from the county of Murray, came
in soon after us; and, understanding we were going north,
desired we would call at the Grange-Green in our way. In the
morning, Friday, 8, I rode to Old-Meldrum, and preached in
the market-place at noon, to a large and serious congregation,
among whom were the Minister and his wife. But I was more
surprised to see a company of our friends from Aberdeen,
several of whom had come on foot, twelve old Scotch miles, and
intended to walk back thither the same day. In the afternoon
we rode on to Banff. I had designed to preach; but the stormy
weather would not permit. We set out early on Saturday
morning, and reached Nairn in the evening. Sunday, 10.
About eight we reached Inverness. I could not preach abroad,
because of the rain; nor could I hear of any convenient room;
so that I was afraid my coming hither would be in vain, all
ways seeming to be blocked up. At ten I went to the kirk.
After Service, Mr. Fraser, one of the Ministers, invited us to
dinner, and then to drink tea. As we were drinking tea, he
asked at what hour I would please to preach. I said, “At
half-hour past five.” The high kirk was filled in a very short
time; and I have seldom found greater liberty of spirit. The
other Minister came afterwards to our inn, and showed the
most cordial affection. Were it only for this day, I should
not have regretted the riding an hundred miles.
Mon. 11.--A gentleman, who lives three miles from the
town, invited me to his house, assuring me the Minister of his
parish would be glad if I would make use of his kirk; but
time would not permit, as I had appointed to be at Aberdeen
on Wednesday. All I could do was, to preach once more at
Inverness. I think the church was fuller now than before;
and I could not but observe the remarkable behaviour of the
whole congregation after Service. Neither man, woman, nor
child, spoke one word all the way down the main street.
Indeed the seriousness of the people is the less surprising,
when it is considered that for at least an hundred years,
this town has had such a succession of pious Ministers as
very few in Great Britain have known.
After Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Aberdeen, I think Inverness
is the largest town I have seen in Scotland. The main streets
are broad and straight; the houses mostly old, but not very
bad, nor very good. It stands in a pleasant and fruitful
country, and has all things needful for life and godliness.
The people in general speak remarkably good English, and
are of a friendly, courteous behaviour.
About eleven we took horse. While we were dining at
Nairn, the inn-keeper said, “Sir, the gentlemen of the town
have read the little book you gave me on Saturday, and would
be glad if you would please to give them a sermon.” Upon my
consenting, the bell was immediately rung, and the congre
gation was quickly in the kirk. O what a difference is there
between South and North Britain' Every one here at least
loves to hear the word of God; and none takes it into his
head to speak one uncivil word to any, for endeavouring to
save their souls.
Doubting whether Mr. Grant was come home, Mr. Kershaw
called at the Grange-Green, near Forres, while I rode forward.
But Mr. Grant soon called me back. I have seldom seen a
more agreeable place. The house is an old castle, which stands
on a little hill, with a delightful prospect all four ways; and
the hospitable master has left nothing undone to make it still
more agreeable. He showed us all his improvements, which
are very considerable in every branch of husbandry. In his
gardens manythings were more forward than at Aberdeen, yea,
or Newcastle. And how is it, that none but one Highland
gentleman has discovered that we have a tree in Britain, as
easily raised as an ash, the wood of which is of full as fine a red
as mahogany? namely, the laburnum. I defy any mahogany
to exceed the chairs which he has lately made of this.
Tues. 12.--We rode through the pleasant and fertile county
of Murray to Elgin. I never suspected before that there was
any such country as this near an hundred and fifty miles beyond
Edinburgh; a country which is supposed to have generally six
weeks more sunshine in a year than any part of Great Britain.
At Elgin are the ruins of a noble cathedral; the largest that
I remember to have seen in the kingdom. We rode thence to
the Spey, the most rapid river, next the Rhine, that I ever
saw. Though the water was not breast-high to our horses,
they could very hardly keep their feet. We dined at Keith,
and rode on to Strathbogie, much improved by the linen
manufacture. All the country from Fochabers to Strathbogie
has little houses scattered up and down; and not only the
valleys, but the mountains themselves, are improved with the
utmost care. There want only more trees to make them
more pleasant than most of the mountains in England. The
June, 1764.] JOURNAL, 183
whole family at our inn, eleven or twelve in number, gladly
joined with us in prayer at night. Indeed, so they did at
every inn where we lodged; for among all the sins they have
imported from England, the Scots have not yet learned, at
least not the common people, to scoff at sacred things.
Wed. 13.--We reached Aberdeen about one. Between six
and seven, both this evening and the next, I preached in the
shell of the new House, and found it a time of much consolation.
Friday, 15. We set out early, and came to Dundee just as the
boat was going off. We designed to lodge at the house on the
other side; but could not get either meat, drink, or good words;
so we were constrained to ride on to Cupar. After travelling
near ninety miles, I found no weariness at all; neither were our
horses hurt. Thou, O Lord, dost save both man and beast !
Sat. 16.--We had a ready passage at Kinghorn, and in
the evening I preached on the Calton-Hill, to a very large
congregation; but a still larger assembled at seven on
Sunday morning in the High-School yard. Being afterwards
informed that the Lord’s Supper was to be administered in
the west kirk, I knew not what to do; but at length I judged
it best to embrace the opportunity, though I did not admire the
manner of administration. After the usual Morning Service,
the Minister enumerated several sorts of sinners, whom he
forbade to approach. Two long tables were set on the sides
of one aisle, covered with table-cloths. On each side of them
a bench was placed for the people. Each table held four or
five and thirty. Three Ministers sat at the top, behind a
cross-table; one of whom made a long exhortation, closed with
the words of our Lord; and then breaking the bread, gave it
to him who sat on each side of him. A piece of bread was
then given to him who sat first on each of the four benches.
He broke off a little piece, and gave the bread to the next; so
it went on, the Deacons giving more when wanted. A cup
was then given to the first person on each bench, and so by
one to another. The Minister continued his exhortation all
the time they were receiving; then four verses of the twenty
second Psalm were sung, while new persons sat down at the
tables. A second Minister then prayed, consecrated, and
exhorted. I was informed the Service usually lasted till five
in the evening. How much more simple, as well as more
solemn, is the Service of the Church of England
The evening congregation on the hill was far the largest I
have seen in the kingdom; and the most deeply affected.
Many were in tears; more seemed cut to the heart. Surely
this time will not soon be forgotten. Will it not appear in
the annals of etermity?
Mon. 18.--I set out early, and reached Wooler about four
in the afternoon. Some friends from Newcastle met me here,
and took me in a chaise to Whittingham. Tuesday, 19.
After preaching about noon at Morpeth, we went on to
Newcastle. The fire had not gone out since I was here. I
felt it as soon as I began to speak; and so, it seems, did the
whole congregation. At five in the morning the same spirit
was in the midst of us, as well as at seven in the evening;
but most of all at the Fell, while I was applying those words,
“Believe, and thou shalt be saved.”
Thur. 21.--Leaving this house of God, I rode to Carlisle.
The day was extremely sultry, so that I was faint and feverish
in the evening. However, the next day I got well to
Whitehaven.
What has continually hurt this poor people is offence. I
found the society now all in confusion because a woman had
scolded with her neighbour, and another stole a two-penny
loaf. I talked largely with those who had been most offended;
and they stood reproved. Sunday, 24. About seven I
preached at the Gins, and the people flocked together from
all quarters. The want of field-preaching has been one cause
of deadness here. I do not find any great increase of the
work of God without it. If ever this is laid aside, I expect
the whole work will gradually die away.
Mon. 25.--I rode by Keswick to Kendal. The clouds shaded
us most of the way, and the wind was just in our face; other
wise we should scarce have been able to bear the heat. A few
years ago the fields here were whiteforthe harvest; but the poor
people have since been so harassed by Seceders, and disputers
of every kind, that they are dry and dead as stones; yet I think
some of them felt the power of God this evening; and can he
not, “out of these stones, raise up children unto Abraham ?”
Tues. 26.--I preached abroad at five; and, I believe, not in
vain. Between nine and ten we reached Black-Burton, where
there was a general awakening till the jars between Mr. Ingham
and Allan laid the people asleep again. However, some are
united again in a quiet, loving society, zealous of good works.
I preached about eleven. Thence we rode to Long-Preston,
July, 1764.] JOURNAL, 185
being still fanned by the wind, and (unless a few minutes
now and then) shaded by the clouds. The congregation was
exceeding serious. Hence I rode to Skipton, where, some
time since, no Methodist Preacher could appear. I preached
in the evening near the bridge, without the least interruption.
Nor did I find any weariness, after preaching four times, and
riding fifty miles.
Wed. 27.--I rode to Otley. In the evening we had a large
congregation at the foot of the great mountain. After
preaching in the morning, I examined those who believe they
are saved from sin. They are a little increased in number
since I met them last; and some of them much increased in
love. This evening I preached at Guiseley; the next at
Keighley; and on Saturday, 30, at Bradford. This was a
place of contention for many years; but since the contentious
have quitted us, all is peace. Sunday, JULY 1. I preached
at seven to a more numerous congregation than I believe
ever assembled there before; and all were serious as death.
About one I preached at Birstal, on, “Now is the day of
salvation.” The people stood by thousands; covering
both the plain, and the sides of the adjacent hill. It was a
glorious opportunity. At five the congregation in Leeds was
almost as large, but not so deeply affected.
Mon. 2.--I gave a fair hearing to two of our brethren who
had proved bankrupts. Such we immediately exclude from our
society, unless it plainly appears not to be their own fault. Both
these were in a prosperous way till they fell into that wretched
trade of bill-broking, wherein no man continues long without
being wholly ruined. By this means, not being sufficiently
accurate in their accounts, they ran back without being
sensible of it. Yet it was quite clear that I R-- is
an honest man: I would hope the same concerning the other.
Tues. 3.--I was reflecting on an odd circumstance, which I
cannot account for. I never relish a tune at first hearing, not
till I have almost learned to sing it; and as I learn it more per
fectly, I gradually lose my relish for it. I observe something
similar in poetry; yea, in all the objects of imagination. I seldom
relish verses at first hearing; till I have heard them over and
over, they give me no pleasure; and they give me next to none
when I have heard them a few times more, so as to be quite
familiar. Just so a face or a picture, which does not strike me
at first, becomes more pleasing as I grow more acquainted with
it; but only to a certain point: For when I am too much
acquainted, it is no longer pleasing. O, how imperfectly do
we understand even the machine which we carry about us!
Thur. 5.--I had the comfort of leaving our brethren at
Leeds united in peace and love. About one I preached in a
meadow at Wakefield. At first the sun was inconvenient;
but it was not many minutes before that inconvenience was
removed by the clouds coming between. We had not only a
larger, but a far more attentive, congregation than ever was
seen here before. One, indeed, a kind of gentleman, was
walking away with great unconcern, when I spoke aloud,
“Does Gallio care for none of these things? But where will
you go, with the wrath of God on your head, and the curse
of God on your back?” He stopped short, stood still, and
went no farther till the sermon was ended.
In the evening I preached on the top of the hill near
Dewsbury, one of the pleasantest towns in England. The
congregation was larger than ever before. They filled the
preaching-house at five in the morning.
I had purposed to take horse early, to avoid the heat; but
was detained till between nine and ten. It was then warm
enough, there being no wind, and the sun shining full in our
face. However, before one we got to Heptonstall, where I
preached in the shell of the new House. After service one
brought his daughter to me, who had been ill some months,
just like those near Brechin. Her sister was so two years
since; and when that recovered, this was taken. How often
must even physicians acknowledge spiritual agents, did not
the nerves help them out at a dead lift
In the evening I preached at Halifax, where I had the
pleasure of meeting Mr. Venn; with whom, in the morning,
Saturday, 7, I rode to Huddersfield, and preached between
eleven and twelve. The church was pretty well filled,
considering the short warning. At half-hour after one we
took horse. The sun shone burning hot, and the wind was in
our back; but very soon the sky was overcast, and the wind
changed, and blew just in our face all the way to Manchester.
It was with difficulty that I preached in the evening, my
voice being exceeding weak; as I had preached three times
a day for ten days, and many of the times abroad.
Sun. 8.--I rode to Stockport, and preached at one on a
Green at the end of the town. A few wild young men strove
July, 1764.] JOURNAL. 187
to make a disturbance; but none regarded them. At five I
preached at Manchester, on, “One thing is needful;” and
scarce knew how to leave off. At the meeting of the society,
likewise, it pleased God to comfort us greatly. Monday, 9.
The stewards from various parts gave a good account of the
work of God among them, steadily increasing on every side.
In the evening curiosity brought to the House many
unbelievers, in the proper sense;--men who do not receive
the Christian Revelation. I preached on, “Thou shalt love
thy neighbour as thyself; ” and proved them sinners on
their own principles. Some of the stout-hearted trembled;
I hope to more purpose than poor Felix did.
Wed. 11.--I gave all our brethren a solemn warning not to
love the world, or the things of the world. This is one way
whereby Satan will surely endeavour to overthrow the present
work of God. Riches swiftly increase on many Methodists, so
called: What, but the mighty power of God, can hinder their
setting their hearts upon them? And if so, the life of God
vanishes away.
About seven I preached in the street at Bolton, to twice or
thrice as many as the Room would have contained. It was
a calm, still evening, and the congregation was as quiet as
the season; though composed of awakened and unawakened
Churchmen, Dissenters, and what not. As many as the
House would well contain were present again at five in the
morning. About seven in the evening the multitude of
people constrained me to preach in the street, though it
rained. But in a very short time the rain stopped; and I
strongly enforced our Lord’s word, “If thou canst believe, all
things are possible to him that believeth.”
After sermon, one was mentioning a person who, according to
his account, was disordered just like those in Scotland. In the
morning, Friday, 13, her father brought her over. Soon after
she fell into a fit; but it was plainly natural. I judged it to be
of the epileptic kind. When she fell into a second, I advised
electrifying. The fit ceased by a very gentle shock. A third
was removed in the same manner; and she was so well, that her
father found no difficulty in carrying her home behind him.
At ten I began to preach at Wigan, proverbially famous
for all manner of wickedness. As I preached abroad, we
expected some disturbance; but there was none at all. A
few were wild at first; but in a little space grew quiet and
188 REv. J. wesDEY’s [July, 1764.
attentive. I did not find so civil a congregation as this the
first time I preached at Bolton.
To-day I wrote the following letter, which I desire may be
seriously considered by those to whom it belongs:--
“THERE was one thing, when I was with you, that
gave me pain: You are not in the society. But why not?
Are there not sufficient arguments for it to move any reason
able man? Do you not hereby make an open confession of
Christ, of what you really believe to be his work, and of
those whom you judge to be, in a proper sense, his people
and his messengers? By this means do not you encourage
his people, and strengthen the hands of his messengers?
And is not this the way to enter into the spirit, and share
the blessing, of a Christian community? Hereby, likewise,
you may have the benefit of the advices and exhortations at
the meeting of the society; and also of provoking one another,
at the private meetings, to love and to good works.
“The ordinary objections to such an union are of little
weight with you. You are not afraid of the expense. You
already give unto the Lord as much as you need do then :
And you are not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, even in the
midst of a crooked and perverse generation. Perhaps you will
say, ‘I am joined in affection.’ True; but not to so good
effect. This joining half-way, this being a friend to, but not a
member of, the society, is by no means so open a confession
of the work and servants of God. Many go thus far who
dare not go farther, who are ashamed to bear the reproach of
an entire union. Either you are ashamed, or you are not.
If you are, break through at once; if you are not, come into
the light, and do what those well-meaning cowards dare not do.
This imperfect union is not so encouraging to the people,
not so strengthening to the Preachers. Rather it is weakening
their hands, hindering their work, and laying a stumbling
block in the way of others; for what can any man think,
who knows you are so well acquainted with them, and yet do
not join in their society? What can he think, but that you
know them too well to come any nearer to them; that you
know that kind of union to be useless, if not hurtful? And
yet by this very union is the whole (external) work of God
upheld throughout the nation; besides all the spiritual good
which accrues to each member. O delay no longer, for the
July, 1764.] JOURNAL. 189
sake of the work, for the sake of the world, for the sake of your
brethren Join them inwardly and outwardly, heart and hand,
for the sake of your own soul. There is something not easily
explained in the fellowship of the Spirit, which we enjoy with
a society of living Christians. You have no need to give up
your share therein, and in the various blessings that result
from it. You have no need to exclude yourself from the benefit
of the advice and exhortations given from time to time. These
are by no means to be despised, even supposing you have
yourself more understanding than him that gives them. You
need not lose the benefit of those prayers which experience
shows are attended with a peculiar blessing. “But I do not
care to meet a class; I find no good in it.’ Suppose you find
even a dislike, a loathing of it; may not this be natural, or
even diabolical? In spite of this, break through, make a fair
trial. It is but a lion in the way. Meet only six times, (with
previous prayer) and see if it do not vanish away. But if it
be a cross, still bear it for the sake of your brethren. “But I
want to gain my friends and relations. If so, stand firm. If
you give way, you hurt them, and they will press upon you the
more. If you do not, you will probably gain them; otherwise
you confirm both their wrong notions and wrong tempers.
Because I love you I have spoken fully and freely; to know
that I have not spoken in vain, will be a great satisfaction to
“Your affectionate brother,
fg J. W.”
In the evening I preached at Liverpool, and the next
day, Sunday, 15, the House was full enough. Many of the
rich and fashionable were there, and behaved with decency.
Indeed, I have always observed more courtesy and humanity
at Liverpool, than at most sea-ports in England.
Mon. 16.--In the evening the House was fuller, if possible,
than the night before. I preached on the “one thing needful;”
and the rich behaved as seriously as the poor. Only one
young gentlewoman (I heard) laughed much. Poor thing!
Doubtless she thought, “I laugh prettily.”
Tues. 17.--I preached at Warrington. But what a
change | No opposer, nor any trifler now ! Every one
heard as for life, while I explained and applied, “Why will
ye die, O house of Israel?”
In the evening I preached in the little Square adjoining to
the preaching-house at Chester. There were many wild, rude
people, but they were quite out-numbered by those who
were civil and attentive; and I believe some impression was
Imade on the wildest. What can shake Satan’s kingdom like
field-preaching?
Wed. 18.--I should have been glad of a day of rest;
but notice had been given of my preaching at noon near
Tatten-Hall. The rain began almost as soon as we came in:
So I could not preach abroad as I designed, but in a large
commodious barn, where all that were present seemed to
receive the word of God with joy and reverence.
The congregation at Chester, in the evening, was more
numerous and far more serious than the day before. There
wants only a little more field-preaching here, and Chester
would be as quiet as London.
Thur. 19.--After preaching at Little-Leigh, I rode on to
Macclesfield. Here I heard an agreeable account of Mrs.
R--, who was in the society at London from a child; but
after she was married to a rich man, durst not own a poor,
despised people. Last year she broke through, and came to
see me. A few words which I then spoke never left her, not
even in the trying hour, during the illness which came a few
months after. All her conversation was then in heaven; till,
feeling her strength was quite exhausted, she said, with a
smile, “Death, thou art welcome!” and resigned her spirit.
I preached about seven to an huge multitude of attentive
hearers. Friday, 20. At noon we made the same shift at
Congleton as when I was here last. I stood in the window,
having put as many women as it would contain into the House.
The rest, with the men, stood below in the meadow, and
many of the townsmen, wild enough. I have scarce found
such enlargement of heart since I came from Newcastle.
The brutes resisted long, but were at length overcome; not
above five or six excepted. Surely man shall not long have
the upper hand: God will get unto himself the victory.
It rained all the day till seven in the evening, when I
began preaching at Burslem. Even the poor potters here
are a more civilized people than the better sort (so called)
at Congleton. A few stood with their hats on, but none
spoke a word, or offered to make the least disturbance.
Sat. 21.--I rode to Bilbrook, near Wolverhampton, and
preached between two and three. Thence we went on to Made
ley, an exceeding pleasant village, encompassed with trees and
July, 1764.] JOURNAL, 191
hills. It was a great comfort to me to converse once more
with a Methodist of the old stamp, denying himself, taking
up his cross, and resolved to be “altogether a Christian.”
Sun. 22.--At ten Mr. Fletcher read Prayers, and I preached
on those words in the Gospel, “I am the good Shepherd: The
good Shepherd layeth down his life for the sheep.” The church
would nothing near contain the congregation; but a window
near the pulpit being taken down, those who could not come
in stood in the church-yard, and I believe all could hear.
The congregation, they said, used to be much smaller in the
afternoon than in the morning; but I could not discern the
least difference, either in number or seriousness.
I found employment enough for the intermediate hours, in
praying with various companies who hung about the house,
insatiably hungering and thirsting after the good word. Mr.
Grimshaw, at his first coming to Haworth, had not such a
prospect as this. There are many adversaries indeed; but
yet they cannot shut the open and effectual door.
Mon. 23.--The church was pretty well filled even at five,
and many stood in the churchyard. In the evening I
preached at Shrewsbury, to a large congregation, among
whom were several men of fortune. I trust, though hitherto
we seem to have been ploughing on the sand, there will at
last be some fruit. The next day I spent at Shrewsbury.
Wed, 25.--I took horse a little after four, and, about two,
preached in the market-house at Llanidloes, two or three and
forty miles from Shrewsbury. At three we rode forward
through the mountains to the Fountain-head. I was for
lodging there; but Mr. B being quite unwilling, we
mounted again about seven. After having rode an hour, we
found we were quite out of the way, having been wrong
directed at setting out. We were then told to ride over some
grounds; but our path soon ended in the edge of a bog.
However, we got through to a little house, where an honest
man, instantly mounting his horse, galloped before us, up hill
and down, till he brought us into a road, which, he said, led
straight to Roes-Fair. We rode on, till another met us, and
said, “No ; this is the way to Aberystwith. If you would
go to Roes-Fair, you must turn back, and ride down to
yonder bridge.” The master of a little house near the bridge
then directed us to the next village, where we inquired again,
(it being past nine,) and were once more set exactly wrong.
192 REv. J. wesDEY’s [July, 1764.
Having wandered an hour upon the mountains, through rocks
and bogs, and precipices, we, with abundance of difficulty, got
back to the little house near the bridge. It was in vain to think
of rest there, it being full of drunken, roaring miners; besides
that there was but one bed in the house, and neither grass, nor
hay, nor corn to be had. So we hired one of them to walk
with us to Roes-Fair, though he was miserably drunk, till, by
falling all his length in a purling stream, he came tolerably to
his senses. Between eleven and twelve we came to the inn;
but neither here could we get any hay. When we were in bed,
the good hostler and miner thought good to mount our beasts.
I believe it was not long before we rose that they put them into
the stable. But the mule was cut in several places, and my
mare was bleeding like a pig, from a wound behind, two inches
deep, made, it seemed, by a stroke with a pitch-fork. What
to do we could not tell, till I remembered I had a letter for
one Mr. Nathaniel Williams, whom, upon inquiry, I found to
live but a mile off. We walked thither, and found “an
Israelite indeed,” who gladly received both man and beast.
After I had got a little rest, Mr. W. desired me to give an
exhortation to a few of his neighbours. None was more struck
therewith than one of his own family, who before cared for
none of these things. He sent a servant with us after dinner
to Tregarron, from whence we had a plain road to Lampeter.
Fri. 27.--We rode through a lovely vale, and over pleasant
and fruitful hills, to Carmarthen. Thence, after a short bait,
we went on to Pembroke, and came before I was expected;
so I rested that night, having not quite recovered my journey
from Shrewsbury to Roes-Fair.
Sun. 29.--The Minister of St. Mary’s sent me word he
was very willing I should preach in his church; but, before
Service began, the Mayor sent to forbid it; so he preached
a very useful sermon himself. The Mayor's behaviour so
disgusted many of the Gentry, that they resolved to hear
where they could; and accordingly flocked together in the
evening from all parts of the town: And perhaps the taking
up this cross may profit them more than my sermon in the
church would have done.
Mon. 30.--I rode to Haverfordwest : But no notice had been
given, nor did any in the town know of my coming. However,
after a short time, I walked up toward the Castle, and began
singing an hymn. The people presently ran together from all
July, 1764.] JOURNAL. 193
quarters. They have curiosity at least; and some, I cannot
doubt, were moved by a nobler principle. Were zealous and
active labourers here, what an harvest might there be, even in
this corner of the land |
We returned through heavy rain to Pembroke. Tuesday,
31. We set out for Glamorganshire, and rode up and down
steep and stony mountains, for about five hours, to Larn.
Having procured a pretty ready passage there, we went on to
Lansteffan-Ferry, where we were in some danger of being
swallowed up in the mud before we could reach the water.
Between one and two we reached Kidwelly, having been more
than seven hours on horseback, in which time we could have
rode round by Carmarthen with more ease both to man and
beast. I have, therefore, taken my leave of these ferries;
considering we save no time by crossing them, (not even when
we have a ready passage,) and so have all the trouble, danger,
and expense, clear gains. I wonder that any man of common
sense, who has once made the experiment, should ever ride
from Pembroke to Swansea any other way than by Carmarthen.
An honest man at Kidwelly told us there was no difficulty in
riding the sands; so we rode on. In ten minutes one overtook
us who used to guide persons over them; and it was well he
did, or in all probability we had been swallowed up. The
whole sands are at least ten miles over, with many streams
of quicksands intermixed. But our guide was thoroughly
acquainted with them, and with the road on the other side.
By his help, between five and six, we came well tired to
Oxwych in Gower.
Gower is a large tract of land, bounded by Brecknockshire
on the north-east, the sea on the south-west, and rivers on the
other sides. Here all the people talk English, and are in
general the most plain, loving people in Wales. It is,
therefore, no wonder that they receive “the word with all
readiness of mind.”
Knowing they were scattered up and down, I had sent
two persons on Sunday, that they might be there early on
Monday, and so sent notice of my coming all over the country:
But they came to Oxwych scarce a quarter of an hour before
me; so that the poor people had no notice at all: Nor was
there any to take us in; the person with whom the Preacher
used to lodge being three miles out of town. After I had
stayed a while in the street, (for there was no public-house,)
a poor woman gave me house-room. Having had nothing
since breakfast, I was very willing to eat or drink; but she
simply told me she had nothing in the house but a dram of gin.
However, I afterwards procured a dish of tea at another house,
and was much refreshed. About seven I preached to a little
company, and again in the morning. They were all attention;
so that even for the sake of this handful of people I did not
regret my labour.
Wed. AUGUST 1.--It was with difficulty I reached Cowbridge
about one, where the congregation was waiting. I found they
had had heavy rain great part of the day; but very little fell
upon us. Nor do I remember that from the beginning of
March till now we have been in more than one heavy shower
of rain, either in England, Scotland, or Wales.
I preached in the evening at Llandaff, and on Thursday,
2, in the Town-Hall at Cardiff. Saturday, 4. We crossed at
the New-Passage, and rode on to Bristol.
Sun. 5.--I preached in Prince’s Street at eight; at two,
under the sycamore-tree at Kingswood; and at five, near King’s
Square in Bristol. How many thousands in this city do see
in this “their day, the things that belong to their peace l’’
On Monday, the 6th, our Conference began. The great
point I now laboured for was a good understanding with all
our brethren of the Clergy who are heartily engaged in
propagating vital religion. Saturday, 11. I took chaise early
in the morning, and at night came safe to London.
Sun. 12.--In the afternoon I preached in Moorfields on
those comfortable words, “Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and thou shalt be saved.” Thousands heard with calm and
deep attention. This also hath God wrought!
Mon. 13.--I was again as fully employed as at the Confer
ence, in visiting classes from morning till night. Saturday,
18. I preached, for the first time, in our new chapel at Snows
fields, on, “O, how amiable are thy tabernacles, thou Lord
of hosts l”
Sun. 19.--Meeting with a pious and sensible man, who was
born in the Isle of Skye, I said, “Tell me freely, did you
yourself ever know a second-sighted man?” He answered,
after a little pause, “I have known more than one or two.”
I said, “But were they not deceivers?--How do you know
they were really such?” He replied, “I have been in
company with them, when they dropped down as dead.
Sept. 1764.] JOURNAL. 195
Coming to themselves, they looked utterly amazed, and said, ‘I
have been in such a place, and I saw such and such persons
(perhaps fifty miles off) die in such a manner;’ and when
inquiry was made, I never could find that they were mistaken
in one circumstance. But the reason why it is so hard for
you to get any information concerning this is, those who have
the second sight count it a great misfortune; and it is
thought a scandal to their family.”
Mon. 20.--I went to Canterbury, and opened our new
chapel, by preaching on, “One thing is needful.” How is it
that many Protestants, even in England, do not know, that no
other consecration of church or chapel is allowed, much less
required, in England, than the performance of public worship
therein? This is the only consecration of any church in
Great Britain which is necessary or even lawful. It is
true, Archbishop Laud composed a Form of Consecration;
but it was never allowed, much less established, in England.
Let this be remembered by all who talk so idly of preaching
in unconsecrated places !
Wed. 22.--I had designed to return to London; but being
importuned to pay a visit first to Sandwich, I went over, and
preached about ten, to a dull, but attentive, congregation.
Immediately after service we set out for Dover. In the way
we were on the point of being dashed in pieces; the chariot
wheels running within two or three inches, or less, of the
edge of a bank, ten or twelve feet high. I preached in
Dover at two, and returned time enough for the Service at
Canterbury. Thursday, 23. I preached at Bethnal-Green,
and in the evening at the Foundery.
Mon. 27.--I saw a pattern of patience, John Matthews,
daily dying of a consumption; but in constant pain, weakness,
weariness, and want of sleep, calmly giving himself up to God.
Sun. SEPTEMBER 2.--After a toilsome, yet comfortable day,
I set out in the machine, and on Monday evening came to
Bristol, as fresh as I left London.
Mon. 10.--I rode to Shepton-Mallet, and preached at noon,
Qn, “One thing is needful.” Only one man, a common dis
turber, behaved amiss. Iwasconstrained torebuke him sharply.
All the people turned their eyes upon him; and for once he
was ashamed. In the evening I preached at Bayford, near
Wincanton, and at seven in the morning. Wednesday, 12.
I returned to Bristol; and at six in the evening preached on
Redcliff-Hill. Many were here who, I suppose, never heard
me before; and attention sat on every face.
Thur. 13.--I spent an hour in Lord B ’s gardens, or
more properly, woods. They are small to the late Duke of
Kent's, in Bedfordshire, and, therefore, not capable of so much
variety; but, for the size, it is not possible for anything of
the kind to be more agreeable; and the situation, on the top of
an high hill, in one of the fruitfullest counties in England,
gives them an advantage which even Stow-Gardens have not.
Yet happiness is not in these shades; and if it were, yet,
How long? How soon will they upbraid
Their transitory master dead :
Mon, 17.--About noon I preached at Bath. The day
before Mr. Davis had preached abroad. One fruit of this
was, the congregation was larger now than I remember it to
have been these seven years. Thence I rode to Comb-Grove,
an house built in a large grove, on the side of an high, steep
hill. I found Mrs. W the same still, with regard to her
liveliness, but not her wildness; in this she was much altered.
I preached at five to a small, serious congregation; and, I
believe, few were sent empty away.
Two persons from London, who were at Bath for their
health, had walked over to the preaching. Afterwards we all
spent an hour in singing, and serious conversation. The fire
kindled more and more, till Mrs. asked if I would give
her leave to pray. Such a prayer I never heard before: It
was perfectly an original; odd and unconnected, made up of
disjointed fragments, and yet like a flame of fire. Every
sentence went through my heart, and I believe the heart of
every one present. For many months I have found nothing
like it. It was good for me to be here.
Tues. 18.--I preached again in the court-yard at seven;
and it was now that one of the servants, who was in tears the
night before, was throughly convinced that God had blotted
out all her sins. About moon I preached to a large congre
gation at Freshford, on, “Now is the day of salvation.” A
little before six, being determined to be no longer cooped up
in the Room at Bradford, I began in the main street, near
the bridge. In a very short time a multitude of people ran
together, and listened with all attention, till an impetuous
shower drove part of them away: The rest would not stir
Sept. 1764.] JOURNAL. 197
till I concluded. I then gave notice of meeting the society;
but a crowd of people pressed in with them. Seeing their
earnestness, I was unwilling to hinder; so we had quickly
another large congregation; and I know not if we have had
such a season at Bradford for twice seven years before.
Wed. 19.--At five we had such a congregation as does not
use to meet here at that hour. At nine I preached again at
Comb-Grove, and found again that God was there.
Is not this an instance of ten thousand of God’s choosing
the foolish things of the world to confound the wise?--Here is
one that has not only a weak natural understanding, but an
impetuosity of temper, bordering upon madness; and hence
both her sentiments are confused, and her expressions odd
and indigested; and yet, notwithstanding this, more of the
real power of God attends these uncouth expressions than
the sensible discourses of even good men who have twenty
times her understanding.
Thus I have many times known God attach his power to
the words of extremely weak men. The humble overlooked
the weakness of the men, and rejoiced in the power of God.
But all his power is unacknowledged, unfelt, by those who
stumble at the weakness of the instrument.
I reached Bristol time enough to preach in the evening
upon Redcliff-Hill. A malignant fever had lately broke out
upon the very spot, which much increased the number and
seriousness of the congregation.
Sat. 22.--I was much refreshed by hearing the experience
of Mary G , once a determined enemy to the doctrine
of Perfection, opposing it with great eagerness and many
reasons; but now an happy witness of it. During her hottest
opposition she never could rest in any known sin: And this,
at length, made both pride and anger so exceeding bitter to
her that she could have no peace till she was fully delivered
from them.
Sun. 23.--I do not know whether we have had so large a
congregation these twenty years, as this evening, at the new
Square. Surely the wise world will not impute this to novelty;
unless because the grace of God is ever new.
On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I visited the
societies in Somersetshire. On the following days I met the
classes in Bristol, and marrowly inquired into the character
and behaviour of each person; the rather because it had been
198 REv. J. wesDEY’s [Oct. 1764.
strongly affirmed that there were many disorderly walkers in
the society. I found one woman and one man, who, I am
afraid, deserved that character. Let any one that is more
clear-sighted than me find two more, and I will thank him.
Sun. 30.--The whole society met in the evening, and jointly
renewed their covenant with God, in a form recommended by
Mr. Richard Alleine; and many felt that God was there. It
was a day of his power not to be forgotten, a day both of godly
sorrow and strong consolation.
Mon. October 1.--I left Bristol with joy, having seen the
fruit of my labour. At noon I preached at Comb-Grove, to a
small congregation of earnest, simple people. I had designed
to preach in the evening at Bradford, in the same place I did
before; but Mr. R., at whose door I then stood, had now
altered his mind: So I was constrained to preach in our own
Room, to (comparatively) an handful of people.
Tues. 2.--I breakfasted at the Devizes, with Mr. B r
a black swan, an honest Lawyer | Hence we rode through
a most intricate road to Pewsey. I found a neighbouring
gentleman had been there, moving every stone, to prevent
my preaching. I was informed, his first design was to raise
a mob; then he would have had the Churchwardens inter
pose: Whether they intended it or no, I cannot tell; but
they neither did nor said any thing. The congregation filled
a great part of the church, and were all deeply attentive
Surely good will be done in this place, if it be not prevented
by a mixture of various doctrines.
Wed, 3.--I rode to Salisbury, and, going slowly forward,
on Saturday, 6, came to London.
Sun. 7.--I preached in the morning at Snowsfields, and
afterwards at West-Street. We had a glorious opportunity
at the Lord’s Supper; the rocks were broken in pieces. At
five I preached in Moorfields to a huge multitude, on, “Ye
are saved through faith.” A little before twelve I took the
machine for Norwich. Monday, 8. We dined at Bury,
where a gentlewoman came into the coach, with whom I
spent most of the afternoon in close conversation and singing
praises to God.
Tues. 9.--I was desired to meet Mr. B., and we had a
good deal of conversation together. He seems to be a person
of middling sense, but a most unpleasing address. I would
hope he has some little experience of religion; but it does
Oct. 1764.] JOURNAL, 199
not appear to advantage, as he is extremely hot, impetuous,
overbearing, and impatient of contradiction. He hooked me,
unawares, into a little dispute; but I cut it short as soon as
possible, knowing neither was likely to convince the other.
So we met and parted in peace.
Wed. 10.--I went to Yarmouth, where the earnest congre
gation was gathered at short warning. Thursday, 11. I was
desired to go to Lowestoft, in Suffolk, nine miles south-east of
Yarmouth. The use of a large place had been offered, which
would contain abundance of people: But when I was come,
Mr. Romaine had changed his mind; so I preached in the
open air. A wilder congregation I have not seen; but the
bridle was in their teeth. All attended, and a considerable
part seemed to understand something of what was spoken;
nor did any behave uncivilly when I had done; and I
believe a few did not lose their labour.
It was easy in the evening to observe the different spirit
of the congregation at Yarmouth. Almost all seemed to feel
the power of God, and many were filled with consolation.
Fri. 12.--I returned to Norwich, and inquired into the
state of the society. I have seen no people in all England or
Ireland so changeable as this. This society, in 1755, consisted
of eighty-three members; two years after, of an hundred and
thirty-four; in 1758 it was shrunk to an hundred and ten. In
March, 1759, we took the Tabernacle; and within a month
the society was increased to above seven hundred and sixty.
But nearly five hundred of these had formerly been with James
Wheatley, and having been scattered abroad, now ran together
they hardly knew why. Few of them were throughly
awakened; most deeply ignorant; all bullocks unaccustomed
to the yoke, having never had any rule or order among them,
but every man doing what was right in his own eyes. It was
not, therefore, strange, that the next year, only five hundred
and seven of these were left. In 1761 they were farther
reduced, namely, to four hundred and twelve. I cannot tell
how it was, that in 1762 they were increased again to six
hundred and thirty. But the moon soon changed, so that in
1763, they were shrunk to three hundred and ten. This
large reduction was owing to the withdrawing the sacrament,
to which they had been accustomed from the time the Taber
nacle was built. They are now sunk to an hundred and
seventy-four; and now probably the tide will turn again.
Sun. 14.--At seven I clearly and strongly described the
height and depth of Christian holiness: And (what is strange)
I could not afterward find that any one person was offended.
At ten we had a congregation indeed; I trust, all of one
heart. I went, as usual, to the cathedral in the afternoon,
and heard a sound, practical sermon. About five our great
congregation met, and (what has seldom been known) very
quietly. We were cqually quiet at the meeting of the society,
which met now for the first time on a Sunday evening. So
has God stilled the madness of the people. Are not the
hearts of all men in his hand?
Mon. 15.--At the request of many, I had given notice of
a watch-night. We had but an indifferent prelude: Between
six and seven the mob gathered in great numbers, made an
huge noise, and began to throw large stones against the out
ward doors. But they had put themselves out of breath before
eight, so that when the service begun they were all gone.
Tues. 16.-In the evening the whole congregation seemed
not a little moved, while I was enforcing those solemn words,
“He died for all, that they which live should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and
rose again.” The same was observable, and that in an higher
and higher degree, the two following evenings. If I could stay
here a month, I think there would be a society little inferior
to that at Bristol. But it must not be; they who will bear
sound doctrine only from me, must still believe a lie.
Sat. 20.--My horses meeting me at Burntwood, I rode on to
Leytonstone, and preached to a serious congregation, on, “I
will; be thou clean.” The following week I made a little tour
through part of Kent and Sussex, where some of our brethren
swiftly increase in goods. Do they increase in grace too?
If not, let them take care that their money do not perish
with them.
Sun. NovEMBER. 4.--I proposed to the Leaders, the assist
ing the Society for the Reformation of Manners, with regard to
their heavy debt. One of them asked, “Ought we not to pay
our own debt first?” After some consultations, it was agreed
to attempt it. The general debt of the society in London,
occasioned chiefly by repairing the Foundery, and chapels,
and by building at Wapping and Snowsfields, was about nine
hundred pounds. This I, laid before the society in the
evening, and desired them all to set their shoulders to the
Dec. 1764.] JOURNAL. 201
work, either by a present contribution, or by subscribing what
they could pay, on the first of January, February, or March.
Mon. 5.--My scraps of time this week I employed in setting
down my present thoughts upon a single life, which, indeed,
are just the same they have been these thirty years; and the
same they must be, unless I give up my Bible.
Thur. 8.--At ten (and so every morning) I met the
Preachers that were in town, and read over with them the
“Survey of the Wisdom of God in the Creation.” Many
pupils I had at the University, and I took some pains with
them: But to what effect? What is become of them now?
How many of them think either of their Tutor or their God?
But, blessed be God! I have had some pupils since, who well
reward me for my labour. Now “I live;” for “ye stand
fast in the Lord.”
Mon. 12.--I retired to Hoxton, to answer what was personal
in the letters ascribed to Mr. Hervey. How amazing is the
power of prejudice! Were it not for this, every one who
knew him and me would have cried out with indignation,
“Whatever Mr. W. was, none can commend or excuse Mr.
H. Such bitterness he ought not to have shown to his most
cruel enemy; how much less to the guide of his youth; to
one he owns to have been his ‘father and his friend l’”
Monday, 19, and the other afternoons of this week, I took
up my cross, and went in person to the principal persons
in our society, in every part of the town. By this means,
within six days, near six hundred pounds were subscribed
toward the public debt; and what was done, was done with
the utmost cheerfulness. I remember but one exception:
Only one gentleman squeezed out ten shillings, as so many
drops of blood.
Sat. DECEMBER 1.--M. B. gave me a farther account of
their affairs at Leytonstone. It is exactly Pietas Hallensis
in miniature. What it will be, does not yet appear.
Tues. 4.--I made a little excursion to Colchester. Satur
day, 8. I saw one who, many years ago, was a “minister of
God to us for good,” in repressing the madness of the people,
--Sir John Gonson, who was near fifty years a Magistrate,
and has lived more than ninety. He is majestic in decay,
having few wrinkles, and not stooping at all, though just
dropping into the grave, having no strength, and little memory
or understanding. Well might that good man, Bishop
Stratford, pray, “Lord, let me not live to be useless!” And
he had his desire: He was struck with a palsy in the evening,
praised God all night, and died in the morning.
Monday, 10, and the three following days, I visited Canter
bury, Dover, and Sandwich, and returned to London on
Friday, 14. In the machine I read Mr. Baxter's book upon
apparitions. It contains several well-attested accounts; but
there are some which I cannot subscribe to. How hard is it
to keep the middle way; not to believe too little or too
much !
Sun. 16.--I buried Mrs. Prior, housekeeper to Mr. P.,
who told me, “On night, just at one, I rung, and said to
my man coming in, ‘Mrs. Prior is dead. She just now came
into my room, and walked round my bed. About two, the
nurse came, and told me she was dead. I asked at what time
she died; and was answered, “Just at one o’clock.’”
Thur. 27.--I preached and administered the sacrament at
the new chapel in Snowsfields. How well does God order all
things! By losing the former chapel we have gained both a
better House and a larger congregation.
Fri. 28.--Between two and three in the morning, I was
sent for to John Matthews. For some months he had
frequently said, “I have no more doubt of being in heaven,
than if I was there already.” A little before we came, one
asked, “How do you do now?” He answered,--
“The Lord protects, for ever near.”
When I came in, he was perfectly sensible, but too weak to
speak. Just at three I began to pray. I had scarce prayed
two minutes, when, without any struggle, or sigh, or groan,
he fell asleep.
A man of so faultless a behaviour I have hardly ever been
acquainted with. During twenty years, I do not remember
his doing or saying any thing which I would wish to have
been unsaid or undone.
Mon. 31.--I thought it would be worth while to make an
odd experiment. Remembering how surprisingly fond of
music the lion at Edinburgh was, I determined to try whether
this was the case with all animals of the same kind. I
accordingly went to the tower with one who plays on the
German flute. He began playing near four or five lions;
only one of these (the rest not seeming to regard it at all)
Jan. 1765.] JOURNAL. 203
rose up, came to the front of his den, and seemed to be all
attention. Meantime, a tiger in the same den started up,
leaped over the lion's back, turned and ran under his belly,
leaped over him again, and so to and fro incessantly. Can
we account for this by any principle of mechanism? Can we
account for it at all?
Tues. JANUARY 1, 1765.--This week I wrote an answer
to a warm letter, published in the “London Magazine,” the
author whereof is much displeased that I presume to doubt
of the modern Astronomy. I cannot help it. Nay, the
more I consider, the more my doubts increase: So that, at
present, I doubt whether any man on earth knows either the
distance or magnitude, I will not say of a fixed star, but of
Saturn, or Jupiter; yea, of the sun or moon.
Sun. 6.--The whole society met in the evening. The
service lasted from five till near nine; and I do not remember
so solemn a season since the first time we joined in renewing
our covenant with God.
Mon. 7.--In the evening I preached at High-Wycombe;
and Tuesday, 8, at Witney. The congregation here, though
of so late standing, may be a pattern to all England. When
the service was ended, no one spoke, either in the evenings
or mornings. All went silently out of the House and yard.
Nay, when I followed a large part of them, I did not hear
any open their lips, till they came to their own houses.
Thursday, 10. I preached again at Wycombe, and on Friday
returned to London.
Sat. 12.--I rode to Mr. D ’s, at Ovington, in Essex,
about six-and-fifty miles from the Foundery. Sunday, 13.
Notwithstanding the rain, the church was pretty well filled.
And all gave earnest heed, while I opened and applied those
words in the Second Lesson, “Come unto me, all ye that
labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.”
Titbury church is considerably larger than this: Accord
ingly the congregation was much larger than that in the
morning. But I did not see one careless or inattentive person;
all seemed resolved to “seek the Lord while he may be
found.” At seven in the evening I preached again to a small
company in Mr. D.'s house, on fellowship with the Father
and the Son. Tuesday, 15. I returned to London.
Sun. 20.--I looked over Mr. R--’s strange book on the
Life of Faith. I thought nothing could ever exceed Mr.
Ingham's; but really this does: Although they differ not
an hair's breadth from each other, any more than from Mr.
Sandeman.
I employed all my leisure hours this week in revising my
letters and papers. Abundance of them I committed to the
flames. Perhaps some of the rest may see the light when I
am gone.
Thur. 31.--I was considering how it was, that so many who
were once filled with love, are now weak and faint. And
the case is plain: The invariable rule of God’s proceeding is,
“From him that hath not, shall be taken away even that
which he hath.” Hence, it is impossible that any should
retain what they receive, without improving it. Add to
this, that the more we have received, the more of care and
labour is required, the more watchfulness and prayer, the
more circumspection and earnestness in all manner of
conversation. Is it any wonder, then, that they who forget
this, should soon lose what they had received? Nay, who
were taught to forget it? Not to watch ! Not to pray,-
under pretence of praying always |
Wed. FEBRUARY 13.--I heard “Ruth,” an Oratorio, per
formed at Mr. Madan’s chapel. The sense was admirable
throughout; and much of the poetry not contemptible.
This, joined with exquisite music, might possibly make an
impression even upon rich and honourable sinners.
Mon. 18.--I set out for Norwich, and spent a few days
there with more comfort than I had ever done before. The
congregations were not only more numerous than ever, but
abundantly more serious: And the society appeared to be
more settled, and more loving to each other. Monday, 25.
In my way to Yarmouth I read Dr. Watts, on “The
Improvement of the Mind.” He has many just and useful
observations, mixed with some that are not just, and with
more that are of little use, besides that they are trite and
obvious. I preached at seven in a preaching-house built for
the General Anabaptists; one of the most elegant buildings I
have seen; which was well filled both this and the following
evening with serious and attentive hearers. There now seems
to be a general call to this town: Surely some will hear the
voice that raises the dead. We returned to Norwich on Wed
nesday, and left it on Thursday morning, in a wonderful day
of frost and snow, and sleet and wind. However, we reached
March, 1765.] JOURNAL, 205
Lakenheath in the afternoon. Considering the weather, there
was a large congregation. Mr. I. read prayers, and I
preached, with great liberty of spirit, on, “What is a man
profited, if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?”
Fri. MARCH 1.--I read Prayers and preached at seven in the
morning. It was noon before we could procure a post-chaise.
We then pushed on, though the snow lay deep on the ground,
to the great inn at Hockerill, the dearest house I ever was at,
So fare it well. In the morning we went on to London.
Sun. 10.--I made a collection in our congregation for the
poor weavers who are out of employment. It amounted to
about forty pounds. In the evening our own society met, and
contributed fourteen pounds more, to relieve a few of their
own distressed members.
Mon. 11.--I took horse with Mr. Pennington for Bristol.
In two or three hours my mare fell lame, without any
discernible cause; and in an hour or two after, the beast he
rode was taken ill, and grew worse and worse, till she dropped
down and died. So I was glad to go into a machine which
was driving by; and the next evening I reached Bristol.
Mon. 18.--I rode to Stroud, and in the evening preached in
the new House. But a considerable part of the congregation
were obliged to stand without. Toward the close of the
sermon, a young man dropped down and vehemently cried
to Göd. This occasioned a little hurry at first; but it was
soon over, and all was quiet as before.
After supper I was speaking a little, when a young gentleman
cried out, “I am damned,” and fell to the ground. A second
did so quickly after, and was much convulsed, and yet quite
sensible. We joined in prayer, but had not time (it growing
late) to wrestle with God for their full deliverance.
Tues. 19.--We rode to Worcester, and had the pleasure
of spending an hour with Mr. R. , a sensible, candid
man. But who is proof against prejudice? especially when
those who labour to infuse it, converse with him daily, and
those who strive to remove it, not two hours in a year?
We came to Birmingham in the evening, and had a com
fortable season with the great congregation. Wednesday, 20.
M. Lewen took me in a post-chaise to Derby, where the new
House was throughly filled; and the people behaved in a quite
different manner, from what they did when I was here last.
Thursday, 21. We went on, though with much difficulty, being
often ready to stick fast, to Sheffield. The House here is full
twice as large as it was; and so is the congregation. The little
differences which had been for some time among the people,
were now easily adjusted; and I left them all united in love,
and resolved to strengthen each other's hands.
Sat. 23.--We took horse in a furious wind, which was ready
to bear us away. About ten I preached in Bradwell, in the
High-Peak, where, notwithstanding the storm, abundance of
people were got together. I had now an opportunity of
inquiring concerning Mr. B y. He did run well, till
one offence after another swallowed him up; but he scarce
enjoyed himself after. First his oldest daughter was snatched
away; then his only son; then himself. And only two or
three of that large family now remain.
Sun. 24.--At seven I preached at Manchester, on, “I
beseech you, suffer the word of exhortation; ” and observed,
that the exhortation which it is particularly difficult to suffer,
is that--to accept of salvation now, and now to improve the
whole grace of God. The evening congregation was far
larger than the House could contain, and all seemed to have
the hearing ear.
Tues. 26.--It rained all the way to Little-Leigh; but
from thence we had a pleasant ride to Chester.
As several ships were ready to sail from Park-Gate, I
waited here two days. But the wind continuing foul, on
Friday, 29, I crossed over to Liverpool. I was surprised at
the evening congregations, particularly on Sunday. The
House, even with the addition of three new galleries, would
not near contain the congregation; and I never before
observed the word to take such effect upon them. So that
I was not sorry the wind continued in the same point on
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday. Only it shifted a
little on Wednesday morning: On which some impatient
Captains sailed immediately. But in a few hours it came
full west again; so that they were glad to get well back.
Thur. APRIL 4.--I rode to Bolton, and not being expected
was the more welcome. The House was filled in the evening,
and the hearts of many filled with joy and peace in believing.
APRIL 5.--(Being Good-Friday.) Mr. Johnson preached
at five: I preached at twelve and at six. What a blessed
calm has God at length given to this poor, shattered society
For many years the men of bitter and contentious spirits
April, 1765.] JOURNAL.- 207
were harassing them continually. But they are now sunk
into quiet, formal Presbyterians; and those they have left
enjoy God and one another.
Sat. 6.--I returned to Liverpool; and on Wednesday, 10,
the wind continuing west, I set out northward, and in the
evening found a friend’s house, James Edmondson’s, near
Garstang. Thursday, 11. We rode on to Francis Gilbert's, at
Kendal, where there is now a real work of God. The genuine
Gospel now takes root, and sinners are converted to God.
Sat. 13.--We rode through much wind and rain to Barnard
Castle. In the evening I preached in the new preaching-house,
(not opened before,) and at eight in the morning. I would
have preached abroad on Sunday evening; but the weather
drove us into the house. And God was there, both to invite
sinners, and to comfort believers.
Afterwards I spent an hour with those who once believed
they were saved from sin. I found here, as at London, about
a third part who held fast their confidence. The rest had
suffered loss, more or less, and two or three were shorn of all
their strength.
Mon. 15.--I rode on to Newcastle, where I was quite
unexpected. I found both the hearers, the society, and the
believers, are increased since I was here last; and several
more believe they are saved from sin. Mean time Satan has
not been idle: Two were following George Bell, step by step,
as to the “not needing self-examination,” the “not being
taught by man,” and most of his other unscriptural extrava
gancies; but as they appeared to be still of an advisable
spirit, for the present at least the snare was broken.
Thur. 18.--I went to Durham with Miss Lewen, and
spent an hour with her father. He behaved with the utmost
civility; said I had done his daughter more good than all the
Physicians could do; and he should be exceeding glad if she
should go to London again at the approach of winter. At
three I preached to the poor colliers in Gateshead-Fell. How
do these shame the colliers of Kingswood flocking from all
parts on the week-days as well as Sundays: Such a thirst
have they after the good word |
Fri. 19.--I had a little time with that venerable monument
of the grace of God, Henry Jackson. He is just dropping
into the grave, being now quite bed-rid, but praising God
with every breath.
Mon. 22.--Two of our friends took me in a post-chaise to
Alnwick; but the road was so intolerably bad, that we did not
reach it till past twelve. I began preaching immediately, and
then hastened away. On Berwick Moor we were ready to
stick fast again; and it was past seven before I reached the
town, where I found notice had been given of my preaching.
Hearing the congregation waited for me, I went to the
Town-Hall, and began without delay. About one in the
morning we had a violent storm of thunder and lightning.
The house being full of dragoons, M. L. and M. D. were
constrained to lodge in the same room with our landlady,
who, being waked by the storm, and throughly terrified,
began praying aloud. M. D. laid hold on the opportunity,
to speak very closely to her. The words seemed to sink into.
her heart. Who knows but they may bring forth fruit?
Tues. 23.--I preached at Dunbar about noon, and in the
evening at Edinburgh. My coming was quite seasonable,
(though unexpected,) as those bad letters, published in the
name of Mr. Hervey, and reprinted here by Mr. John
Erskine, had made a great deal of noise. Wednesday, 24.
I preached at four in the afternoon on the ground where we
had laid the foundation of our House. Friday, 26. About
noon I preached at Musselburgh, where are a few living
souls still. In the evening we had another blessed oppor
tunity at Edinburgh, and I took a solemn leave of the people.
Yet how I should be able to ride, I knew not. At Newcastle
I had observed a small swelling, less than a pea, but in six
days it was as large as a pullet’s egg, and exceeding hard.
On Thursday it broke. I feared riding would not agree
with this, especially an hard trotting horse. However,
trusting God, I set out early on Saturday morning: Before
I reached Glasgow it was much decreased, and in two or
three days more it was quite gone. If it was a boil, it was
such an one as I never heard of; for it was never sore, first
or last, nor ever gave me any pain.
This evening I preached in the hall of the Hospital; the
next day, morning and afternoon, in the yard. So much of
the form of religion is here still, as is scarce to be found
in any town in England. There was once the power too.
And shall it not be again? Surely the time is at hand.
Mon. 29.--I rode with James Kershaw through a fruitful
country to Kilmarnock, and thence to Ayr. After a short bait
May, 1765.] JOURNAL, 209
at Maybole in the afternoon, we went on to Girvan, a little
town on the sea-shore. Tuesday, 30. We rode over high and
steep mountains, between Ballantrae and Stanrawer; where
we met with as good entertainment of every kind as if we had
been in the heart of England.
We reached Port-Patrick about three o’clock, and were
immediately surrounded with men, offering to carry us over
the water. But the wind was full in our teeth. I determined
to wait till morning, and then go forward or backward, as God
should please.
Wed. MAY 1.--The wind was quite fair; so, as soon as the
tide served, I went on board. It seemed strange to cross the
sea in an open boat, especially when the waves ran high. I
was a little sick, till I fell asleep. In five hours and an half we
reached Donaghadee; but my mare could not land till five
hours after, so that I did not reach Newtown till past eight.
I spent the next day here, endeavouring to lift up the
hands of a poor, scattered, dejected people. In the evening I
preached on the Green: Though it was exceeding cold, none
of the congregation seemed to regard it. And a few of them
do “remember from whence” they “are fallen, and” resolve
to “do the first works.”
Fri. 3.--I rode on to Lisburn, and in the evening preached
in the market-house. The wind was as keen as in December;
yet a large congregation attended. I then met what was left of
the society; and the spirit of many that were faint revived.
Saturday, 4. I preached in the Room at five, which had been
discontinued for three years. And this alone would account
for the scattering of the people, and the deadness of them
that remained. In the evening I preached in the Linen-Hall,
so called, a large Square, with piazzas on three sides of it.
And so deep an attention I never saw in the people of
Lisburn before.
Sun. 5.--For the sake of the country people, I delayed
the morning preaching till half an hour past mine. At eleven
the Church Service began, and we had an useful sermon on,
“Follow peace with all men, and holiness.” At five I
preached in the Linen-Hall again, to a numerous congrega
tion, on, “Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.”
Mon. 6.--I rode to Newry, and in the evening preached in
the market-house, on, “Her ways are ways of pleasantness,
and all her paths are peace.” The whole congregation seemed
affected, this as well as the next evening; indeed more than I
had seen them for some years. Hence, Wednesday, 8, I
rode to Terryhugan, and found much of the power of God
among that plain, simple-hearted people. Here Mr. Ryan
overtook me, and led me to Clanmain, where we had, as usual,
a lively, earnest congregation; most of whom (except those
that came from far) were present again at five in the morning.
About eleven I preached in the Grange, a small village, about
five miles from Clanmain. Friday, 10. I took Mr. Ryan with
me, and set out for Londonderry. When we had rode about
twelve miles, a road turned short to the left; but having no
direction to turn, we went straight forward, till a woman,
running after us, (taking one of us, I know not why, for a
Doctor,) told us the case of her poor husband, who, she said,
had kept his bed for seven weeks. After riding half an hour,
we found we were out of our way, and rode back again. By
this means we went by the house where the man lay. When
I alighted and went in, I quickly saw that he needed some
thing more than I had prescribed before. Who knows but
our losing the way may be the means of saving the poor
man’s life?
In the afternoon, after riding through a fruitful country,
(one mountain only excepted,) we came to Omagh, the shire
town of the county of Tyrone. We found a good inn; but
were not glad when we heard there was to be dancing that
night in the room under us. But in a while the dancers
removed to the Shire-Hall; so we slept in peace.
Sat. 11.--Having no direction to any one in Derry, I was
musing what to do, and wishing some one would meet me,
and challenge me, though I knew not how it could be, as I
never had been there before, nor knew any one in the town.
When we drew near it, a gentleman on horseback stopped,
asked me my name, and showed me where the Preacher lodged.
In the afternoon he accommodated me with a convenient
lodging at his own house. So one Mr. Knox is taken away,
and another given me in his stead.
At seven I preached in the Linen-Hall (a Square so called)
to the largest congregation I have seen in the North of
Ireland. The waters spread as wide here as they did at
Athlone. God grant they may be as deep /
Sun. 12.--At eight I preached there again, to an equal
May, 1765.] JOURNAL, 211
number of people. About eleven Mr. Knox went with me
to church, and led me to a pew where I was placed next the
Mayor. What is this? What have I to do with honour?
Lord, let me always fear, not desire, it.
The Afternoon Service was not over till about half an hour
past six. At seven I preached to near all the inhabitants of
the city. I think there was scarce one who did not feel that
God was there. So general an impression upon a congregation
I have hardly seen in any place.
Monday, 13, and the following days, I had leisure to go
on with the Notes on the Old Testament. But I wondered
at the situation I was in, in the midst of rich and honourable
men | Whilst this lasts it is well. And it will be well too
when any or all of them change their countenance,
And wonder at the strange man's face,
As one they ne'er had known.
Tues. 14.--I wrote the following letter to a friend:--
“DEAR SIR, Londonderry, May 14, 1765.
“YoUR manner of writing needs no excuse. I hope you
will always write in the same manner. Love is the plainest
thing in the world: I know this dictates what you write; and
then what need of ceremony?
“You have admirably well expressed what I mean by
an opinion, contra-distinguished from an essential doctrine.
Whatever is ‘compatible with love to Christ, and a work of
grace, I term an opinion. And certainly the holding Parti
cular Election and Final Perseverance is compatible with these.
‘Yet what fundamental errors, you ask, ‘have you opposed
with half that fervency as you have these opinions?’--I have
printed near fifty sermons, and only one of these opposes
them at all. I preach about eight hundred sermons in a
year; and, taking one year with another, for twenty years
past, I have not preached eight sermons in a year upon the
subject. But, ‘how many of your best Preachers have been
thrust out because they dissented from you in these parti
culars?” Not one, best or worst, good or bad, was ever
‘thrust out’ on this account. There has not been a single
instance of this kind. Two or three (but far from the best of
our Preachers) voluntarily left us, after they had embraced
those opinions. But it was of their own mere motion: And
two I should have expelled for immoral behaviour; but they
withdrew, and pretended ‘they did not hold our doctrine.’
Set a mark, therefore, on him that told you that tale, and let
his word for the future go for nothing.
“‘Is a man a believer in Jesus Christ, and is his life
suitable to his profession?” are not only the main, but the
sole inquiries I make in order to his admission into our society.
If he is a Dissenter, he may be a Dissenter still; but if he is
a Churchman, I advise him to continue so; and that for many
reasons; some of which are mentioned in the tract upon that
subject.
“I think on Justification just as I have done any time
these seven-and-twenty years; and just as Mr. Calvin does.
In this respect I do not differ from him an hair's breadth.
“But the main point between you and me is Perfection.
‘This, you say, ‘has no prevalence in these parts; otherwise
I should think it my duty to oppose it with my whole
strength; not as an opinion, but as a dangerous mistake,
which appears to be subversive of the very foundation of
Christian experience; and which has, in fact, given occasion
to the most grievous offences.’
“Just so my brother and I reasoned thirty years ago, “as
thinking it our duty to oppose Predestination with our whole
strength; not as an opinion, but as a dangerous mistake,
which appears to be subversive of the very foundation of
Christian experience; and which has, in fact, given occasion
to the most grievous offences.’
“That it has given occasion to such offences, I know; I
can name time, place, and persons. But still another fact
stares me in the face. Mr. H and Mr. N hold this,
and yet I believe these have real Christian experience. But
if so, this is only an opinion : It is not ‘subversive ’ (here is
clear proof to the contrary) ‘of the very foundation of
Christian experience.’ It is ‘compatible with love to Christ,
and a genuine work of grace.” Yea, many hold it, at whose
feet I desire to be found in the day of the Lord Jesus. If,
then, I ‘oppose this with my whole strength,” I am a mere
bigot still. I leave you in your calm and retired moments
to make the application.
“But how came this opinion into my mind? I will tell
you with all simplicity. In 1725 I met with Bishop Taylor's
“Rules of Holy Living and Dying. I was struck particularly
with the chapter upon intention, and felt a fixed intention
May, 1765.] JOURNAL, 213
‘to give myself up to God.” In this I was much confirmed
soon after by the ‘Christian Pattern, and longed to give
God all my heart. This is just what I mean by Perfection
now : I sought after it from that hour.
“In 1727 I read Mr. Law’s ‘Christian Perfection, and
‘Serious Call, and more explicitly resolved to be all devoted
to God, in body, soul, and spirit. In 1730 I began to be
Jhomo unius libri; * to study (comparatively) no book but
the Bible. I then saw, in a stronger light than ever before,
that only one thing is needful, even faith that worketh by the
love of God and man, all inward and outward holiness; and I
groaned to love God with all my heart, and to serve Him
with all my strength.
“January 1, 1733, I preached the sermon on the
Circumcision of the Heart; which contains all that I now
teach concerning salvation from all sin, and loving God
with an undivided heart. In the same year I printed, (the
first time I ventured to print any thing,) for the use of my
pupils, ‘A Collection of Forms of Prayer;’ and in this I
spoke explicitly of giving ‘the whole heart and the whole life
to God.” This was then, as it is now, my idea of Perfection,
though I should have started at the word.
“In 1735 I preached my farewell sermon at Epworth, in
Lincolnshire. In this, likewise, I spoke with the utmost
clearness of having one design, one desire, one love, and of
pursuing the one end of our life in all our words and actions.
“In January, 1738, I expressed my desire in these
words:
O grant that nothing in my soul
May dwell but thy pure love alone !
O may thy love possess me whole,
My joy, my treasure, and my crown |
Strange flames far from my heart remove,
My every act, word, thought be love :
“And I am still persuaded this is what the Lord Jesus
hath bought for me with his own blood.
“Now, whether you desire and expect this blessing or not, is
it not an astonishing thing that you, or any man living, should
be disgusted at me for expecting it; and that they should
persuade one another that this hope is ‘subversive of the very
foundations of Christian experience? Why then, whoever
* A man of one book.-EDIT.
retains it cannot possibly have any Christian experience at all.
Then my brother, Mr. Fletcher, and I, and twenty thousand
more, who seem both to fear and to love God, are, in reality,
children of the devil, and in the road to eternal damnation :
“In God’s name I entreat you make me sensible of this I
Show me by plain, strong reasons, what dishonour this hope
does to Christ, wherein it opposes Justification by Faith, or
any fundamental truth of religion. But do not wrest, and
wiredraw, and colour my words, as Mr. Hervey (or Cudworth)
has done, in such a manner, that when I look in that glass, I
do not know my own face ‘Shall I call you,” says Mr.
Hervey, ‘my father, or my friend? For you have been
both to me.’ So I was, and you have as well requited me !
It is well my reward is with the Most High. Wishing all
happiness to you and yours, I am, dear Sir,
“Your affectionate brother and servant,
“JoHN WESLEY.”
On Wednesday and Thursday I spoke severally to the
members of the society. I found (just as I expected) that
the work of God here is exceeding shallow; yet while so
many flock to hear, one cannot doubt but God will cut some
of them to the heart.
Sun. 19.--Mr. S-, one of the Curates, preached an
excellent sermon on receiving the Holy Ghost. I afterwards
accepted his invitation to dinner; and found a well-natured,
sensible man, and one well acquainted with every branch of
learning which we had occasion to touch upon. At seven I
preached on, “God forbid that I should glory, save in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.” And truly the people of
this place will hear sound doctrine. Wednesday, 22. I
exhorted the little society to avoid sloth, prodigality, and
sluttishness; and, on the contrary, to be patterns of
diligence, frugality, and cleanliness.
Thur. 23.--Lighting on a volume of Mr. Seed's sermons, I
was utterly surprised. Where did this man lie hid, that I never
heard of him all the time I was at Oxford P. His language is
pure in the highest degree, his apprehension clear, his judg
ment strong. And for true, manly wit, and exquisite turns of
thought, I know not if this century has produced his equal.
Sat. 25.--Both in the morning and evening, I spoke as
closely and sharply as I could; but yet I cannot find the way
to wound the people. They are neither offended, nor convinced.
May, 1765.] JOURNAL. 215
Ever since I came hither, I have been amazed at the honesty
which runs through this city. None scruples to leave his house
open all day, and the door only on the latch at night. Such a
thing as theft is scarce heard of at Derry; no one has the least
suspicion of it. No wonder, therefore, that the inhabitants
never suspect themselves to be sinners. O what pity that
honesty should be a bar to salvation? Yet so it is if a man
puts it in the place of Christ.
Having a remarkable anecdote put intomy hands, which some
will probably be pleased to see, I may insert it here, as well as
elsewhere. It is a conversation between my father's father,
(taken down in short-hand by himself) and the then Bishop
of Bristol. I may be excused if it appears more remarkable
to me, than it will do to an unconcerned person:
Bishop. What is your name?
WESLEY. John Wesley.
B. There are many great matters charged upon you.
W. May it please your Lordship, Mr. Horlock was at my
house on Tuesday last, and acquainted me that it was your
Lordship’s desire I should come to you; and on that account
I am here to wait on you.
B. By whom were you ordained? Or are you ordained?
W. I am sent to preach the Gospel.
B. By whom were you sent?
W. By a Church of Jesus Christ.
B. What Church is that?
W. The Church of Christ at Melcomb.
B. That factious and heretical Church !
W. May it please you, Sir, I know no faction or heresy
that Church is guilty of.
B. No | Did not you preach such things as tend to faction
and heresy?
W. I am not conscious to myself of any such preaching.
B. I am informed by sufficient men, gentlemen of honour,
of this county, viz., Sir Gerard Napper, Mr. Freak, and Mr.
Tregonnel, of your doings. What say you?
W. Those honoured gentlemen I have been with, who,
being by others misinformed, proceeded with some heat
against me.
B. There are oaths of several honest men; and shall we
take your word for it, that all is but misinformation?
W. There was no oath given or taken. Besides, if it be
enough to accuse, who shall be innocent? I can appeal to the
determination of the great day of judgment, that the large
catalogue of matters laid to me are either things invented or
mistaken.
B. Did not you ride with your sword in the time of the
Committee of Safety, and engage with them?
W. Whatever imprudences in civil matters you may be
informed I am guilty of, I shall crave leave to acquaint your
Lordship, that, His Majesty having pardoned them fully, I
shall wave any other answer.
B. In what manner did the Church you spake of send you
to preach 7 At this rate every body might preach.
W. Not every one. Everybody has not preaching gifts
and preaching graces. Besides, that is not all I have to offer
to your Lordship to justify my preaching.
B. If you preach, it must be according to order; the order
of the Church of England upon ordination.
W. What does your Lordship mean by ordination?
B. Do not you know what I mean?
W If you mean that sending spoken of in Romans x., I
had it.
B. I mean that. What mission had you?
W. I had a mission from God and man.
B. You must have it according to law, and the order of the
Church of England.
W. I am not satisfied in my spirit therein.
B. Not satisfied in your spirit ! You have more new
coined phrases than ever were heard of ! You mean your
conscience, do you not?
W. Spirit is no new phrase. We read of being sanctified
in soul, body, and spirit.
B. By spirit there we are to understand the upper region
of the soul.
W. Some think we are to take it for the conscience; but
if your Lordship like it not so, then I say I am not satisfied
in conscience, as touching the ordination you speak of.
B. Conscience argues science, science supposes judgment,
and judgment reason. What reason have you that you will
not be thus ordained ?
W. I came not this day to dispute with your Lordship;
my own inability would forbid me so to do.
B. No, no; but give me your reason.
May, 1765.] JOURNAL. 217
W. I am not called to office, and therefore cannot be
ordained.
B. Why have you then preached all this while?
W. I was called to the work of the ministry, though not
the office. There is, as we believe, vocatio ad opus, et ad
munus.*
B. Why may you not have the office of the ministry?
W. May it please your Lordship, because they are not
a people who are fit subjects for me to exercise office-work
among them.
B. You mean a gathered Church: But we must have no
gathered Churches in England, and you will see it so; for
there must be a unity without divisions among us, and there
can be no unity without uniformity. Well, then, we must
send you to your Church, that they may dispose of you, if you
were ordained by them.
W. I have been informed, by my cousin Pitfield and
others, concerning your Lordship, that you have a disposition
inclined against morosity. However you may be prepossessed
by some bitter enemies to my person, yet there are others who
can and will give you another character of me. Mr. Glisson
hath done it; and Sir Francis Tulford desired me to present
his service to you, and, being my hearer, is ready to acquaint
you concerning me.
B. I asked Sir Francis Tulford whether the presentation
to Whitchurch was his. Whose is it? He told me it was
not his.
W. There was none presented to it these sixty years. Mr.
Walton lived there. At his departure, the people desired me
to preach to them; and when there was a way of settlement
appointed, I was by the Trustees appointed, and by the Triers
approved.
B. They would approve any who would come to them, and
close with them. I know they approved those who could not
read twelve lines of English.
W. All that they did I know not; but I was examined
touching gifts and graces.
B. I question not your gifts, Mr. Wesley. I will do you
any good I can; but you will not long be suffered to preach,
unless you will do it according to order. .
* A call to the work, and a call to the office.-EDIT.
W. I shall submit to any trial you shall please to make.
I shall present your Lordship with a Confession of my Faith,
or take what other way you please to insist on.
B. No, we are not come to that yet.
W. I shall desire those severals laid together which I look
on as justifying my preaching:--
1. I was devoted to the service from mine infancy.
2. I was educated in order thereto at school, and in the
University of Oxford.
B. What age are you?
W. Twenty-five.
B. No, sure you are not.
W. 3. As a son of the Prophets, after I had taken my
degrees, I preached in the country; being approved of by
judicious, able Christians, Ministers and others.
4. It pleased God to seal my labour with success, in the
apparent conversion of many souls.
B. Yea, that is, it may be, to your way.
W. Yea, to the power of godliness, from ignorance and
profaneness. If it please your Lordship to lay down any evi
dences of godliness agreeing with Scripture, and that are not
found in those persons intended, I am content to be discharged
the ministry. I will stand or fall on the issue thereof.
B. You talk of the power of godliness, such as you fancy.
W. Yea, to the reality of religion. Let us appeal to any
common-place book for evidences of graces, and they are
found in and upon them.
B. How many are there of them?
W. I number not the people.
B. Where are they?
W. Wherever I have been called to preach --At Radpole,
Melcomb, Turnwood, Whitchurch, and at sea. I shall add
another ingredient of my mission:
5. When the Church saw the presence of God going along
with me, they did, by fasting and prayer, in a day set apart
for that end, seek an abundant blessing on my endeavours.
B. A particular Church?
W. Yes, my Lord: I am not ashamed to own myself a
member of one.
B. Why, you may mistake the Apostles’ intent. They
went about to convert Heathens: You have no warrant for
your particular Churches.
May, 1765.] JOURNAL. 219.
W. We have a plain, full, and sufficient rule for Gospel
worship, in the New Testament, recorded in the Acts of the
Apostles, and in the Epistles.
B. We have not.
W. The practice of the Apostles is a standing rule in those
cases which were not extraordinary.
B. Not their practice, but their precepts.
W. Both precepts and practice. Our duty is not delivered
to us, in Scripture, only by precepts, but precedents, by
promises, by threatenings, mixed. We are to follow them as
they followed Christ.
B. But the Apostle said, “This speak I, not the Lord;”
that is, by revelation.
W. Some interpret that place, “This speak I now by
revelation from the Lord;” not the Lord in that text before
instanced concerning divorces. May it please your Lordship,
we believe that cultus non institutus est indebitus.*
B. It is false.
W. The second commandment speaks the same: “Thou
shalt not make to thyself any graven image.”
B. That is, forms of your own invention.
W. Bishop Andrews, taking notice of Non facies tibi, f.
satisfied me that we may not worship God but as commanded.
B. Well, then, you will justify your preaching, will you,
without ordination according to law?
W. All these things, laid together, are satisfactory to me,
for my procedure therein.
B. They are not enough.
W. There has been more written in proof of preaching of
gifted persons, with such approbation, than has been answered
yet by any one.
B. Have you anything more to say to me, Mr. Wesley?
W. Nothing; your Lordship sent for me.
B. I am glad to hear this from your mouth; you will
stand to your principles, you say?
W. I intend it, through the grace of God; and to be
faithful to the King's Majesty, however you deal with me.
B. I will not meddle with you.
W. Farewell to you, Sir.
B. Farewell, good Mr. Wesley.
* That worship which is not instituted is not right.-EDIT.
+ “Thou shalt not make to thyself ”-EDIT.
Monday, MAY 27, 1765.--I took my leave of Londonderry.
Mr. Knox sent his servant to conduct me to Sligo, being now
as affectionate as Mr. K. of Sligo was the first time I was
there. Keeping a steady pace, we rode fifteen miles, so called,
in four hours and a half, and came, at noon, to Ballymafay.
Here we were shown into a room, where lay a young man,
brought near death by a vomiting of blood. Perhaps we
were brought into this room, at this time, to save a poor man’s
life. As we were riding through the mountains, in the
afternoon, we overtook one who was just come from Derry,
and had heard me preach all the time I was there, both in the
evening and the morning. I talked plainly both to her and
her husband, and they expressed all possible thankfulness.
At five we reached Donegal, the county-town. What a
wonderful set of county-towns are in this kingdom ! Donegal
and five more would not make up such a town as Islington.
Some have twenty houses in them, Mayo three, and Leitrim,
I think, not one. Is not this owing in part to the fickleness
of the nation, who seldom like anything long, and so are
continually seeking new habitations, as well as new fashions,
and new trifles of every kind?
Tues. 28.--We breakfasted at Ballyshannon, I believe the
largest and pleasantest town in the county. Beyond it, a
good-natured man overtook me, with whom I talked largely
and closely. He seemed much affected: If it continues, well;
if not, I am clear of his blood.
About twelve we stopped at a little house; but a cloud of
smoke soon drove us out of the first room into another, where
the landlord lay with a grievously bruised and swelled leg. I
directed him how to cure it, and thence took occasion to give
him some farther advice. Several eagerly listened as well as
himself. Perhaps some will remember it.
In the evening I took my usual stand in the market-house,
at Sligo; but here how was the scene changed ! I have
seen nothing like this since my first entrance into the kingdom.
Such a total want of good sense, of good manners, yea, of
common decency, was shown by not a few of the hearers |
It is good to visit Sligo after Londonderry: Honour and
dishonour balance each other. Have we done nothing here
yet? Then it is high time to begin, and try if something can
be done now. In the two following days I spoke as strongly
as I could; and my labour was not in vain. The congre
gation increased very considerably, and appeared to be of
another spirit. They behaved better the second night than
the first, and far better the third night than the second.
Many of them, I believe, had a fresh call from God; and at
the meeting of the society he was eminently present: So
that, notwithstanding their decay, I could not but hope
there would be a “blessing in the remnant.”
I expected one to meet me at Sligo; but none appearing,
I set out alone at five in the morning, JUNE 1, purposing to
ride the new road to Castlebar; but on second thoughts I
rode straight on to Foxford. At the entrance of the town I
met three gentlewomen. One of them turned and cried out,
“Is not that Mr. Wesley?” I thought it odd, but rode on.
At the other end of the town a gentleman met me, and,
taking hold of my bridle, said, “Sir, I must beg you to turn
back, and dine with me at the barracks. There is a lady
whom you know, and who will be very glad to see you.” I
went back, and found one whom I had wished to see, more
than most persons in the nation, but scarce ever expected to
see her more. It was Miss B n, of Sligo; and I found
Mrs. S n (now a widow) just the same amiable woman that
Miss B--n was. I spent an hour or two in close, serious
conversation, admiring the good providence of God. So I
could not go the new road, which misses Foxford, because
God had work for me to do there.
About seven I preached at Castlebar, on “the excellency
of the knowledge of. Jesus Christ.” I found another kind
of people here than at Sligo, and was much refreshed among
them. Sunday, 2. Most of the Gentry in the town being at
the Court-yard in the evening, my text was, “We preach
Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the
Greeks foolishness.” I know not that ever I spake more
June, 1765.] JOURNAL. 223
plain, though I supposed many would be offended; but I was
mistaken; high and low seemed to approve: Some, I hope,
profited.
Mon. 3.--I rode to Newport, and preached at one to the
largest congregation I remember to have seen there; and on
Tuesday evening I took a solemn leave of the congregation at
Castlebar.
Wed. 5.--At five I took horse with a friend who undertook
to bear me company to Galway. We faced the sun all the
day; but light clouds and a small breeze made the heat
tolerable. After resting an hour at Hollymount, (where the
gardens, water-works, and once-lovely walks, swiftly running
to ruin, give a striking proof that “the fashion of this world
passeth away,”) we rode on to Mr. Lambert’s, near Headford,
(a plain, open, hospitable man,) and thence to Galway, one
of the largest towns I have seen since I left Glasgow. Our
Room being small, some of our well-meaning friends were
earnest for my preaching in the Exchange. Because I would
not disoblige them, I began at seven; and was suffered to go
on for a full quarter of an hour ! The beasts of the people
(just as I expected) then roaring louder and louder, I walked
through them without any hinderance or affront, and returned
quietly to my lodgings. A large retinue attended me to the
door; but it was only to gape and stare; none taking the pains
either to lift up an hand, or to say anything bad or good.
Thur. 6.--I was brought on my way by Lieutenant Cook,
who was in all the actions at Fort-William-Henry, at Louis
bourg, Quebec, Martinico, and the Havannah; and gave a
more distinct account of those eminent scenes of Providence
than ever I heard before. Although he was so often in the
front of the battle, both against Indians, French, and
Spaniards, and in the hottest fire, both advancing and retreat
ing, he never received one wound. So true is the odd saying
of King William, that “every bullet has its billet.” Between
five and six we reached Ennis, after a warm day, which much
exhausted my strength; but it was soon repaired; and the
serious well-behaved congregation (though many of them
were people of fortune) made amends for the turbulent one
at Galway. Such is the chequer-work of life !
Fri. 7.--I rested at Ennis: And it was well I did; for even
in the house the heat was scarce supportable. Saturday, 8. I
rode to Limerick, and found the preaching-house just finished.
I liked it the best of any in the kingdom; being neat, yea,
elegant, yet not gaudy. Sunday, 9. In the evening I
preached at Mardyke. The heat was violent, even at six;
nevertheless there was a numerous congregation, both of
Protestants and Papists. Some of the latter behaved with
remarkable indecency, --talking and laughing as at a play.
I turned and reproved them. They took it well, and
neither laughed nor talked any more.
In the following week I spoke to each member of the society,
and had much satisfaction among them. Concerning several
of them, there is all reasonable proof that they have given God
all their heart: Many others are groaning after full salvation;
and all the rest are free from outward blame. Why may not
every Christian community come as far as this?
Wed. 12.--In the evening I preached near Mardyke, on a
smooth, grassy place, to, I think, the largest congregation
which I ever saw in Limerick. A solemn awe seemed to sit
on every face, while I declared, in strong words, “He died for
all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him.” The next day the rain began ;
so that all the following days I was constrained to preach in
the house.
Fri. 14.--About noon I preached at Ballygarane, to the
small remains of the poor Palatines. As they could not get
food and raiment here, with all their diligence and frugality,
part are scattered up and down the kingdom, and part gone
to America. I stand amazed ! Have landlords no common
sense, (whether they have common humanity or no,) that
they will suffer such tenants as these to be starved away from
them? In the evening I preached at Newmarket, to a larger
congregation of Papists as well as Protestants, both in the
evening and morning, than I remember to have seen there
before. For the present, many were full of good resolutions;
and “why should ye revolt any more?”
Sunday, 16, was a Sabbath indeed. Both in the morning
and afternoon many were filled with consolation. Few were
absent at five, Monday, 17, when I cheerfully commended
them to the grace of God.
Two or three of them were desirous to bear me company for
a day’s journey. Before noon we were met by a violent shower,
which drove us into a little cabin, where were a company of
children, with their mother, grandmother, and great-grand
June, 1765.] JOURNAL. 225
mother. They seemed much frighted; but one of our com
pany, who spoke Irish, soon took away their fears. We then
sang a hymn, and went to prayer. They gaped and stared
abundantly; and when we went away, after giving them a
small piece of money, followed us with a thousand blessings.
At seven I preached in the market-house at Kilfinnan. Well
nigh all the town, Irish, English, and Germans, Protestants
and Papists, presently gathered together. At first, most of the
Papists stood aloof, and so did several of the genteeler people;
but by degrees they drew in and mixed with the congregation;
and I believe all of them felt that God was there.
When I went to my lodging, they crowded after me, so
that the house was quickly filled. I exhorted and prayed
again, till I found it was full time both for them and me to
go to rest.1.
To-day I received from Prudence Nixon herself the strange
account of her late husband:--In November last, on a
Sunday evening, he was uncommonly fervent in prayer, and
found such a desire as he never had before, “to depart, and
to be with Christ.” In the night she awaked, and found him
quite stiff, and without either sense or motion. Supposing
him to be either dying or dead, she broke out into a vehement
agony of prayer, and cried for half an hour together, “Lord
Jesus! give me George I Take him not away.” Soon after
he opened his eyes, and said earnestly, “You had better have
let me go.” Presently he was raving mad, and began to
curse and blaspheme in the most horrid manner. This he
continued to do for several days, appearing to be under the
full power of an unclean spirit. At the latter end of the week
she cried out, “Lord, I am willing! I am willing he should
go to thee.” Quickly his understanding returned, and he
again rejoiced with joy unspeakable. He tenderly thanked
her for giving him up to God, kissed her, lay down and died.
Tues. 18.--The town seemed to be all alive a little after
four o’clock: So, finding the congregation ready, I began a
little before five. A cry soon arose of young and old, on the
right hand and on the left; but in many it was not so much
the voice of sorrow as of joy and triumph. A fair beginning
this! But who can tell what the end will be?
About nine we rode through Doneraile, one of the pleasant
est towns in the kingdom: But a man came galloping after
us, and said, “All the town begs you will stop and give them
a sermon.” I turned back, and took my stand in the main
street. Men, women, and children flocked from all sides.
There was no disturbance of any kind, while I declared “the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.” Fair blossoms again!
And who knows but some of these may bring forth fruit
unto perfection?
In the evening I came to Cork; and at seven was surprised
at the unusual largeness of the congregation. I had often
been grieved at the smallness of the congregation here; and
it could be no other, while we cooped ourselves up in the
House. But now the alarm is sounded abroad, people flock
from all quarters. So plain it is, that field-preaching is the
most effectual way of overturning Satan’s kingdom.
Thur. 20.--At seven in the evening I stood in a vacant
place near Blackpool, famous from time immemorial for all
manner of wickedness, for riot in particular, and cried aloud,
“Why will ye die, O house of Israel?” Abundance of
Papists gathered at a distance; but they drew nearer and
nearer, till nine parts in ten mingled with the congregation,
and were all attention. Surely this is the way to spread
religion: To publish it in the face of the sun.
Fri. 21.--I rode over to Bandon, and preached at seven in
the main street. The congregation was exceeding large: So
it was, in proportion, at five in the morning. Sunday, 23.
I preached at eight near the upper market-house. Till now I
did not observe that all I could say made any impression upon
the hearers. But the power of God was now eminently
present; and all seemed to be sensible of it. About five I
began in George's Street, at Cork, the opposite corner of the
town from the new Room. Many of the chief of the city
were of the audience, Clergy as well as laity; and all but
two or three were not only quiet, but serious and deeply
attentive. What a change | Formerly we could not walk
through this street but at the peril of our lives.
Monday and Tuesday I spoke, one by one, to the members
of the society. They are now two hundred and ninety-five,--
fifty or sixty more than they have been for some years. This
is owing partly to the preaching abroad, partly to the meetings
for prayer in several parts of the city. These have been the
means of awakening many gross sinners, of recovering many
backsliders, of confirming many that were weak and wavering,
and bringing many of all sorts to the public preaching. At
July, 1765.] JOURNAL, 227
seven I went once more to Blackpool, where the congregation
was far larger than before. Abundance of Papists stole in
among them, a very few standing aloof. O what a day of God’s
power is this! May he fulfil in us all His good pleasure!
Fri. 28.--After giving our brethren a solemn caution, not
to “love the world, nor the things of the world,” I left them
with more satisfaction than ever; as there is reason to hope
that they will be tossed to and fro no more, but steadily adorn
the doctrine of God our Saviour.
About seven in the evening I began in the Exchange
at Youghall. Four or five noisy men disturbed those that
were near them, till I reproved them sharply. The whole
congregation then behaved with the utmost decency.
Sat. 29.--I preached at five in a Room that would contain
four or five hundred people. But the word does not yet sink
into their hearts: Many are pleased; but few convinced. In
the evening I went to the Exchange again. The congregation
was almost doubled, whom I exhorted to “ask for the old
Path, the good way, and to walk therein.” Afterwards I met
the infant society, consisting of nineteen members; all of
whom are full of good desires, and some know in whom they
have believed.
Sun. 30.--At eight the congregation was both larger and
more affected than ever. I was glad to see a large and tolerably
serious congregation in the church. It was once a spacious
building; but more than half of it now (a common thing in
Ireland 1) lies in ruins. In the evening I preached to a
multitude of people in the main street. A few Gentry soon
walked away; but the bulk of the congregation were deeply
attentive. What an harvest is ready for zealous labourers |
When wilt thou thrust them out into thy harvest?
Mon. JULY 1.--I rode to Waterford, and preached in a
little court, on our “great High Priest that is passed into
the heavens” for us. But I soon found I was got above most
of my hearers: I should have spoke of death or judgment.
On Tuesday evening I suited my discourse to my audience,
which was considerably increased: But much more the next
evening; and deep attention sat on almost every face.
The Room was well filled on Thursday morning; and the
poor people were so affectionate, that it was with difficulty
we were able to break from them, amidst abundance of
prayers and blessings.
At seven in the evening I preached in the Assembly-room
at Kilkenny, to many well-dressed, reputable people, some of
whom attended again at five in the morning. In the evening
the congregation was increased in seriousness as much as in
number, while I enforced those awful words, “God now
commandeth all men everywhere to repent.” I never spoke
plainer; yet I did not hear of any that were offended. What
an alteration is there in this city within six or eight years |
Sat. 6.--We rode to Portarlington. At seven I preached in
the market-house to a numerous congregation. Near as many
were present at eight in the morning. I had great liberty of
speech; and the manner wherein they “suffered the word of
exhortation” persuaded me it would not be in vain.
We came to Mount-Mellick before the church began, and
were glad to find it was sacrament Sunday. In the evening
I preached on one side of the market-place, on our Lord’s
lamentation over Jerusalem, to almost all the Protestants in
the town, and not a few of the Papists. To these I made
a particular application in the conclusion of my discourse.
Indeed, I never found so great a concern for them as since I
came last into the kingdom.
Mon. 8.--I preached in the market-place once more; and
it was a solemn hour. I left many of the people much alive
to God, and athirst for his whole image. I preached at
Tullamore in the evening. At five in the morning the House
was near full. While I was preaching on Tuesday evening
in the market-place we had several showers; but few went
away. Here, likewise, I was constrained to address myself to
the Papists in particular, and to exhort them never to rest till
they were partakers of the common salvation.
About eleven we were waked with a cry of “Fire,” which
was at the next door but one. The flames shone so that one
might see to pick up a pin, and the sparks flew on every side;
so that it was much feared the neighbouring houses would
take fire, as several of them were thatched: But the violent
vain, which fell an hour before, had made the thatch so wet
that it could not catch quickly; and in less than two hours
all the fire was quenched; so we slept the rest of the night
in peace. Wed. 10.--I preached at Clara about noon, and in the
evening at Athlone. The two next evenings I preached in
the market-house, for the sake of the Papists, who durst not
July, 1765.] JOURNAL, 229
come to the Room. Saturday, 13. I read Sir Richard
Cox’s “History of Ireland.” I suppose it is accounted as
authentic as any that is extant. But surely never was there
the like in the habitable world! Such a series of robberies,
murders, and burning of houses, towns, and countries, did I
never hear or read of before. I do not now wonder Ireland
is thinly inhabited, but that it has any inhabitants at all !
Probably it had been wholly desolate before now, had not
the English come, and prevented the implacable wretches from
going on till they had swept each other from the earth.
In the afternoon I rode to Aghrim, and preached about seven
to a deeply serious congregation, most of whom were present
again at eight in the morning. On Sunday, 14, about five,
I began in my usual place at Athlone, on the Connaught side
of the river. I believe the congregation (both of Protestants
and Papists) was never so large before. Some were displeased
at this; and several pieces of turf were thrown over the
houses, with some stones; but neither one nor the other could
in the least interrupt the attention of the people. Then a
Popish miller (prompted by his betters, so called) got up to
preach over against me; but some of his comrades throwing
a little dirt in his face, he leaped down in haste to fight them.
This bred a fray, in which he was so roughly handled that he
was glad to get off with only a bloody nose.
Mon. 15.--I had the pleasure of meeting many of my
friends from various parts at Coolylough. I preached at
twelve under the shade of some spreading trees, and again at
six in the evening. Tuesday, 16. I preached at Tyrrel’s
Pass, with a peculiar blessing from God, though many
persons of fortune were in the congregation. But the poor
and the rich are his.
Wed. 17.--I preached in the Grove at Edinderry. Many
of the Quakers were there, (it being the time of their General
Meeting,) and many of all sorts. I met here with the Journal
of William Edmundson, one of their Preachers in the last
century. If the original equalled the picture, (which I see no
reason to doubt,) what an amiable man was this His
opinions I leave; but what a spirit was here ! What faith,
love, gentleness, long-suffering ! Could mistake send such
a man as this to hell? Not so. I am so far from believing
this, that I scruple not to say, “Let my soul be with the
soul of William Edmundson l’”
Thur. 18.--The wind in our face tempering the heat of
the sun, we had a pleasant ride to Dublin. In the evening I
began expounding the deepest part of the holy Scripture,
namely, the first Epistle of St. John, by which, above all
other, even inspired writings, I advise every young Preacher
to form his style. Here are sublimity and simplicity together,
the strongest sense and the plainest language How can any
one that would “speak as the oracles of God,” use harder
words than are found here?
Sun. 21.--Between eight and nine I began preaching in the
Barrack-Square, to such a congregation as I never saw in Dub
lin before; and every one was as quiet as if we had been in the
new Square at Bristol. What a change since Mr. Whitefield,
a few years ago, attempted to preach near this place |
Mon. 22.--I rode to Donard, a little town in the county of
Wicklow. Here I met with more noise, and stupid, senseless
impudence, than I have found since I left England; but the
chief man of the town having handled one of the disturbers
roughly, and another of them being knocked down, (not by a
Methodist,) I concluded my discourse without any farther
hinderance.
Tues. 23.--I began, as usual, at five. About the middle of
the sermon, the rain (which was exceedingly wanted) began,
and drove us into our friend’s house; where I found his daugh
ters, five sisters, all rejoicing in God their Saviour. Hence I
rode to Baltinglass. But I had scarce spoken five minutes
when the rain drove us into the house here also. I had
designed to preach at Carlow in the evening; but the difficulty
was, where to find a place: Our House was too small, and
there was little prospect of preaching quietly in the street.
While we were considering, one of the chief persons in the
town sent to desire I would preach in her court-yard. This
I did to a multitude of people, rich and poor; and there was
no disturbance at all; nor did I observe that any went away,
though we had a sharp shower almost as soon as I began.
Wed. 24.--I rode, in the hottest day I have felt this year,
to Dublin. Thursday and Friday morning I spent in a
conference with our Preachers. In the afternoons I spoke
to the members of the society. I left four hundred and forty,
and find above five hundred; more than ever they were since
my first landing in the kingdom. And they are not increased
in number only, but many of them are rejoicing in the pure
Aug. 1765.] JOURNAL. 231
love of God; and many more refuse to be comforted till they
can witness the same confession.
Sun. 28.--I preached in the Barrack-Square, both morning
and afternoon. The morning congregation was far larger than
last week; but this was doubled in the afternoon. At both
times my heart was much enlarged towards them, and my voice
so strengthened, that I suppose several thousands more might
have distinctly heard every sentence.
Mon. 29.--I was desired by some friends to take a ride to
the Dargle, ten or twelve miles from Dublin; one of the
greatest natural curiosities, they said, which the kingdom
afforded. It far exceeded my expectation. You have a high
and steep mountain, covered with stately wood, up the side
of which a path is cut, and seats placed at small distances.
A deep vale, through which a clear river runs, lies between
this and another high mountain, whose sides are clothed with
tall trees, row above row, from the river to the very top.
Near the summit of the first mountain, you have an opening
on the one hand which commands the fruitful counties of
Kildare, Dublin, and Louth, as far, in a clear, sunshiny day,
as the huge mountains of Newry; on the other hand is a fine
landscape of meadows and fields, that terminates in a sea
prospect. Adding this to the rest, it exceeds anything which
I have seen in Great Britain. And yet the eye is not
satisfied with seeing ! It never can, till we see God.
Wed. 31.--At the earnest desire of a friend, I suffered Mr.
Hunter to take my picture. I sat only once, from about ten
o'clock, to half an hour after one; and in that time he began
and ended the face; and with a most striking likeness.
Fri. AUGUST 2.--One informed me that the Captain with
whom I had agreed for my passage, was gone without me, but
had taken my horse. I was content, believing all was for the
best; but we soon heard he was only fallen down a few miles;
so we took a boat and followed him; and about ten we went
on board the Felicity bound for Whitehaven. In about an
hour we set sail. Soon after the wind turned, and was against
us most part of Saturday and Sunday. On Sunday, I
preached to our little congregation, thirteen in all, on, “The
kingdom of heaven is at hand; repent ye, and believe the
Gospel.” In a short time, the wind sprung up fair, but with
intervals of calm; so that we did not reach Whitehaven quay
till Tuesday, 6, between twelve and one in the morning.
After sleeping two or three hours, I hastened away, and in
the afternoon came to Carlisle. Some friends waited for me
here. We purposed setting out early in the morning; but
one of our company being taken ill, we waited some hours;
so that we did not reach Newcastle till about one on
Thursday morning.
I scarce ever saw the people here so much alive to God;
particularly those who believe they are saved from sin. I was
ready to say, “It is good for me to be here;” but I must
not build tabernacles. I am to be a wanderer on earth, and
desire no rest till my spirit returns to God.
Sun. 11.--I preached about seven at the Fell, to our honest,
lively colliers; and about two in the afternoon in the Square at
Hartley, eleven miles from Newcastle. Thence Ihastened back
to the Garth-heads, where was the largest congregation which
has been there for many years. Afterwards, several hundreds
of us met at the Room, and solemnly renewed our covenant
with God. About eight I was so tired, I could hardly stand;
but after speaking another hour all my weariness was gone,
and I was as lively and strong as at eight in the morning.
Mon. 12.--I went to Sunderland. Here likewise is a people
ready prepared for the Lord. Tuesday, 13. I purposed to
preach abroad at Durham; but the rain hindered. As many
as could hear behaved well; and many felt that God was there.
At Yarm in the evening, one would have thought the whole
congregation loved or feared God; so much thought appeared
in all their faces; so much decency in their behaviour.
Wed. 14.--I preached in the evening at Leeds, and the
next morning rode to Huddersfield. Mr. Venn having given
notice on Sunday of my preaching, we had a numerous con
gregation. We had a warm ride from hence to Manchester;
but as my day, so was my strength.
Fri. 16.--I rode over to Chester, and preached to as many
as the new House would well contain. We had likewise a
numerous congregation on Saturday, morning as well as
evening. How the grace of God concurs with his providence I
A new House not only brings a new congregation, but
likewise (what we have observed again and again) a new
blessing from God. And no wonder, if every labour of love
finds even a present reward.
Sun. 18-The House contained the morning congregation;
but in the evening multitudes were constrained to go away.
Sept. 1765.] JOURNAL, 233
So does truth win its way against all opposition, if it be
steadily declared with meekness of wisdom.
Mon. 19.--I preached in Northwich at ten, and at
Manchester in the evening. Our Conference began on
Tuesday, 20, and ended on Friday, 23. Sunday, 25.
Having been all the week greatly straitened for room, I
preached at seven in the new Square. The congregation
was exceeding large; yet generally and deeply attentive.
About one I preached at Stockport on a Green at the south
end of the town. It was sultry hot, but few regarded it;
for God “sent a gracious rain upon his inheritance.”
At six in the evening I preached at Maxfield; and, setting
out early in the morning, by long stages came to Birmingham,
where a large congregation waited for me. I began imme
diately to apply those comfortable words, “Open thy mouth
wide, and I will fill it.” I soon forgot my weariness, and the
heat of the place: God was there, and it was enough. On
Tuesday, 27, I rode on to Stroud, and the next morning to
Bristol. After resting three or four days, on Monday,
SEPTEMBER 2, I set out for Cornwall, and preached that
evening at Middlesey. Tuesday, 3. I rode to Tiverton,
and in the evening preached near the east end of the town to
a large and quiet audience. Wednesday, 4. I rode on to
North-Tawton, a village where several of our Preachers had
preached occasionally. About six I went to the door of our
inn; but I had hardly ended the Psalm, when a Clergyman
came, with two or three (by the courtesy of England called)
gentlemen. After I had named my text, I said, “There
may be some truths which concern some men only; but this
concerns all mankind.” The Minister cried out, “That is
false doctrine, that is predestination.” Then the roar began,
to second which they had brought an huntsman with his
hounds: But the dogs were wiser than the men; for they
could not bring them to make any noise at all. One of the
gentlemen supplied their place. He assured us he was such,
or none would have suspected it; for his language was as
base, foul, and porterly, as ever was heard at Billingsgate.
Dog, rascal, puppy, and the like terms, adorned almost every
sentence. Finding there was no probability of a quiet hearing,
I left him the field, and withdrew to my lodging.
Thur. 5.--We had a pleasant ride to Mill-House, where I
preached at five to a deeply serious congregation. The next
day at noon I preached in a field near Camelford, it being the
fair-day, on, “Come, buy wine and milk without money and
without price.” I preached within at Port-Isaac, because of
the rain; but many were constrained to stand without. It was
a glorious opportunity; God showering down his blessing on
many souls.
Sat. 7.--I rode to Cuthbert, (that is the true spelling,) and
found Mr. Hoskins weak in body, but happy in God. He was
just able to ride to the Church-Town in the evening, where
a serious congregation soon assembled. Sunday, 8. About
eight I preached at St. Agnes; at one, in the main street at
Redruth; but a still larger congregation was at Gwennap in
the evening, equal to any I have seen in Moorfields. Yet, I
think, they all heard, while I enforced, “Why will ye die,
O house of Israel ?”
After preaching I returned to Redruth; where, hearing an
exceeding strange story, I sent for the person herself, Grace
Paddy, a well-bred, sensible young woman. I can speak of her
now without restraint, as she is safe in Abraham’s bosom. She
said, “I was harmless, as I thought, but quite careless about
religion, till about Christmas, when my brother was saying,
‘God has given to me all I want; I am as happy as I can
live.” This was about ten in the morning. The words went
like an arrow to my heart. I went into my chamber and
thought, ‘Why am not I so? O, I cannot be, because I am
not convinced of sin.” I cried out vehemently, ‘Lord, lay
as much conviction upon me as my body can bear.’ Imme
diately I saw myself in such a light, that I roared for the
disquietness of my heart. The maid running up, I said,
“Call my brother. He came; rejoiced over me; said,
‘Christ is just ready to receive you; only believe!’ and went
to prayer. In a short time all my trouble was gone, and I
did believe all my sins were blotted out; but in the evening I
was throughly convinced of the want of a deeper change. I
felt the remains of sin in my heart; which I longed to have
taken away. I longed to be saved from all sin, to be “cleansed
from all unrighteousness.’ And at the time Mr. Rankin was
preaching, this desire increased exceedingly. Afterwards,
he met the society. During his last prayer I was quite over
whelmed with the power of God. I felt an inexpressible
change in the very depth of my heart; and from that hour I
have felt no anger, no pride, no wrong temper of any kind;
Sept. 1765.] JOURNAL. 235
nothing contrary to the pure love of God, which I feel con
tinually. I desire nothing but Christ; and I have Christ
always reigning in my heart. I want nothing; He is my
sufficient portion in time and in eternity.”
Such an instance I never knew before; such an instance I
never read; a person convinced of sin, converted to God, and
renewed in love, within twelve hours! Yet it is by no means
incredible; seeing one day is with God as a thousand years.
Mon. 9.--The Room would by no means contain the
congregation at five in the morning. How is this town
changed ! Some years since a Methodist Preacher could not
safely ride through it. Now, high and low, few excepted,
say, “Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.”
About one I preached at Porkellis; at six in Crowan. I
admire the depth of grace in the generality of this people; so
simple, so humble, so teachable, so serious, so utterly dead to
the world !
Tues. 10.--They filled the House at five. I preached in
Breage at twelve, under a lovely shade of trees. About six I
began at St. John’s near Helstone, once as furious a town
as Redruth. Now almost all the Gentry of the town were
present, and heard with the deepest attention.
Wed. 11.--Perceiving my voice began to fail, I resolved
to preach, for a while, but twice a day. In the evening I
preached in a little ground at Newlyn, to a numerous
congregation. None behaved amiss but a young gentleman
who seemed to understand nothing of the matter.
Thur. 12.--Coming to St. Just, I learned that John
Bennets had died some hours before. He was a wise and a
good man, who had been above twenty years as a father to
that society. A little before his death he examined each of
his children concerning their abiding in the faith. Being
satisfied of this, he told them, “Now I have no doubt but
we shall meet again at the right hand of our Lord.” He
then cheerfully committed his soul to Him, and fell asleep.
On the numerous congregation in the evening I enforced
those solemn words, “There is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou goest.”
Fri. 13.--I rode to St. Ives; and in the evening preached
on the sea-shore; but though there was little wind, yet the noise
of the waves prevented many from hearing. Saturday, 14.
About noon I preached at the Hayle, a small arm of the sea,
which runs up into the land, two or three miles from St. Ives,
and makes a tolerable harbour. In the evening we procured a
more convenient place at St. Ives, a meadow on the side of the
hill, where the people stood before me, row above row, to a
considerable distance. On Sunday, 15, we had nearly the
same congregation at seven in the morning; to whom I
explained, “Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and
with his Son Jesus Christ.” At one I preached in Lelant,
three miles from St. Ives; and at five in the same meadow,
to a larger congregation than before. Indeed the whole
town seems moved; the truths we preach being so confirmed
by the lives of the people.
Mon. 16.--We had our Quarterly Meeting at Redruth;
and it appeared, by the accounts from all parts, that the flame
which was kindled the last year, though abated, is not
extinguished. At six I began on the market-house steps,
as usual, to a very numerous congregation; but I had not
finished the hymn, when Mr. C. came and read the Act
against riots. I said, “Mr. C., I did not expect this from
you; I really thought you had more understanding.” He
answered not, but stood like one astonished, neither moving
hand nor foot. However, I removed two or three hundred
yards, and quietly finished my discourse.
Tues. 17.--I rode to Medros, near St. Austle, where we had
the Quarterly Meeting for the eastern circuit. Here likewise
we had an agreeable account of a still increasing work of God.
This society has eighty-six members, and all rejoicing in the
love of God. Fifty-five or fifty-six of these believe He has
saved them from all sin; and their life no way contradicts
their profession. But how many will endure to the end?
Wed. 18.--I set out for Plymouth-Dock. In the way we
called on one of our friends near Liskeard, and found his
wife, once strong in faith, in the very depth of despair. I
could not but admire the providence of God which sent us so
seasonably thither. We cried strongly to God in her behalf,
and left her not a little comforted.
The society at the Dock had been for some time in a
miserable condition. Disputes had run so high, concerning a
worthless man, that every one's sword was set, as it were,
against his brother. I showed them how Satan had desired
to have them, that he might sift them as wheat; and after
wards told them there was but one way to take,--to pass an
Oct. 1765.] JOURNAL. 237
absolute act of oblivion; not to mention, on any pretence
whatever, anything that had been said or done on either side.
They fully determined so to do. If they keep that resolution,
God will return to them.
Thur. 19.--I rode to Tiverton, and preached to a deeply
serious congregation. Friday, 20. I preached at noon in Hill
farrance, near Taunton, where I had not been for fifteen years.
Saturday, 21. I preached about noon at Shepton-Mallet, and
then went on to Bristol.
Wed. 25.--About one I preached at Paulton, under a large,
shady tree. My own soul, and I trust many others, were
refreshed, while I was describing our fellowship with the
Father and the Son.
After visiting the other neighbouring places, on Saturday,
28, at noon, I preached at Bath: But I had only the poor
to hear; there being service at the same time in Lady H.’s
chapel. So I was just in my element. I have scarce ever
found such liberty at Bath before.
Monday, 30, and the two following days, I examined the
society at Bristol, and was surprised to find fifty members
fewer than I left in it last October. One reason is, Christian
Perfection has been little insisted on; and wherever this is
not done, be the Preachers ever so eloquent, there is little
increase, either in the number or the grace of the hearers.
Sat. OcToBER 5.--I spent some time with the children at
Kingswood. They are all in health: They behave well: They
learn well: But, alas ! (two or three excepted) there is no life
in them |
About this time, the oldest Preacher in our connexion, Alex
ander Coats, rested from his labours. A little account of his
death, one who was in the house sent me, in these words:
“Newcastle, October 7, 1765.
“I HAD an opportunity, the last evening, of seeing our dear,
aged brother Coats. A few days before, he was sore tempted
by the enemy; but near the close he had perfect peace. His
faith was clear, and he found Christ precious, his portion, and
his eternal all. I asked him, a little before he died, if he had
‘followed cunningly devised fables. He answered, ‘No, no,
no.’ I then asked him whether he saw land. He said, ‘Yes,
I do;’ and, after waiting a few moments at anchor, he put
into the quiet harbour.”
Wed. 9.-I read Mr. Jones’s ingenious “Essay on the
Principles of Natural Philosophy.” He seems to have totally
overthrown the Newtonian principles; but whether he can
establish the Hutchinsonian is another question.
Friday, 11, we observed as a day of fasting and prayer.
Sunday, 13. We met in the evening jointly to renew our
covenant with God. It was, as usual, a time of remarkable
blessing.
Mon. 14.--In the evening I preached at Shaftesbury; and
on Tuesday, at Wincanton. Riding homeward, we saw the
pond in which a great man, a few weeks since, put an end to
a wretched life. And is death more welcome than life, even
to a man that wallows in gold and silver?
Sun. 20.--I preached a funeral sermon at Kingswood, over
the remains of Susanna Flook; who, a few days before, rose
up and said, “I am dying,” and dropped down dead. So
little security is there in youth or health ! Be ye therefore
likewise ready.-
Mon. 21.--I went in the coach to Salisbury, and on Thurs
day, 24, came to London. Monday, 28. I breakfasted with
Mr. Whitefield, who seemed to be an old, old man, being
fairly worn out in his Master’s service, though he has hardly
seen fifty years: And yet it pleases God, that I, who am now
in my sixty-third year, find no disorder, no weakness, no
decay, no difference from what I was at five-and-twenty; only
that I have fewer teeth, and more grey hairs.
Thur. NoveMBER 7.--A fire broke out near the corner of
Leadenhall-Street, which (the wind being exceeding high) soon
seized on both the corners of the street, and both the corners of
Cornhill, and in a few hours destroyed above threescore houses.
Yet no lives were lost. Even Mr. Rutland (at whose house it
began) and his whole family were preserved; part escaping
through the chamber window, part over the top of the house.
Sun. 24.--I preached on those words in the Lesson for the
day, “The Lord our righteousness.” I said not one thing
which I have not said, at least, fifty times within this twelve
month: Yet it appeared to many entirely new, who much
importuned me to print my sermon, supposing it would stop
the mouths of all gainsayers. Alas, for their simplicity | In
spite of all I can print, say, or do, will not those who seek
occasion of offence find occasion?
Mon. DECEMBER 2.--I went to Canterbury. I had received
most tragical accounts, as if the society were all fallen from
Dec. 1765.] JOURNAL. 239
grace, if ever they had any. I determined to search this to the
bottom. To this end I examined them, one by one; and was
agreeably surprised to find them all (none excepted) upright
and blameless in their behaviour.*
Tues, 3.--I rode to Dover, and found a little company
more united together than they have been for many years.
Whilst several of them continued to rob the King, we seemed
to be ploughing upon the sand; but since they have cut off
the right hand, the word of God sinks deep into their hearts.
Wed. 4.--I preached about noon at Sandwich, and in the
evening at Margate. A few people here also join in helping
each other to work out their salvation. But the Minister of
the parish earnestly opposes them, and thinks he is doing
God service
Thur. 5.--I rode back to Feversham. Here I was quickly
informed that the mob and the Magistrates had agreed
together to drive Methodism, so called, out of the town. After
preaching, I told them what we had been constrained to do
by the Magistrate at Rolvenden; who perhaps would have
been richer, by some hundred pounds, had he never
meddled with the Methodists; concluding, “Since we have
both God and the law on our side, if we can have peace by
fair means, we had much rather; we should be exceeding
glad; but if not, we will have peace.”
Sat. 7.--I returned to London. Wednesday, 11. I had
much conversation with Mr. D--e, lately a Romish Priest.
What wonder is it, that we have so many converts to Popery,
and so few to Protestantism; when the former are sure to want
nothing, and the latter almost sure to starve?
Thur. 12.--I rode over to Leytonstone, and found one
truly Christian family: That is, what that at Kingswood
should be, and would, if it had such Governors. Friday, 13.
I examined the children, one by one. Several of them did
find the love of God. One enjoys it still, and continues to
walk humbly and closely with God.
Sun. 15.--I buried the remains of Henry Perronet, who had
been a child of sorrow from his infancy. But from the time he
was taken ill, his mind was more and more composed. The day
and night before his death, he was praying continually; till, all
fear being taken away, he cheerfully gave up his spirit to God.
Wed. 18.--Riding through the Borough, all my mare's feet
flew up, and she fell with my leg under her. A gentleman,
stepping out, lifted me up, and helped me into his shop. I was
exceeding sick, but was presently relieved by a little hartshorn
and water. After resting a few minutes, I took a coach; but
when I was cold, found myself much worse; being bruised
on my right arm, my breast, my knee, leg, and ankle, which
swelled exceedingly. However, I went on to Shoreham;
where, by applying treacle twice a day, all the soreness was
removed, and I recovered some strength, so as to be able to
walk a little on plain ground. The word of God does at
length bear fruit here also, and Mr. P. is comforted over all
his trouble. Saturday, 21. Being not yet able to ride, I
returned in a chariot to London.
Sun. 22.--I was ill able to go through the service at
West-Street; but God provided for this also. Mr. Greaves,
being just ordained, came straight to the chapel, and gave
me the assistance I wanted.
Thur. 26.--I should have been glad of a few days’ rest,
but it could not be at this busy season. However, being
electrified morning and evening, my lameness mended,
though but slowly.
Wed. JANUARY 1, 1766.--A large congregation met in the
Foundery at four o’clock, and ushered in the new year with the
voice of praise and thanksgiving. In the evening we met, as
usual, at the church in Spitalfields, to renew our covenant with
God. This is always a refreshing season, at which some
prisoners are set at liberty.
Fri. 3.--Mr B called upon me, now calm and in his
right mind. God has repressed his furious, bitter zeal, by
means of Mr. Whitefield. He (Mr. Whitefield) made
the first breach among the Methodists: O that God may
empower him to heal it!
Sun. 5.--In the evening I went to Lewisham. Thursday,
9. I read Bishop Lowth’s “Answer” to Bishop W. If any
thing human could be a cure for pride, surely such a medicine
as this would !
Mon. 13.--I went in the machine to Bury, and preached to
a small, serious congregation. Tuesday, 14. The frozen road
being exceeding rough, our machine broke down before day.
However, it was patched up, so as to carry us to Budsdale;
and in the evening I preached at Yarmouth. The work of God
was increasing here, when poor B. W. was converted to Calvin
ism. Immediately he declared open war, tore the society in.
Feb. 1766.] JOURNAL, 241
pieces, took all he could to himself, wholly quitted the Church,
and raised such a scandal as will not soon be removed. Yet
doubtless he who turned the young man’s head thinks he has
done God service.
Thur. 16.--I rode to Norwich, and preached at seven in a
large place, called the Priory. The room, I suppose, was
formerly the chapel: I like it the better on that account.
After spending three days here more agreeably than I had
done for many years, on Monday, 20, I left a society of an
hundred and seventy members, regular, and well united
together. In the evening the machine put up at the White
Elm. On Tuesday morning I reached Colchester.
I found the society here slowly recovering from the mischief
done by offence and disputing together. I had great liberty of
speech, both morning and evening; and God seemed strongly
to apply his word. Surely they will at length learn to bear
one another’s burdens; then will “the desert rejoice, and
blossom as the rose.”
Fri. 24.--I returned to London. Tuesday, 28. Our brethren
met together to consider our temporal affairs. One proposed
that we should, in the first place, pay off the debt of the
society, which was five hundred pounds. Towards this an
hundred and seventy were subscribed immediately. At a
second meeting this was enlarged to three hundred and
twenty. Surely God will supply the rest.
Fri. 31.--Mr. Whitefield called upon me. He breathes
nothing but peace and love. Bigotry cannot stand before
him, but hides its head wherever he comes.
Sun. FEBRUARY 2.--I dined with W. Welsh, the father
of the late Society for Reformation of Manners. But that
excellent design is at a full stop. They have indeed
convicted the wretch who, by wilful perjury, carried the
cause against them in Westminster-Hall; but they could
never recover the expense of that suit. Lord, how long shall
the ungodly triumph?
Wed. 5.--One called upon me who had been cheated
out of a large fortune, and was now perishing for want
of bread. I had a desire to clothe him, and send him back
to his own country; but was short of money. However,
I appointed him to call again in an hour. He did so;
but before he came, one from whom I expected nothing
less, put twenty guineas into my hand: So I ordered him
to be clothed from head to foot, and sent him straight away
to Dublin.
Monday, 10, and the four following days, I wrote a
catalogue of the society, now reduced from eight-and-twenty
hundred to about two-and-twenty. Such is the fruit of George
Bell's enthusiasm, and Thomas Maxfield’s gratitude!
Mon. 17.--I preached at Sundon; and many looked as if
they understood something of what was said. Tuesday, 18.
I went on to Bedford, and found James Glasbrook had just
buried his wife; a woman of fine understanding, and an
excellent spirit, snatched away in the dawn of her usefulness.
What Thou doest, we know not now ! We wonder and
adore ! The next day I rode over to Copel, where she died,
and preached her funeral sermon. In the evening I preached
at Bedford, and found God was there also: And
Where Thy presence is display'd is heaven.
Thur. 20.--I preached at Hertford, and in the evening at
Leytonstone. Friday, 21. I preached at Oldford, near Bow.
Part of the congregation were deeply serious; the other part
wild and stupid enough. But the bridle was in their mouth,
so that they made no noise; nay, and were, in a manner,
attentive.
Sun. 23.--In the evening I went to Lewisham, and finished
the notes on the book of Job. About this time one of Henry
Jackson's daughters gave me the following letter from her
sister:
“Newcastle, February 23, 1766.
“ON Thursday, the 13th of this month, my honoured father
looked so beautiful and comely that we all wondered. At night,
in his first sleep, he was taken very ill. On Friday morning
I asked him what he could take. He answered, ‘I am to eat
no more.’ His illness increased; but he was still calm and
composed, and resigned to the will of God. Indeed I always
beheld in him such faith, love, and divine resignation as I
never saw in any other. On Sunday he said, ‘Now my soul
is prepared, and made ready to meet the Lord. From this
time he was filled with longing desires to depart and to be with
Christ; crying out, ‘I cannot stay: I must go to my Beloved,
to be with him for ever. Monday, 17. He said, ‘I have
fought a good fight; I have finished my course; I have kept
the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of glory,
March, 1766.] JOURNAL, 243
which the righteous Judge shall give me at that day.’ Tues
day, 18. After receiving the blessed sacrament, he declared to
the Minister, “My anchor is cast within the veil, both sure
and immovable.” And as long as he had his speech, he
preached Christ to every one that came to see him. Indeed
his whole life, for many years, was but one dedication of his
body and soul to God; praying continually, and being lost in
praise and thanksgiving to his adorable Saviour. In all the
various dispensations of God’s providence towards him and his
family, he was still magnifying and praising his holy name;
always thankful, humble, loving, and obedient. Nothing was
able to move him one moment, or put him out of temper;
but he received every thing from the hand of God, with faith,
patience, and resignation. Before his speech failed, he blessed
all his children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren; and
on Thursday morning, February 20, yielded up his soul to
God, being ninety-nine years and five months old.”
Sat. MARCH 1.--I read Bishop Lowth's ingenious Lectures
De Poesi Hebraed, far more satisfactory than any thing on
that subject which I ever saw before. He shows clearly, that
the noblest poetry may subsist without being beholden either
to rhyme or fixed measures.
Thur. 6.--Our brethren met once more on account of the
public debt. And they did not part till more than the whole
(which was six hundred and ten pounds) was subscribed.
Sun. 9.--In the evening I went to Knightsbridge; and in
the morning took the machine for Bristol, where I preached
(as I had appointed) on Tuesday evening, and met the
society. Wednesday, 12. I rode over to Kingswood; and,
having told my whole mind to the Masters and servants,
spoke to the children in a far stronger manner than ever I
did before. I will kill or cure: I will have one or the other,
--a Christian school, or none at all.
Sun. 16.--I preached in Princes-Street at eight, on,
“Awake, thou that sleepest;” and at the Square in the even
ing, to a listening multitude, on, “Come, Lord Jesus!”
At Kingswood we had such a congregation at ten as has not
been there for several years: And I had the satisfaction to
find four of our children again rejoicing in the love of God.
Mon. 17.--I rode to Stroud, the sun shining as in May.
Seventeen such days in the beginning of March, I suppose,
few men have known. But on Tuesday the weather entirely
changed; and the piercing north-east wind, this and the two
following days, was scarce supportable. At seven I preached
in the Room at Painswick, and about ten came to Cheltenham.
Here I was in a strait; the House would not hold half the
people; and the wind was keen enough. However, I thought
this the less evil of the two, and so preached abroad, where
we were tolerably sheltered. And I did not observe that any,
rich or poor, went away till I concluded.
I reached Evesham about five in the evening, and preached
about six with tolerable quiet. But as we returned, the mob,
encouraged by the wretched Magistrate, were rude and noisy
enough. Yet as they neither saluted us with stones, nor dirt,
we were well contented.
Wed. 19.--We called at a little inn, about sixteen miles from
Evesham. But as Duncan Wright and I had our hoods on,
the good woman was frighted, and did not care to take us in:
So we rode a mile or two farther to another house, where we
came in season. After a little talk, the woman of the house
said, “I fear it is not so well with me as it was once. Before
I married, I used to kneel down in the cow-house, to pray to
God for all I wanted. But now I am incumbered with worldly
cares; and yet God has not forgotten me. Last winter, when
my husband had lost the use of all his limbs, I prayed to God
for him, and he was well.” This woman knew nothing about
the Methodists; but God is nigh to all that call upon him.
In the evening I preached at Birmingham. Towards the
close, the mob gathered: But they were restrained till I had
concluded.
Thur. 20.--It was as much as we could do to bear the
cold before sunrise. However, we came well to Burton before
eleven, where I preached to an exceeding serious congregation.
In the evening I preached at Nottingham in the new House,
throughly filled with serious hearers. Indeed there is never
any disturbance here. And there could be none anywhere,
if the Magistrates were lovers of peace, and exerted themselves
in the defence of it.
Sun. 23.--I had thoughts of preaching in the market-place;
but the snow which fell in the night made it impracticable.
In the morning the house contained the congregation; but in
the evening many were constrained to go away. There seems
to be now (what never was before) a general call to the town.
Mon. 24.--We rode to Derby. I never saw this House full
April, 1766.] JOURNAL. 245
before; the people in general being profoundly careless. I
endeavoured to show them their picture, by enlarging on those
words, “Gallio cared for none of these things.”
Tues. 25.--At ten I preached in their new House at
Creitch, about twelve miles from Derby, to a loving, simple
hearted people; many of whom felt what I spoke of fellow
ship with the Father and with the Son. Thence we rode on
through several heavy showers of snow to Sheffield, where at
six we had a numerous congregation. There has been much
disturbance here this winter; but to-night all was peace.
Thur. 27.--I preached in the morning at a little village
near Eyam, in the High-Peak. The eagerness with which
the poor people devoured the word made me amends for the
cold ride over the snowy mountains. The same earnestness
I observed in the congregation at Maxfield: And yet hardly
a third part of those I formerly examined now retain the
glorious liberty which they then enjoyed.
MARCH 28.-(Being Good-Friday.) As soon as we came
from church, I began at Stockport, on, “We preach Christ
crucified; to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the Greeks
foolishness.” At six in the evening I preached at Manchester;
and on Saturday, and on Easter-Day In the evening I
explained to the society the nature of the yearly subscription.
On this one sent me the following letter:--
* GooD SIR, March 31, 1766.
“I THouGHT proper to send you a few lines concerning
what you spoke of last night. How good it was that you put
us all together as one family; that each might do his utmost
to help all his brethren I Had you spoke of this sooner, and
opened your mind freely as you did yesterday, where I have
given one shilling, I would have given one pound. My heart
was rejoiced at the good news, so as my tongue cannot express.
I was ready to cry out, with Zaccheus, ‘Lo, the half of
my goods I give to the poor. I have sent you two guineas
towards carrying on the work of the Lord. And may the
blessing of the Lord go with it; for I give it freely: I would
rather it had been twoscore. W. N.”
Tues. APRIL 1.--On a close examination, out of more than
fifty persons, who, two or three years ago, were filled with the
love of God, I did not find above a third part who had not
suffered loss. But almost all were deeply sensible of their
loss, and earnestly groaning for what they once enjoyed.
Wed, 2.--We rode through heavy rain to Chester. Friday,
4. I visited a poor woman, who has been ill eight years, and
is not yet weary or faint in her mind. An heavy-laden
sinner desired to receive the sacrament with her, and found
rest to her soul; and from that hour increased every day in
the knowledge and love of God.
Mon. 7.--I preached at Warrington, about noon, to a large
congregation, rich and poor, learned and unlearned. I never
spoke more plain; nor have I ever seen a congregation listen
with more attention. Thence I rode to Liverpool, and
thoroughly regulated the society, which had great need
of it. Wednesday, 9. I took much pains with a sensible
woman who had taken several imprudent steps. But it was
labour lost,-neither argument nor persuasion made the
least impression. O, what power less than almighty can
convince a thorough-paced enthusiast!
Thur. 10.--I looked over the wonderful Deed which was
lately made here: On which I observed, 1. It takes up three
large skins of parchment, and so could not cost less than six
guineas; whereas our own Deed, transcribed by a friend,
would not have cost six shillings. 2. It is verbose beyond all
sense and reason; and withal so ambiguously worded, that one
passage only might find matter for a suit of ten or twelve
years in Chancery. 3. It everywhere calls the house a Meeting
House, a name which I particularly object to. 4. It leaves
no power either to the Assistant or me, so much as to place
or displace a Steward. 5. Neither I, nor all the Conference,
have power to send the same Preacher two years together. To
crown all, 6. If a Preacher is not appointed at the Conference,
the Trustees and the congregation are to choose one by most
votes ! And can any one wonder I dislike this Deed, which
tears the Methodist discipline up by the roots?
Is it not strange, that any who have the least regard either
for me or our discipline, should scruple to alter this uncouth
Deed ?
Fri. 11.--I preached near Wigan to a large number of
serious, well-behaved people, mixed with a few as stupidly
insolent creatures as I ever saw. Finding them proof both
against reason and persuasion, at length I rebuked them
sharply. This they understood, and quickly retired. So I
concluded in peace.
Sat. 12.--I was desired to preach at Brinsley, three or four
April, 1766.] JOURNAL, 247
miles from Wigan. The sun shone hot, but I had some shelter;
and the artless people drank in every word. About six I began
in the street at Bolton. The wind was then high, and cold
enough; but I soon forgot it, and so did most of the people,
being almost as thirsty as those at Brimsley. When I began
on Sunday, in the afternoon, the wind was exceeding sharp;
but it fell in a few moments, and we had a mild, agreeable
summer evening.
Mon. 14.--I preached at Middleton, six miles from Man
chester. A sharp shower of hail began in the middle of the
sermon; but scarce any went away. Tuesday, 15. We rode
to Chapel-en-le-Frith. We had a rough salutation in riding
through the town; at the end of which a multitude of people
being gathered together in a convenient meadow, I preached
on, “By grace are ye saved through faith.” God spoke in his
word. It was an acceptable time, and few went empty away.
In riding over the dreary mountains of the High-Peak we
met with several storms: But we were no worse when we came
to Rotherham, where I preached in the evening. The spirit
of the congregation was able to enliven the dullest Preacher.
Indeed it was good to be here. Wednesday, 16. About two
in the afternoon, I had another kind of congregation at
Doncaster, wild and stupid enough. Yet all were tolerably
civil, many attentive, and some affected. Thence we hasted
to Epworth. Here I took knowledge of the same spirit as
at Rotherham. What a blessing is it, to be with those who
are alive to God! But how few duly value this blessing !
Fri. 18.--I set out for the eastern part of Lincolnshire,
and after preaching at Awkborough and Barrow in the way,
came the next day to our old friends at Grimsby. It put me
in mind of Purrysburg, in Georgia. It was one of the largest
towns in the county: It is no bigger than a middling village,
containing a small number of half-starved inhabitants, without
any trade, either foreign or domestic. But this they have;
they love the Gospel, hardly six families excepted. And a
large proportion of them have found “it is the power of God
unto salvation.”
Mon. 21.--Between nine and ten I began preaching in an
open place at Louth. The mob here used to be exceeding
boisterous; but none now opened his mouth. How easily,
when it seems him good, does God “still the madness of
the people !”
Hence we rode to Trusthorpe in the Marsh, where a
multitude of plain, simple-hearted people assembled. When
I met the society after preaching, abundance of them crowded
in; many of whom, while we were wrestling with God in prayer,
cried out with a loud and bitter cry. But it was not long
before some of them rejoiced with joy unspeakable.
Tues. 22.--I preached to a congregation of a very
different kind at Horncastle. John Hill has done more
mischief here than a man of far greater talents can do good.
By that unhappy division of the society, he has opened the
mouths of all the gainsayers; and, to complete the scandal,
he and six-and-twenty more have been dipped ! “Unstable
as water, thou shalt not excel!”
Wed. 23.--I preached at five; in Torrington at nine; and
about two at Scotter, where the poor people now enjoy great
quietness, by means of Sir N. H. About six I preached at
Ferry. I do not choose to preach above twice or thrice in a
day; but when I am called to do more, it is all one: I find
strength according to my need.
Thur. 24.--I rode to Epworth, and the next day, through
heavy rain, to Swinfleet. I supposed, as the rain kept many
from coming, the preaching-house would contain the congrega
tion; but it would not. However, as the door and windows
were open, I believe, most of them could hear; and the
eagerness with which they heard made me hope they were
not forgetful hearers.
Sun. 27.--I rode over to Misterton, and visited a young
woman, who a year or two since was struck first with deep
melancholy, and soon after with utter distraction. We were
quickly convinced whence her disorder came. Let Physicians
do all they will or can; yet it will be found in the end, that
“this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting.”
After preaching I hasted away to Haxey, and came thither
before the church began. The Curate preached a very
harmless sermon against the Methodists. Between one and
two I preached at Westwood-side, om, “Behold, now is the
day of salvation l’’ And it seemed as if all had ears to hear.
About four I began in the market-place at Epworth, on, “He
beheld the city, and wept over it.” And such a call I think
the inhabitants of this town have scarce ever had before.
Mon. 28.--I preached at Thorne. Although a great part of
the congregation had never heard one preach under a tree
May, 1766.] JOURNAL, 249
before, yet they behaved extremely well. Before we came to
York, I was thoroughly tired; but my strength quickly
returned; so that, after preaching to a large congregation,
and meeting the society, I was fresher than when I began.
Tues. 29.--I preached at noon in the new House at Thirsk,
almost equal to that at Yarm: And why not quite, seeing they
had the model before their eyes, and had nothing to do but to
copy after it? Is it not an amazing weakness, that when
they have the most beautiful pattern before them, all builders
will affect to mend something? So the je ne sgai quoi is
lost, and the second building scarce ever equals the first.
I preached at Yarm in the evening, and the next at New
castle. I know not to what it is owing, that I have felt more
weariness this spring, than I had done before for many years;
unless to my fall at Christmas, which perhaps weakened the
springs of my whole machine more than I was sensible of.
Thur. MAY 1.--I enjoyed a little rest. I do not find the
least change in this respect. I love quietness and silence as
well as ever; but if I am called into noise and tumult, all is
well.
Sun. 4.--The rain constrained me to preach in the Room,
both in the morning and evening. But it was fair at two
while I preached abroad at the Fell, where the Room could
not contain one half of the congregation.
Tues. 6.--I rode to Sunderland. On Wednesday and
Thursday evening, I preached in Monkwearmouth church.
Saturday, 10. I spent an agreeable hour at a Quaker's, a
man of large substance. His spirit put me in mind of
Thomas Keene. May thy last end be like his !
Sun. 11.--The weather not permitting me to preach abroad,
I preached in the Room, morning and evening, and about eleven
in Monkwearmouth church. In the evening some hundreds of
us solemnly renewed our covenant with God, and he answered
many in the joy of their hearts. Monday, 12. After preaching
at South-Shields about noon, and at North-Shields in the even
ing, I returned to Newcastle. In the following days I preached
at as many of the neighbouring places as I could; and on
Monday, 19, set out northward. About two I preached to the
honest colliers at Placey, and in the evening at Morpeth.
Tuesday, 20. About noon I preached at Felton. There were
many hearers, though the wind was extremely sharp; and most
of them were attentive; but very few seemed to understand
anything of the matter. I preached at Alnwick in the evening.
Wednesday, 21. We spent an hour in the Castle and the
gardens, which the Duke is enlarging and improving daily,
and turning into a little paradise. What pity, that he must
leave all these, and die like a common man |
Thur. 22.--At eleven I preached in the street at Belford,
fifteen miles beyond Alnwick. The hearers were seriously
attentive, and a few seemed to understand what was spoken.
Between six and seven I preached in the Town-hall at
Berwick. I had an uncommon liberty in speaking, and a
solemn awe sat on the faces of all the hearers. visiting this poor, barren place?
Is God again
Fri. 23.--When I came to Old-Camus, I found notice
had been given of my preaching about a mile off. So I took
horse without delay, and rode to Coppersmith, where the
congregation was waiting. I spoke as plain as I possibly
could; but very few appeared to be at all affected. It seems
to be with them, as with most in the north : They know
everything, and feel nothing.
I had designed to preach abroad at Dunbar in the evening;
but the rain drove us into the House. It was for good. I
now had a full stroke at their hearts, and I think some felt
themselves sinners.
Sat. 24.--In the afternoon, notice having been given a
week before, I went to the Room at Preston-Pans. And I
had it all to myself; neither man, woman, nor child, offered
to look me in the face: So I ordered a chair to be placed in
the street. Then forty or fifty crept together; but they were
mere stocks and stones; no more concerned than if I had
talked Greek. In the evening I preached in the new Room
at Edinburgh, a large and commodious building.
Mon. 26.--I spent some hours at the meeting of the
National Assembly. I am very far from being of Mr.
Whitefield's mind, who greatly commends the solemnity of
this meeting. I have seen few less solemn: I was extremely
shocked at the behaviour of many of the members. Had any
Preacher behaved so at our Conference, he would have had
no more place among us.
Wed. 28.--I preached at Leith, and spoke exceeding plain.
A few received the truth in the love thereof.
Sun. JUNE 1.--Many of the Ministers were present at
seven, with a large and serious congregation. In the afternoon
June, 1766.] JOURNAL, 251
I heard a thundering sermon in the new kirk, occasioned by
Mr. Jardin's (a Minister) dropping down dead in the Assembly
a day or two before. I preached in the evening on “The
Spirit and the Bride say, Come!” A few, I trust, closed
with the invitation.
Mon. 2.--I came to Dundee, wet enough. But it cleared up
in the evening, so that I preached abroad to a large congrega
tion, many of whom attended in the morning. Tuesday, 3.
The congregation was still larger in the evening, but on
Wednesday the rain kept us in the House. Thursday, 5. It
being fair, we had a more numerous congregation than ever;
to whom, after preaching, I took occasion to repeat most of the
plausible objections which had been made to us in Scotland.
I then showed our reasons for the things which had been
objected to us, and all seemed to be throughly satisfied.
The sum of what I spoke was this:--
“I love plain-dealing. Do not you? I will use it now. Bear
with me.
“I hang out no false colours; but show you all I am, all I
intend, all I do.
“I am a member of the Church of England: But I love
good men of every Church.
“My ground is the Bible. Yea, I am a Bible-bigot. I
follow it in all things, both great and small.
“Therefore, 1. I always use a short private prayer, when
I attend the public service of God. Do not you? Why
do you not? Is not this according to the Bible?
“2. I stand whenever I sing the praise of God in public.
Does not the Bible give you plain precedents for this?
“3. I always kneel before the Lord my Maker, when I
pray in public.
“4. I generally in public use the Lord’s Prayer, because
Christ has taught me, when I pray, to say,
“I advise every Preacher connected with me, whether in
England or Scotland, herein to tread in my steps.”
Fri. 6.--We went on to Aberdeen, about seventy measured
miles. The congregation in the evening was larger than the
usual one at Edinburgh. And the number of those who
attended in the morning showed they were not all curious
hearers.
Sun. 8.--Knowing no reason why we should make God’s
day the shortest of the seven, I desired Joseph Thompson to
preach at five. At eight I preached myself. In the afternoon
I heard a strong, close sermon, at Old-Aberdeen; and after
ward preached in the College kirk, to a very genteel, and yet
serious congregation. I then opened and enforced the way
of holiness, at New-Aberdeen, on a numerous congregation.
Monday, 9. I kept a watch-night, and explained to abundance
of genteel people, “One thing is needful;” a great number
of whom would not go away, till after the noon of night.
Tues. 10.--I rode over to Sir Archibald Grant's. The
church was pretty well filled, and I spoke exceeding plain;
yet the hearers did not appear to be any more affected than
the stone walls.
Wed. 11.--I returned to Aberdeen, where many of the
people were much alive to God. With these our labour has
not been in vain; and they are worth all the pains we have
taken in Scotland.
Fri. 13.--We reached Brechin a little before twelve.
Quickly after, I began preaching in the flesh-market, on the
“one thing needful.” It being the fair-day, the town was
full of strangers, and perhaps some of them were found of
Him they sought not. I preached in the evening at Dundee,
with greater liberty than ever before. Saturday, 14. It
rained from the moment we set out, till (about one) we came
to Kinghorn. Finding the boat was not to move till four
o'clock, I purposed to hire a pinnace; but the wind springing
up fair, I went into the large boat. Quickly it fell calm
again, so that we did not get over till past seven.
Sun. 15.--Our Room was very warm in the afternoon,
through the multitude of people; a great number of whom
were people of fashion, with many Ministers. I spoke to
them with the utmost plainness, and, I believe, not in vain;
for we had such a congregation at five in the morning as I
never saw at Edinburgh before. It is scarce possible to
speak too plain in England; but it is scarce possible to
speak plain enough in Scotland. And if you do not, you
lose all your labour, you plough upon the sand.
Mon. 16.--I took a view of one of the greatest natural
curiosities in the kingdom; what is called Arthur's Seat;
a small, rocky eminence, six or seven yards across, on the
top of an exceeding high mountain, not far from Edinburgh.
The prospect from the top of the Castle is large, but it is
nothing in comparison of this. In the evening we had another
June, 1766.] JOURNAL, 253
Sunday’s congregation, who seemed more affected than the
day before. Tuesday, 17. It rained much, yet abundance
of people came; and again God made bare his arm. I can
now leave Edinburgh with comfort; for I have fully delivered
my own soul.
Wed. 18.--I set out for Glasgow. In the afternoon the
rain poured down, so that we were glad to take shelter in
a little house, where I soon began to talk with our host's
daughter, eighteen or nineteen years old. But, to my surprise,
I found her as ignorant of the mature of religion as an Hot
tentot. And many such I have found in Scotland; able to
read, nay, and repeat the Catechism, but wholly unacquainted
with true religion, yea, and all genuine morality. This
evening we were in the House; but the next I preached
abroad to many more than the House could contain. On
Friday the number was greatly increased, but much more
on Saturday. I then enlarged upon communion with God,
as the only real, scriptural religion. And I believe many felt,
that, with all their orthodoxy, they had no religion still.
What a difference there is between the society here, and
that at Dundee There are about sixty members there, and
scarce more than six scriptural believers. Here are seventy
four members, and near thirty among them lively, zealous
believers; one of whom was justified thirty years ago, and
another of them two-and-forty: And several of them have
been for many years rejoicing in God their Saviour.
Sun. 22.--At seven I was obliged to preach abroad, and
the word sunk deep into the hearers. I almost wondered at
myself for speaking so plain, and wondered how they could
bear it. It is the Lord’s doing ! In the afternoon Mr. Gillies
was unusually close and convincing. At five I preached on,
“O that thou hadst known, at least in this thy day, the things
that make for thy peace l’” I almost despaired of making the
whole congregation hear; but by their behaviour it seems
they did. In the close I enlarged upon their prejudices, and
explained myself with regard to most of them. Shame,
concern, and a mixture of various passions, were painted on
most faces; and I perceived the Scots, if you touch but the
right key, receive as lively impressions as the English.
Mon. 23.--We rode in a mild, cool day, to Thorny-Hill,
about sixty (measured) miles from Glasgow. Here I met with
Mr. Knox’s “History of the Church of Scotland; ” and could
any man wonder, if the members of it were more fierce, sour,
and bitter of spirit, than some of them are? For what a
pattern have they before them | I know it is commonly
said, “The work to be done needed such a spirit.” Not so:
The work of God does not, cannot need the work of the devil
to forward it. And a calm, even spirit goes through rough
work far better than a furious one. Although, therefore,
God did use, at the time of the Reformation, some sour,
over-bearing, passionate men, yet he did not use them
because they were such, but notwithstanding they were so.
And there is no doubt, He would have used them much
more, had they been of an humbler and milder spirit.
Tues. 24.--Before eight we reached Dumfries, and after
a short bait pushed on in hopes of reaching Solway-Frith,
before the sea was come in. Designing to call at an inn by
the Frith side, we inquired the way, and were directed to
leave the main road, and go straight to the house which we
saw before us. In ten minutes Duncan Wright was
embogged: However, the horse plunged on, and got through.
I was inclined to turn back; but Duncan telling me I
needed only go a little to the left, I did so, and sunk at once
to my horse’s shoulders. He sprung up twice, and twice sunk
again, each time deeper than before. At the third plunge he
threw me on one side, and we both made shift to scramble out.
I was covered with fine, soft mud, from my feet to the crown
of my head; yet, blessed be God, not hurt at all. But we
could not cross till between seven and eight o’clock. An
honest man crossed with us, who went two miles out of his
way to guide us over the sands to Skilburness; where we
found a little clean house, and passed a comfortable night.
Wed. 25.--We rode on to Whitehaven. Here I spent the
rest of the week. Sunday, 29. I appointed the children to
meet me; and desired Mr. Atlay to meet them for the time
to come. At one, Robert Williams preached in the market
place, to some thousands of people, all quiet and attentive.
About five I preached near the town to a willing multitude,
many of whom seemed to be cut to the heart.
Mon. 30.--About two we reached Penrith. Two of our
friends guided us thence to Appleby, a county-town worthy of
Ireland, containing, at least, five-and-twenty houses. I was
desired to preach here; but, being very wet, I chose to ride
on to Arthur Johnson's, near Brough.
July, 1766.] JOURNAL, 255
I would willingly have preached, (though we had rode
upwards of seventy miles,) but it was a lone house, and there
was not time to gather a congregation. Tuesday, JULY 1.
The neighbours soon came together, to whom I preached at
seven, and then rode on to Barnard-Castle, and met the Stew
ards of the societies, greatly increased since I was here before.
At six I preached in an open space, adjoining to the preaching
house. As the militia were in town, the far greater part of them
attended, with a large congregation from town and country.
It rained most of the time I was speaking; but, I believe,
hardly six persons went away. At the love-feast which fol
lowed, several spoke their experience with all simplicity. One
poor mourner was set at liberty, and many greatly comforted.
Wed. 2.--About noon I preached in Teesdale, and in
Weardale at six in the evening. Here a poor woman was
brought to us, who had been disordered several years, and was
now raving mad. She cursed and blasphemed in a terrible
manner, and could not stand or sit still for a moment.
However, her husband constrained her to come to the place
where I was going to preach; and he held her there by main
strength, although she shrieked in the most dreadful manner;
but in a quarter of an hour she left off shrieking, and sat
motionless and silent, till she began crying to God, which she
continued to do, almost without intermission, till we left her.
Thur. 3.--We rode through a pleasant vale to Wolsing
ham, where I began singing near the middle of the town. A
few soon gathered together, and their number increased all the
time I was preaching. Only one young man behaved amiss,
striving to divert them that were near him; but they would
not be diverted: So that after a while he grew serious too.
In the evening we came once more to Newcastle. On
Saturday I rode to Sunderland; and at eight the next
morning preached at the east end of the town, to a huge
multitude, the greater part of whom had little thought of
God or devil. Thence we returned to Gateshead-Fell,
where was a multitude of another kind, ripe for the whole
Gospel. Here, therefore, as well as at the Garth-Heads
about five, I enlarged on those solemn words, “To-day, if
you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.”
Mon. 7.--I rode to Durham, and preached about noon on
our Lord’s lamentation over Jerusalem. In the evening, the
rain hindering me from preaching in the street, at Hartlepool, I
256 REv. J. wesDEY’s [July, 1766.
had a large congregation in the assembly-room. Many of them
were present again in the morning, and seemed “almost
persuaded to be Christians.”
Tues. 8.--While I was preaching at Stockton, a drunken
man made some disturbance. I turned and spoke strongly to
him. He stood reproved, and listened with much attention.
Wednesday, 9. We had our Quarterly Meeting at Yarm.
The societies in this Circuit increase; that is, among the
poor; for the rich, generally speaking, “care for none of
these things.”
Thur. 10.--About two in the afternoon, I preached at
Potto, and in the evening at Hutton-Rudby. Here is the
largest society in these parts, and the most alive to God.
After spending some time with them all, I met those apart
who believe they are saved from sin. I was agreeably
surprised. I think not above two, out of sixteen or seventeen
whom I examined, have lost the direct witness of that salvation
ever since they experienced it.
Fri. 11.--I preached at five, on the spies who “brought up
an evil report” on the good land. I breakfasted at ’s, and
met with a very remarkable family. He himself, his wife, and
three of his daughters, are a pattern to all round about them.
About nine I preached in the new House at Stokesley; but it
would by no means contain the congregation. I came to
Guisborough a little before twelve, and found notice had been
given of my preaching there; so, having no time to lose, I
began without delay, in the street where I alighted. I had a
serious congregation in a few minutes, and did not at all repent
of my labour. After riding on to Whitby, and preaching at
seven, I was no more tired than when I rose in the morning.
Sun. 13.--I preached at seven in the Room; at one in
the main street on the other side the water. A vast multitude
quickly ran together, and were deeply attentive. At five I
preached in the new market-place to a still larger congregation.
A great number of them attended at five in the morning,
and we had a solemn parting.
About one I preached in the little Square at Robin Hood's
Bay, and rode on to Scarborough. We were met near the
town by a furious thunder-shower, but it was quickly over;
and a fair evening following, I preached in the garden to a
tolerably serious congregation.
Tues. 15.--I had much conversation with Mr. C., whom
July, 1766.] JOURNAL. 257
some had again taken true pains to prejudice. I think he
is once more set right, but fear it will not continue long. It
rained hard at six, but was fair at seven. Just as I ended my
sermon the rain began again.
Wed. 16.--About ten I reached Middleton, near Pickering.
The church was pretty well filled. I preached on part of
the Second Lesson, John iv.; particularly the twenty-fourth
verse; and all the congregation seemed earnest to know how
they might worship God “in spirit and in truth.”
In the evening most of the congregation at Malton were
of another kind; but a whole troop of the Oxford Blues, who
stood together and were deeply serious, kept them in awe :
So that all behaved decently, and many of the soldiers were
present again in the morning.
Thur. 17.--In the way to Beverley, I called upon Sir Charles
Hotham, and spent a comfortable hour. I preached before the
time appointed at Hull; by which means the Room was but
moderately filled. It was near full at five in the morning; at
noon I believe few were unaffected. When we took horse in
the afternoon, it was quite calm, and the sun was extremely
scorching; but the wind soon rose, and brought on the clouds;
so we had a pleasant ride to Beverley. I preached at six in
an House as warm as an oven; and the people were tolerably
attentive. Who knows but we may find again, after many
days, the bread we are now casting upon the waters?
Sat. 19.--I took a view of Beverley Minster, such a parish
church as has scarce its fellow in England. It is a most
beautiful as well as stately building, both within and without,
and is kept more nicely clean than any cathedral which I
have seen in the kingdom; but where will it be when the
earth is burned up, and the elements melt with fervent heat?
About one I preached at Pocklington, (though my strength
was much exhausted,) and in the evening at York.
Sun. 20.--After preaching at eight, I went to St. Saviour
gate church. Towards the close of the Prayers the Rector
sent the sexton to tell me the pulpit was at my service. I
preached on the conclusion of the Gospel for the day, “Not
every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my
Father which is in heaven.” I did not see one person laugh
or smile, though we had an elegant congregation.
Wed. 23.--I went on to Tadcaster. Here Mr. Ingham had
once a far larger society than ours; but it is now shrunk into
nothing; ours, meantime, is continually increasing. In the
evening rich and poor flocked together, to whom I explained,
“We know that we are of God; ” namely, “by the Spirit
which he hath given us;” by the witness of the Spirit, and
by the fruit confirming that witness.
Thur. 24.--I preached at Pateley-Bridge. Such a
congregation, both for number and seriousness, I have not
seen since we left Newcastle. As it rained, I desired the men
to put on their hats; but in two or three minutes they pulled
them off again, and seemed to mind nothing but how they
might “know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.”
Fri. 25.--We rode to Skipton in Craven. I designed to
preach in the market-place; but the rain prevented. So I stood
near Mr. Garforth’s house, where many were under shelter;
but many remained without, seeming not to think whether it
rained or not. Will all these be barren and unfruitful?
Sat. 26.--I preached at Addingham about nine, and at
Guiseley in the evening. Sunday, 27. As Baildon church
would not near contain the congregation, after the Prayers
were ended I came out into the church-yard, both morning
and afternoon. The wind was extremely high, and blew in
my face all the time; yet, I believe, all the people could
hear. At Bradford there was so huge a multitude, and the
rain so damped my voice, that many in the skirts of the
congregation could not hear distinctly. They have just built
a preaching-house, fifty-four feet square, the largest octagon
we have in England; and it is the first of the kind where the
roof is built with common sense, rising only a third of its
breadth; yet it is as firm as any in England; nor does it at all
hurt the walls. Why then does any roof rise higher? Only
through want of skill, or want of honesty, in the builder.
Tues. 29.--I preached at Colne. And here I found one
whom I had sent for some years ago. She lives two miles
from Colne, and is of an unblamable behaviour. Her name
is Ann A m. She is now in the twenty-sixth year of her
age. The account she gives is as follows:-
“I cannot now remember the particulars which I told Mr.
Grimshaw from time to time; but I well remember, that from
the time I was about four years old, after I was in bed I used
to see several persons walking up and down the room. They
all used to come very near the bed, and look upon me, but say
-Aug. 1766.] JOURNAL. 259
nothing. Some of them looked very sad, and some looked
very cheerful; some seemed pleased, others very angry; and
these frayed me sore; especially a man and a woman of our own
parish, who seemed fighting, and died soon after. None of them
spake to me but a lad about sixteen, who, a week before, died of
the small-pox. I said to him, ‘You are dead! How did you
get out of the other place?” He said, ‘Easily enough.” I said,
‘Nay, I think if I was there, I should not get out so easily.”
He looked exceeding angry. I was frighted, and began to
pray, and he vanished away. If it was ever so dark when
any of them appeared, there was light all round them. This
continued till I was sixteen or seventeen; but it frighted me
more and more; and I was troubled because people talked
about me; and many told me I was a witch. This made me
cry earnestly to God to take it away from me. In a week or
two it was all at an end; and I have seen nothing since.”
In the evening I preached near the preaching-house at
Paddiham, and strongly insisted on communion with God,
as the only religion that would avail us. At the close of the
sermon came Mr. M. His long, white beard showed that his
present disorder was of some continuance. In all other
respects he was quite sensible; but he told me, with much
concern, “You can have no place in heaven without--a
beard | Therefore, I beg, let yours grow immediately.”
Wed. 30.--I rode to Rosendale; which, notwithstanding its
name, is little else than a chain of mountains. The rain in
the evening obliged me to preach in the new House, near a
village called New-Church. As many as could, crowded in,
and many more stood at the door; but many were constrained
to go away. Thursday, 31. I preached at Bacup, and then
rode on to Heptonstall. The tall mountain on which it
stands is quite steep and abrupt, only where the roads are
made; and the deep valleys that surround it, as well as the
sides of the mountains beyond, are well clothed with grass,
corn, and trees. I preached with great enlargement of
heart, on, “Now is the day of salvation.” The renegade
Methodists, first turning Calvinists, then Anabaptists, made
much confusion here for a season; but as they now have
taken themselves away, the poor people are in peace again.
Fri. AUGUST 1.--I rode to Ewood. The last time I was
here, young Mr. Grimshaw received us in the same hearty
manner as his father used to do; but he too is now gone
into eternity | So in a few years the family is extinct 1 I
preached at one in a meadow near the House to a numerous
congregation; and we sang with one heart,
Let sickness blast and death devour,
If heaven will recompense our pains :
Perish the grass and fade the flower,
Since firm the word of God remains.
In the evening I preached at Halifax. When I began, the
sum was intensely hot; but quickly the clouds covered him.
Sun. 3.--When the Prayers at Haworth were ended, I
preached from a little scaffold on the south side of the church,
on those words in the Gospel, “O that thou hadst known the
things that belong unto thy peace l” The communicants
alone (a sight which has not been seen since Mr. Grimshaw’s
death) filled the church. In the afternoon the congregation
was supposed to be the largest which had ever been there;
but strength was given me in proportion; so that I believe
all could hear.
Mon. 4.--At one I preached at Bingley, but with an heavy
heart, finding so many of the Methodists here, as well as at
Haworth, perverted by the Anabaptists. I see clearer and
clearer, none will keep to us unless they keep to the church.
Whoever separate from the church, will separate from the
Methodists. In the afternoon I went to Otley; but the town
seemed to be run mad. Such noise, hurry, drunkenness,
rioting, confusion, I know not when I have met with before.
It was their feast-day ! A feast of Bacchus, or Venus, or
Belial? O shame to a Christian country ! However, both
the small and great rabble were so engaged, that they had no
leisure to molest us; so that I preached to a large congregation
under the hill with perfect quietness.
Tues. 5.--I rode to Bradford. Wednesday, 6. I
preached at one in Great-Gomersal; in the evening at
Dewsbury. The congregation was as large as at Bradford,
and as attentive; although a few years since the people of
Daw-Green were as eminently savage and irreligious, as
even the colliers of Kingswood.
Thur. 7.--We had as hot a day as most I have known in
Georgia. However, about noon I rode to Horbury; but it
was impracticable to preach abroad. So we retired into the
new House; but this too was as hot as an oven. Some of the
people behaved exceeding ill at first; but it was soon over.
Aug. 1766.] JOURNAL, 261
In a few minutes the whole congregation was as serious and
attentive as that at Daw-Green.
Fri. 8.--I rode over to Huddersfield. The church,
though large, was exceeding hot, through the multitude of
people; on whom I enforced St. Paul’s words, “God forbid
that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ.” How we should have rode back, I know not; but
that the wind, which was in our face as we came, was again
in our face as we returned. At Birstal we found many of
our brethren from various parts. One of them was
mentioning a remarkable case:--David Prince, of Thorner,
near Leeds, had been stone-blind for many years, and was
without God in the world till past fourscore. At about
eighty-one he received remission of sins, and from that hour
he never lost the sense of it. When he was asked how he
did, his answer was, “Happier and happier.” In the eighty
fifth year of his age his spirit returned to God.
Sun. 10.--After Mr. Eastwood had read Prayers, I came
out into the churchyard, and preached to four times as
many as the church could contain, on, “Are not Abana and
Pharpar better than all the waters of Israel?” About
one I preached at Daw-Green. I judged the congregation,
closely wedged together, to extend forty yards one way, and
about an hundred the other. Now, suppose five to stand in
a yard square, they would amount to twenty thousand people.
I began preaching at Leeds, between five and six, to just
such another congregation. This was the hardest day’s work
I have had since I left London; being obliged to speak,
at each place, from the beginning to the end, to the utmost
extent of my voice. But my strength was as my day.
Tues. 12.--Our Conference began, and ended on Friday
evening. An happier Conference we never had, nor a more
profitable one. It was both begun and ended in love, and
with a solemn sense of the presence of God.
Sun. 17.--After preaching in Leeds at seven, I rode to
Birstal, and heard a sound useful sermon, on, “Come unto
me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden.” At one I
preached to an immense multitude, on, “Come, Lord Jesus!”
I then set out for Rotherham; but the next day I turned
off from the road I had designed to take, and, going on to
Leicester that night, on Wednesday, reached London.
It was at the earnest request of , whose heart God has
turned again, without any expectation of mine, that I came
hither so suddenly: And if no other good result from it but
our firm union with Mr. Whitefield, it is an abundant
recompence for my labour. My brother and I conferred with
him every day; and, let the honourable men do what they
please, we resolved, by the grace of God, to go on, hand in
hand, through honour and dishonour.
Sun. 24.--The chapel was sufficiently crowded, both
morning and afternoon, and God was eminently present. In
the evening I went to Brentford, and saw a remarkable
monument of mercy, --a man who, in the full career of sin,
was so hurt by a fall, that there was no hope of his life.
But, after deep repentance, God broke in upon his soul, and
gave him a better hope; so that he is now little concerned
about life or death, but praises God all the day long.
Monday, 25. We set out early from Brentford, and reached
Bath on Tuesday, in the afternoon.
Many were not a little surprised in the evening, at seeing
me in the Countess of H.’s chapel. The congregation was
not only large, but serious; and I fully delivered my own soul.
So I am in no concern, whether I preach there again, or no.
I have no choice concerning it.
Wed. 27.--I rode to Bristol, and the next day delivered the
management of Kingswood house to stewards on whom I could
depend. So I have cast an heavy load off my shoulders.
Blessed be God for able and faithful men, who will do his
work without any temporal reward |
Fri. 29.--In my way to Cornwall, I preached at Shepton
Mallet at nine, in Wincanton at one. I was throughly tired
before we came to Shaftesbury: However, at six I preached
in the new House, filled within and without, to the no small
astonishment, it seemed, of most of the hearers. But it was
a time of consolation, as well as conviction. I trust many
will experience both in this House.
Sat. 30.--We rode to Stallbridge, long the seat of war, by a
senseless, insolent mob, encouraged by their betters, so called,
to outrage their quiet neighbours. For what? Why, they
were mad: They were Methodists. So, to bring them to
their senses, they would beat their brains out. They broke
their windows, leaving not one whole pane of glass, spoiled
their goods, and assaulted their persons with dirt, and rotten
eggs, and stones, whenever they appeared in the street. But
Sept. 1766.] JOURNAL. 263
no Magistrate, though they applied to several, would show
them either mercy or justice. At length they wrote to me. I
ordered a lawyer to write to the rioters. He did so; but
they set him at nought. We then moved the Court of
King's Bench. By various artifices, they got the trial put
off, from one Assizes to another, for eighteen months. But
it fell so much the heavier on themselves, when they were
found guilty; and, from that time, finding there is law for
Methodists, they have suffered them to be at peace.
I preached near the main street, without the least disturb
ance, to a large and attentive congregation. Thence we rode
on to Axminster, but were throughly wet before we came
thither. The rain obliged me to preach within at six; but at
seven on Sunday morning, I cried in the market-place,
“The kingdom of God is at hand; repent ye, and believe
the Gospel.”
In the evening I preached in the street at Ashburton.
Many behaved with decency; but the rest, with such stupid
rudeness as I have not seen, for a long time, in any part of
England.
Mon. SEPTEMBER 1.--I came to Plymouth-Dock,
where, after heavy storms, there is now a calm. The
House, notwithstanding the new galleries, was extremely
crowded in the evening. I strongly exhorted the backsliders
to return to God; and I believe many received “the word
of exhortation.”
Tues. 2.--Being invited to preach in the Tabernacle at
Plymouth, I began about two in the afternoon. In the
evening I was offered the use of Mr. Whitefield's Room at
the Dock; but, large as it is, it would not contain the
congregation. At the close of the sermon, a large stone was
thrown in at one of the windows, which came just behind
me, and fell at my feet, the best place that could have been
found. So no one was either hurt or frightened, not many
knowing anything of the matter.
Wed. 3.--I rode to Medros, where there was, last year,
the most lively society in Cornwall. But they are decreased,
both in number and strength; many who were then strong
in the Lord, being now weak and faint. However, we had
a deeply serious congregation in the evening, and a remarkable
blessing at the meeting of the society.
Thur. 4.--At noon I preached in Truro. I was in hopes,
when Mr. Walker died, the enmity in those who were called his
people would have died also. But it is not so: They still
look upon us as rank heretics, and will have no fellowship with
us. In the evening I preached at Penryn, in the main street,
at the door of one of the chief gentlemen in the town. I never
saw such a congregation here before; and all seemed to hear as
for life.
Fri. 5.--I preached near Helstone, to an exceeding large
and serious congregation. What a surprising change is
wrought here also, within a few years, where a Methodist
Preacher could hardly go through the street without a shower
of stones |
Sat. 6.--At one I began preaching in a meadow adjoining
to Penzance. The whole congregation behaved well. The
old bitterness is gone, and perhaps, had it not been market
day, I might have had a quiet hearing in the market-place.
In the evening I preached at Newlyn. Small rain fell all
the time; but none went away.
Sun. 7.--At eight I preached in Mousehole, a large village
south-west from Newlyn. Thence I went to Buryan church,
and, as soon as the service was ended, preached near the church
yard, to a numerous congregation. Just after I began, I
saw a gentleman before me, shaking his whip, and vehemently
striving to say something. But he was abundantly too warm
to say anything intelligibly. So, after walking a while to and
fro, he wisely took horse and rode away.
The multitude of people at St. Just constrained me to
preach abroad, though it rained the whole time. But this
did not discourage the congregation, who not only stayed
till I had concluded, but were not in haste to go away then;
many still hovering about the place.
Tues. 9.-In riding to St. Ives, I called on one with whom
I used to lodge, two or three and twenty years ago, Alice
Daniel, at Rosemargay. Her sons are all gone from her;
and she has but one daughter left, who is always ill. Her
husband is dead; and she can no longer read her Bible, for
she is stone-blind. Yet she murmurs at nothing, but
cheerfully waits till her appointed time shall come. How
many of these jewels may lie hid, up and down; forgotten
of men, but precious in the sight of God!
In the evening I preached at St. Ives, a little above the
town, to the largest congregation I ever saw there. Indeed
Sept. 1766.] JOURNAL, 265
nearly the whole town seems convinced of the truth; yea, and
almost persuaded to be Christians.
Wed. 10.--I preached at Lelant about one, but the rain
drove us into the House; and at St. Ives, all I could do was
to preach to as many as the House would hold, and a few at
the door. But the next evening I stood in the meadow again,
and enforced those solemn words, “Come, Lord Jesus !”
Fri. 12.--I rode to St. Hilary, and in the evening preached
near the new House, on, “Awake, thou that sleepest.” In
returning to my lodging, it being dark, my horse was just
stepping into a tin-pit, when an honest man caught him by
the bridle, and turned his head the other way.
Sat. 13.--I preached at noon in the new House at Crowan,
it being a very stormy day. But I knew not what to do at
Redruth, in the evening: The House was far too small, and
the wind was exceeding high, and brought on frequent and
heavy showers. However, I chose the most convenient part of
the street; and we had but one short shower till I concluded.
Sun. 14.--I preached in St. Agnes at eight. The congre
gation in Redruth, at one, was the largest I ever had seen
there; but small, compared to that which assembled at five,
in the natural amphitheatre at Gwennap; far the finest I
know in the kingdom. It is a round, green hollow, gently
shelving down, about fifty feet deep; but I suppose it is two
hundred across one way, and near three hundred the other.
I believe there were full twenty thousand people; and, the
evening being calm, all could hear.
Mon. 15.--I preached at Cubert, and next morning rode
on to St. Columb. Being desired to break the ice here, I
began preaching, without delay, in a gentleman’s yard
adjoining to the main street. I chose this, as neither too
public nor too private. I fear the greater part of the audience
understood full little of what they heard. However, they
behaved with seriousness and good manners.
Hence I rode to Port-Isaac, now one of the liveliest places
in Cornwall. The weather being uncertain, I preached near
the House. But there was no rain while I preached, except
the gracious rain which God sent upon his inheritance.
Here Mr. Buckingham met me, who, for fear of offending
the Bishop, broke off all commerce with the Methodists. He
had no sooner done this, than the Bishop rewarded him by
turning him out of his curacy; which, had he continued to
walk in Christian simplicity, he would probably have had to
this day.
Wed. 17.--I twice stopped a violent bleeding from a cut,
by applying a brier-leaf. The Room at Launceston would
not near contain the congregation in the evening, to whom
I strongly applied the case of the impotent man at the pool
of Bethesda. Many were much affected; but O, how few
are willing to be made whole !
Thur. 18.--I rode to Collumpton, preached at six, and
then went on to Tiverton. Friday, 19, came a messenger
from Jo. Magor, dangerously ill at Sidmouth, four or five and
twenty miles off, to tell me he could not die in peace till he
had seen me. So the next morning, after preaching, I set
out, spent an hour with him, by which he was exceedingly
refreshed, and returned to Tiverton time enough to rest a
little before the evening preaching.
Sun. 21.--I preached, morning and evening, in the market
house, and at one in an open place at Bampton. Monday,
22. I preached in the street at Culmstock, to almost all the
inhabitants of the town. A little before six in the evening I
preached at Mr. Jones's door, in Middlesey. Many of the
hearers did once run well; some of whom resolve to set out
anew. Tuesday, 23. At eleven I preached to a large and
serious congregation at Lymsham-Green. When I concluded,
a Clergyman began to entertain the people with a dispute
concerning Lay-Preachers. In the instant began a violent
shower; so they left him to himself. But it was fair again in
the afternoon, and we had a pleasant ride to Bristol.
Sun. 28.--I preached in Princes-Street at eight, in Kings
wood at two, and at five near the new Square. The last
especially was an acceptable time; particularly while I was
explaining, “Neither can they die any more; but are the
children of God, being children of the resurrection.”
In the following days I preached at Pensford, Paulton,
Coleford, Buckland, Frome, Beckington, Freshford, and
Bradford. Sunday, October 5. At eight I administered
the sacrament at Lady H.’s chapel in Bath. At eleven I
preached there on those words in the Gospel for the day,
“Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” The word
was quick and powerful; and I trust many, even of the rich
and great, felt themselves sinners before God.
Several evenings this week I preached at Bristol on the
Oct. 1766.] JOURNAL. 267
Education of Children. Some answered all by that poor,
lame, miserable shift, “O, he has no children of his own l’”
But many, of a nobler spirit, owned the truth, and pleaded
guilty before God.
Thur. 9.--I waited on the good old Bishop of London
derry, and spent two or three hours in useful conversation.
In the evening I preached again at my Lady’s chapel to
another numerous congregation. Who knows but a few
among this gay multitude may “work out their salvation
with fear and trembling ?”
Fri. 10.--I took a ride to Cheltenham. It being too
cold to preach abroad, at six I preached in the chapel, and fully
declared the whole counsel of God. Afterwards I examined
the little society; and found the greater part of them lively
believers, and quite free from the bigotry which is common
among Churchmen, and still more among Dissenters. The
next day, after preaching at five and at eight in Gloucester,
I had a pleasant ride to Bristol.
Sun. 12.--I took my leave of Princes-Street for this season.
We had such a congregation at Kingswood at ten as I have
scarce seen there for these twenty years; and at two I was
obliged to preach abroad. Sunday, 19. I preached once more
in the Square; and in the morning, Monday, 20, left Bristol,
with a firm hope that both here and at Kingswood things
will now be conducted to the glory of God and the honour
of true religion. In the evening I preached an healing
sermon at Bath, on Colossians iii. 9. The next day I went on
to Salisbury, and preached in as rousing a manner as I could,
on, “One thing is needful.” Thursday, 23. I preached at
Romsey: The next day, at Winchester, Whitchurch, and
Basingstoke, where many attended at five on Saturday
morning. In the afternoon I came to London.
Sun. 26.--I preached at West-Street in the morning to a
crowded audience, and in the evening at the Foundery. How
pleasing would it be to play between Bristol and London,
and preach always to such congregations as these ! But what
account then should I give of my stewardship when I can
“be no longer steward?”
Mon. 27.--I rode to Wycombe. The Room was much
crowded, and yet could not contain the congregation. In the
morning, too, they flocked together in such a manner as had
not been seen here before. In the evening I preached at
Witney, (where a little company stand fast together,) and
thrice the next day, endeavouring to lay “line upon line,
and precept upon precept.”
Thur. 30.--At one I preached in Wattleton, and thence
rode with some difficulty, the wind being exceeding high, over
the mountain to Wycombe. The congregation was as before,
both for number and earnestness. So, at length we see the
fruit of our labour.
Fri. 31.--At my return to London, I found it needful to
hasten to Leytonstone; but I came too late. Miss Lewen
died the day before, after an illness of five days. Some hours
before, she witnessed that good confession,
Nature's last agony is o'er,
And cruel sin subsists no more.
Awhile after, she cried out earnestly, “Do you not see
him? There he is ! Glory ! glory ! glory ! I shall be
with him for ever,-for ever,-for ever !”
So died Margaret Lewen | a pattern to all young women
of fortune in England: A real Bible Christian. So she
“rests from her labours, and her works do follow her.”
Sat. NoveMBER 1.--“God, who hath knit together his
elect in one communion and fellowship,” gave us a solemn
season at West-Street (as usual) in praising him for all his
Saints. On this day in particular, I commonly find the
truth of these words:
The Church triumphant in his love,
Their mighty joys we know ;
They praise the Lamb in hymns above,
And we in hymns below.
Mon. 3.--I rode to Brentford, where all was quiet, both in
the congregation and the society. Tuesday, 4. I preached
at Brentford, Battersea, Deptford, and Welling, and examined
the several societies. Wednesday, 5. I rode by Shoreham to
Sevenoaks. In the little journeys which I have lately taken,
I have thought much on the huge encomiums which have
been for many ages bestowed on a country life. How have
all the learned world cried out,
O.fortunati nimium, sua si bona norint
Agricolae : *
*Too happy, if their happiness they knew !
Nov. 1766.] JOURNAL. 269
But, after all, what a flat contradiction is this to universal
experience! See that little house, under the wood, by
the river side | There is rural life in perfection. How
happy then is the farmer that lives there ! Let us take a
detail of his happiness. He rises with, or before, the sun,
calls his servants, looks to his swine and cows, then to his
stables and barns. He sees to the ploughing and sowing
his ground, in winter or in spring. In summer and
autumn he hurries and sweats among his mowers and
reapers. And where is his happiness in the mean time?
Which of these employments do we envy? Or do we
envy the delicate repast that succeeds, which the poet so
languishes for ?--
O quando faba, Pythagorae cognata, simulque
Uncta satis pingui ponentur oluscula lardo /
“O the happiness of eating beans well greased with fat
bacon / Nay, and cabbage too !”--Was Horace in his
senses when he talked thus, or the servile herd of his
imitators? Our eyes and ears may convince us there is not
a less happy body of men in all England than the country
farmers. In general, their life is supremely dull; and it is
usually unhappy too. For of all people in the kingdom,
they are most discontented; seldom satisfied either with God
Or man.
Mon. 10.--I set out early for Northampton. But before we
came to Luton, James Glasbrook met me, and informed me
that he had given notice of my preaching every day, at one
place or another, in Bedfordshire. Upon reflection, we thought
it best for Mr. Blackwell to go to Northampton, and for me to
keep the appointments which had been made. So I preached
in Luton at two, and in the evening at Sundon. Tuesday,
1f. I preached, between one and two, at a village called
Milbrook, to a company of plain, serious people; and in the
evening at Wotton-Pillidge, where several have already
found this word to be “the power of God unto salvation.”
Wednesday, 12. I preached at two in Lidlington, to another
company of plain country people. Thence we crossed over
to Copel, where is at present the most lively of all the little
societies in Bedfordshire. Thursday, 13. I rode to Bedford,
and in the evening spoke with more plainness, I may indeed
say roughness, than ever I did before, if haply God might
rouse some of these drowsy people. Friday, 14. I preached
at Luton; and on Saturday I returned to London.
Sun. 16.--I strongly inculcated family religion, the grand
desideratum among the Methodists. Many were ashamed
before God, and at length adopted Joshua’s resolution, “As
for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.”
Thur. 27.--I conversed with a young Clergyman full of
good resolutions. But I judge it impossible they can hold;
for he has not the least conception of his own weakness.
Sun. 30.--I preached on the Education of Children,
wherein we are so shamefully wanting. Many were now
deeply convinced of this. I hope they will not all stifle that
conviction.
Mon. DECEMBER 8.--I went to Canterbury, and on Wed
nesday, 10, to Dover. At all the sea-ports we have a
multitude of hearers. Is not this a token for good to the
nation? Surely mercy “embraces us on every side.” Will
it not likewise go through the land?
Thur. 11.--I preached at Dover, Sandwich, Ramsgate,
and Margate; on Friday, at Canterbury. I have not seen
this society so at unity among themselves for many years.
Saturday, 13. I left them with much satisfaction, and
cheerfully returned to London.
Sat. 20.--I spent an hour with ; just of the same
spirit as she was twenty years ago. So hitherto all the bad
labour of my small friends is lost.
Mon. 29.--At five in the morning I again began a course
of sermons on Christian Perfection; if haply that thirst after
it might return which was so general a few years ago. Since
that time, how deeply have we grieved the Holy Spirit of
God! Yet two or three have lately received his pure love;
and a few more are brought to the birth.
Thur. JANUARY 1, 1767.--The whole society met in the
evening in Spitalfields church, and solemnly renewed their
covenant with God. Sunday, 4. Iburied the remains of Mary
Clarke, (formerly Gardiner,) who, having been much hurt in
the late contests, was, during a lingering illness, first throughly
convinced of her fall from God, and afterward throughly
restored. She then vehemently exhorted all mot to stray from
the fold; and died rejoicing in the full salvation of God.
Sun. 11.--I made a push for the lending-stock; speaking
more strongly than ever I had done before. The effect was,
Feb. 1767.] JOURNAL. 271
that it was raised from about fifty, to one hundred and twenty
pounds.
Tues. 20.--I buried the remains of Ann Wheeler, who,
while she was hearing the preaching in Moorfields, four or
five and twenty years ago, was struck in the forehead with a
stone, being then big with child. The daughter with whom
she then went, retains the mark of the stone in her forehead
to this day.
Wed. 21.--I had a conversation with an ingenious man who
proved to a demonstration, that it was the duty of every man
that could, to be “clothed in purple and fine linen,” and
to “fare sumptuously every day;” and that he would do
abundantly more good hereby than he could do by “feeding
the hungry and clothing the naked.” O the depth of human
understanding ! What may not a man believe if he will ?
Sat. 31.--From the words of our blessed Lord, “He that
followeth me shall not walk in darkness,” I largely showed
that God never deserts any man, unless he first deserts God;
and that, abstracting from the bodily disorders on the one
hand, and violent temptation on the other, every believer
may be happy as well as holy, and walk in the light all the
days of his life.
Thur. FEBRUARY 5.--I heard a melancholy relation:--
One who had run well for many years, a year or two ago took
violent offence at a person she thought had used her ill. A
week or two since she was taken ill. But as her illness
increased, so did her anger. She often cried out, “I cannot
forgive | I will not forgive 1” and intermixed horrid shrieks,
till she died.
Tues. 10.--I baptized a young woman who had been
educated among the Anabaptists. God bore witness to his
ordinance, and gave her such a blessing as she could not
find words to express.
Thur. 12.--I preached at Leytonstone. O what an house
of God is here ! Not only for decency and order, but for the
life and power of religion I I am afraid there are very few
such to be found in all the King's dominions.
Sun. 15.--I buried the remains of Richard Morris, who
had been in the society twenty years, and was a right honest
man, but never convinced of sin till death began to look him
in the face: And then he rather saw than felt his need of
Christ. Yet when he called upon him, even in his dull way,
he was soon assured of his love, and continued praising and
rejoicing till his spirit returned to God.
Mon. 16.--I rode to Colchester; and found more life there
than for several years. Why should we despair of seeing good
done in any place How soon can God turn the wilderness
into a fruitful field ! Wednesday, 18. I preached at
Herringswell, and the next day came to Norwich. Here I
spent a few days much to my satisfaction, finding the people
far more settled than ever. Monday, 23. I rode to Yarmouth,
and found the society, after the example of Mr. W p, had
entirely left the Church. I judged it needful to speak largely
upon that head. They stood reproved, and resolved, one
and all, to go to it again.
Tues. 24.--I was desired to ride over to Lowestoft. The
House would not contain one-fourth of the people; so that I
was obliged to preach in the open air; and all behaved with
great seriousness.
Wed. 25.--I took a list of the present society in Norwich,
consisting of one hundred and sixty members. But I have far
more comfort in it now than when it consisted of six hundred.
These know what they are about; and the greater part are
not ignorant of Satan’s devices.
Thur. 26.--I set out for London. A good part of the day
we had furious wind and rain full in our faces: However,
we pushed on to Lakenheath. Notwithstanding the severity
of the weather, the church was pretty well filled in the evening.
The next evening we reached Hockerhill, and London on
Saturday in the afternoon.
On Ash-Wednesday, MARCH 4, I dined at a friend’s with
Mr. Whitefield, still breathing nothing but love. Thursday,
5. I at length obliged Dr. D. by entering into the lists with
him. The letter I wrote (though not published till two
or three weeks after) was as follows:
“To the Editor of Lloyd's Evening Post.
“MANY times the publisher of the ‘Christian Magazine’
has attacked me without fear or wit; and hereby he has
convinced his impartial readers of one thing at least,-that
(as the vulgar say) his fingers itch to be at me; that he has a
passionate desire to measure swords with me. But I have
other work upon my hands: I can employ the short remainder
of my life to better purpose.
March, 1767.] JOURNAL, 273
“The occasion of his late attack is this:--Five or six and
thirty years ago, I much admired the character of a perfect
Christian drawn by Clemens Alexandrinus. Five or six and
twenty years ago, a thought came into my mind, of drawing
such a character myself, only in a more scriptural manner,
and mostly in the very words of Scripture: This I entitled,
‘The Character of a Methodist, believing that curiosity
would incite more persons to read it, and also that some
prejudice might thereby be removed from candid men. But
that none might imagine I intended a panegyric either on
myself or my friends, I guarded against this in the very title
page, saying, both in the name of myself and them, ‘Not
as though I had already attained, either were already perfect.’
To the same effect I speak in the conclusion, ‘These are
the principles and practices of our sect; these are the marks
of a true Methodist; i. e., a true Christian, as I immediately
after explain myself: “By these alone do those who are in
derision so called desire to be distinguished from other men.’
(P. 11.) ‘By these marks do we labour to distinguish
ourselves from those whose minds or lives are not according
to the Gospel of Christ.’ (P. 12.)
“Upon this Rusticulus, or Dr. Dodd, says, “A Methodist,
according to Mr. Wesley, is one who is perfect, and sinneth
not in thought, word, or deed.’
“Sir, have me excused. This is not ‘according to Mr.
Wesley.’ I have told all the world I am not perfect; and
yet you allow me to be a Methodist. I tell you flat, I have
not attained the character I draw. Will you pin it upon me
in spite of my teeth?
“But Mr. Wesley says, the other Methodists have. I say
no such thing. What I say, after having given a scriptural
account of a perfect Christian, is this:--‘By these marks the
Methodists desire to be distinguished from other men: By
these we labour to distinguish ourselves.” And do not you
yourself desire and labour after the very same thing?
“But you insist, ‘Mr. Wesley affirms the Methodists’
(i.e., all Methodists) ‘to be perfectly holy and righteous.”
Where do I affirm this? Not in the Tract before us. In
the front of this I affirm just the contrary; and that I affirm
it any where else is more than I know. Be pleased, Sir, to
point out the place: Till this is done, all you add (bitterly
enough) is mere brutum fulmen; and the Methodists (so
called) may still declare, (without any impeachment of their
sincerity,) that they do not come to the holy table “trusting
in their own righteousness, but in God’s manifold and great
mercies.’ I am, Sir,
“Yours, &c.,
Sun. 8.--In the evening I left London, and reached Bath
on Tuesday, in the afternoon, time enough to wait on that
venerable man, the Bishop of Londonderry. After spending
an agreeable and a profitable hour with him, my brother
read Prayers, and I preached at Lady H.’s chapel. I know
not when I have seen a more serious or more deeply attentive
congregation. Is it possible? Can the Gospel have place
where Satan’s throne is?
Thursday, 12, and the two following days, I examined the
society in Bristol. Still I find the greatest part to be in peace
and love, and none blamable as to their outward conversation;
but life, power, and “struggling into God,” are wanting: Few
are agonizing to be altogether Christians.
Mon. 16.--Finding no ship which could take over me and
my horses, I set out, with Thomas Dancer, for Liverpool.
Wednesday, 18. I reached Wednesbury, but with difficulty;
for my horse, which I left in October, to rest for six months,
had been rode all the winter, and was now galled, jaded, and
worn to skin and bones.
Thur. 19.--Pushing through the rain and violent wind, we
came in the evening to Nantwich. But I knew not where to
go, till a good woman in the street asked me, if Mr. Wesley
was come; and conducted me to the place where the people
were waiting. Many were noisy at first, because they could
not get in: But when they did, all was silent.
Fri. 20.--I rode on through more storms to Liverpool: But
here too I found no ship to carry my horses; so, Monday, 23,
I set out for Portpatrick. This day we rode but about forty
miles; the next to Kendal, where I preached at six, and spent
a comfortable evening at Serjeant Southwell's. Wednesday, 25.
The rain, which began yesterday moon, continued till noon
to-day, without intermission: But though driven against us by
a strong wind, it was nothing so troublesome as the piercing
cold, while we afterwards rode between the snowy mountains,
the road also being covered with snow. However, after a short
bait at Keswick, we reached Cockermouth in the afternoon.
April, 1767.] JoURNAL. 275
The mare T. Dancer rode being now quite lame, I left him
to cross over at Whitehaven; and Mr. Atlay, who came just in
time, offered to accompany me to Portpatrick. Thursday, 26.
We rode through miserable roads to Solway-Frith: But the
guides were so deeply engaged in a cock-fight, that none could
be procured to show us over. We procured one, however,
between three and four: But there was more sea than we
expected; so that, notwithstanding all I could do, my legs and
the skirts of my coat were in the water. The motion of the
waves made me a little giddy; but it had a stranger effect on
Mr. Atlay: He lost his sight, and was just dropping off his
horse, when one of our fellow-travellers caught hold of him.
We rode on nine or ten miles, and lodged at a village called
Ruthwell. Friday, 27. We rode by Dumfries and the Bridge
of Orr, over the Military-Way, to Gatehouse-of-Fleet: But
the house was filled with so noisy company, that we expected
little rest. Before eleven, however, I fell asleep, and heard
nothing more till between three and four in the morning.
Sat. 28.--We rode to Portpatrick. Sunday, 29. The packet
boat was ready in the morning, but waited for the mail, hour
after hour, till past three in the afternoon. Hereby we avoided
a violent storm, and had only what they called a fresh breeze;
however, this breeze drove us to Donaghadee (thirty miles) in
about three hours.
Mon. 30.--I rode to Newtown; and in the evening preached
in the market-house, to a large number of serious hearers.
The society, I found, had been shattered in pieces, but were
uniting again. To these I spoke more particularly in the
morning. It may be they will yet have ears to hear.
Tues. 31.--After meeting the society at Belfast, I rode on
to Lisburn. At six I preached in the Linen-Hall, (a small
Square so called,) as also the two following evenings. We
had many people of fashion there, and the congregation
increased continually. Friday, APRIL 3. At the end of
Dromore I met Robert Williams, who showed me the way to
Newry. A little after six I went to the market-house;
but when I began I had only four hearers. A good number
assembled before I had done, only none of the Gentry; they
were hindered by a business of more importance,--dressing
for the assembly |
Sun. 5.--I was in hopes of reaching Tanderagee before
the church began; but it was farther off than we expected.
276 REv. J. westEY’s [April, 1767.
At five in the evening we had the largest congregation I had
seen in Ulster; and I believe many found much of the
presence of God, but still more at the meeting of the society.
Monday, 6. The congregation was surprisingly large this
morning, and still larger every morning and evening. Wed
nesday, 8. I preached at noon to our old society at Terry
hugan, the mother-church of all these parts. Thursday, 9.
The House would not contain the people at Tanderagee,
even at five in the morning; so I went to the market-house,
where God gave us a solemn and affectionate parting.
I was not glad to hear that some of the Seceders had settled
in these parts also. Those of them who have yet fallen in my
way are more uncharitable than the Papists themselves. I
never yet met a Papist who avowed the principle of murdering
heretics: But a Seceding Minister being asked, “Would not
you, if it was in your power, cut the throats of all the Method
ists?” replied directly, “Why, did not Samuel hew Agag in
pieces before the Lord?” I have not yet met a Papist in
this kingdom, who would tell me to my face, all but themselves
must be damned. But I have seen Seceders enough, who
make no scruple to affirm, none but themselves could be
saved. And this is the natural consequence of their doctrine:
For as they hold, 1. That we are saved by faith alone;
2. That faith is, the holding such and such opinions; it
follows, all who do not hold those opinions have no faith,
and, therefore, cannot be saved.
About noon I preached near Dawson's Grove, to a large
and serious congregation; but to a far larger in the evening
at Kilmaraty. I do not wonder the Gospel runs so swiftly
in these parts. The people in general have the finest natural
tempers which I ever knew; they have the softness and
courtesy of the Irish, with the seriousness of the Scots, and
the openness of the English.
Fri. 10.--At one I preached at Portadown, a place not
troubled with any kind of religion. I stood in the street and
cried, “Now God commandeth all men everywhere to repent.”
The people gathered from all sides, and when I prayed,
kneeled down upon the stones, rich and poor, all round me.
In the evening I preached again at Kilmaraty. At five in
the morning the House was well filled; and a little after six
I cheerfully commended them to the grace of God.
Sat. 11.--About three I preached at a village called The
April, 1767.] JOURNAL, 277
Grange. The people came from several miles round, and
seemed to hear with the spirit, and with the understanding also.
At six I preached near Cock-Hill; where at nine in the
morning, Sunday, 12, we had a congregation from all parts.
But this was more than doubled at five in the evening. All
were serious, and, according to the custom of the country,
when I went to prayer, immediately kneeled, though it was
in the high road. I believe not a few were deeply wounded.
O may none heal the wound slightly |
Mon. 13.--I preached at Mount-Roe, a gentleman’s seat,
about three miles from Cock-Hill; Tuesday, 14, at Clanmain.
This, I believe, was, two years since, the only society in these
parts. I think there are now one or two and twenty, within
the compass of ten miles.
Wed. 15.--I rode to Armagh. Half an hour before the time
of preaching, an officer came, and said, “Sir, the Sovereign
(or Mayor) orders me to inform you, you shall not preach in
his town.” In order to make the trial, I walked to the market
house at six. I had just begun when the Sovereign came.
I was informed his name was Harcourt. He was talking
very loud, and tolerably fast, when a gentleman came and
said, “Sir, if you are not allowed to preach here, you are
welcome to preach in Mr. M“Gough’s avenue.” Mr.
M“Gough, one of the chief merchants in the town, himself
showed us the way. I suppose thrice as many people flocked
together there, as would have heard me in the market-house.
So did the wise providence of God draw good out of evil!
And his word had indeed free course.
Thur. 16.--About one I preached to a large congregation at
Dungannon, in the county of Tyrone; and in the evening,
before the gate of the great old house, at Castle-Caulfield.
The society here, the first-fruits of this county, seemed to be
all alive. Early in the morning I took horse, and got to
Londonderry just at seven, where the congregation was
waiting for me. My voice was weak; but I think most of
them could hear; and some, I trust, heard the voice of God.
Sat. 18.--I found we were still honourable men here, some
of eminence in the city being both “hearers” and “doers of
the word.” I employed Monday, Tuesday, and part of
Wednesday, in speaking severally to the members of the
society, and was glad to find the greater part of them had
tasted that the Lord is gracious. Saturday, 25. I rode to
Mr. Knox's farm, and preached to a little company, on,
“By grace are ye saved through faith.” I spoke exceeding
plain to them at Derry in the evening, on, “How long halt
ye between two opinions?” And more plain, if possible,
both morning and evening, on Sunday, 26. Surely this is
an understanding people. But it is only love that edifies.
Mon. 27.--I rode to Augher, and preached at six in the
Castle-yard, to a large and deeply-serious congregation.
Tuesday, 28. I preached near Athenacly, after riding
through one of the finest countries in the kingdom. Wed
nesday, 29. A little beyond Swadlingbar I found a lively
congregation of plain country-people, as simple and artless as
if they had lived upon the Welsh mountains. So has God
“chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise.”
Thur. 30.--Some of the chief persons in the town desiring
I would give them a sermon there, I went thither in the
morning. A large room was offered; but it was quickly so
full, and so hot, that I was obliged to go out into the street.
I had hardly named my text, before a poor Papist, at a small
distance from me, began blowing a horn. But a gentleman
stepping up, snatched his horn away, and without ceremony
knocked him down. In the evening I preached in the
country again, to a still larger congregation: And God made
his word quick and powerful. Many were wounded, and
many comforted.
Fri. MAY 1.--We rode by a large seat, elegantly built, and
finely situated. But, to my surprise, the gates of the grand
avenue were painted blue, green, and yellow, like a child’s
rattle. Surely the owner has never seen the pretty bauble;
but will no one inform him of it? In the evening I preached
in the market-house at Sligo, to a larger congregation, as well
as better behaved, than when I was here before. The next
evening was exceeding cold and blustering. However, the
Provost refusing me the use of the Court-House, abundance
of people stood with me in the street, and most of them
behaved well. Sunday, 3. I preached, morning and evening,
in the market-house; and had much hope, both from the
number and behaviour of the hearers, that, even here, our
labour will not be in vain.
Mon. 4.--We rode to Castlebar, thirty old Irish, about fifty
six English, miles. Between six and seven I began preaching
in the Court-House; but few of the rich were there. Many
May, 1767.] JOURNAL, 279
of these dare not hear me above once: They find it is playing
with edged tools. Many of the poor were present at five in the
morning, and many more, both rich and poor, in the evening.
And “the power of the Lord was present to heal:” But how
many rejected his “counsel against themselves?”
Wed. 6.--I rode to Newport, and preached in the evening,
and at six in the morning. Rich and poor behaved extremely
well, and seemed “almost persuaded” to be Christians. In
the evening I took my leave of the congregation at Castlebar,
by speaking from those words, “Come, Lord Jesus!” But
who will abide his coming in the clouds? Those who are
partakers of his holiness.
Fri. 8.--We rode to Galway,-above fifty English miles.
It rained almost every step of the way. I preached at
Ballinrobe in the Court-House between eight and nine, and
at Galway about six. Colonel E , and all his family,
were there. Perhaps a word might reach their hearts.
Sat. 9.--I rode to Ennis, but found the preaching had been
discontinued, and the society was vanished away. So having
no business there, I left it in the morning, preached at Clare
about eight, and in the evening at Limerick. The continued
rain kept me from preaching abroad this week; and I was
scandalized at the smallness of the congregation in the House.
I am afraid my glorying, touching many of these societies,
is at an end. Almost throughout the province of Ulster I
found the work of God increasing; and not a little in
Connaught, particularly at Sligo, Castlebar, and Galway.
But in Munster, a land flowing with milk and honey, how
widely is the case altered ! At Ennis, the god of this world
has wholly prevailed; at Clare there is but a spark left; and
at Limerick itself, I find only the remembrance of the fire
which was kindled two years ago. And yet one of the two
Preachers who was here last was almost universally admired !
But, alas ! how little does this avail! “He is the best
Physician,” said a sensible man, “not who talks best, or who
writes best, but who performs the most cures.”
Sun. 17.--The weather being fair, I took my stand in the
Old-Camp, and had, I believe, as many hearers as all the
preceding week put together. There was a solemn awe
throughout the congregation, and I began to hope, God would
revive his work. Monday, 18. I spoke to the members of
the society severally; most of them appeared to be honest
and upright. But a general faintness seemed to have spread
among them; there was no zeal, no vigour of grace.
Thur. 21.--I preached about noon at Ballygarame, to what
is left of the poor Palatines. Many are gone to America;
many scattered up and down in various parts of the kingdom.
Every where they are patterns of industry and frugality. In
the evening I preached at Newmarket. Sunday, 24. The
Old-Camp would ill contain the congregation, closely wedged
in together. Afterwards we had a solemn hour at the
meeting of the society; in which God caused many of the
bones which had been broken to rejoice. So they are set
upon their feet once again. Now let them run with patience
the race set before them.
Mon. 25.--I rode to Shronill, and preached at twelve to
the largest congregation I have ever seen there. Thence
we crossed the country to Kilfinnan. I had hardly begun to
speak, when a young person, a kind of a gentleman, came,
and took great pains to make a disturbance. Mr. Dancer
mildly desired him to desist; but was answered with a volley
of oaths and a blow. One of the town then encountered
him, and beat him well. But the noise preventing my being
heard, I retired a few hundred yards, with the serious part of
the congregation, and quietly finished my discourse.
Tues. 26.--I went on to Cork, and on Thursday, 28, to
Bandon. This evening I preached in the House; the next,
in the main street: But the wind was so high and so cold,
that none either could or would bear it but those who really
desired to save their souls. I judged the House would hold
these: So the next evening I preached within; and when the
benches were removed, it held the greatest part of the congre
gation: And those who could not get in heard tolerably well,
either at the doors or windows. Sunday, 31. We had most
of them again at seven; and I took my leave of them with
much satisfaction, after having strongly enforced, “To-day
if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.”
I would fain have preached abroad at Cork in the evening,
but the wind and rain would not permit. Two years ago I
left above three hundred in the society; I find an hundred
and eighty-seven. What has occasioned so considerable a
reduction? I believe the real cause is this:--
Between two and three years ago, when the society was
nearly as low as it is now, Thomas Taylor and William
June, 1767.] JOURNAL. 281
Pennington came to Cork. They were zealous men, and
sound Preachers; full of activity, and strict in discipline,
without respect of persons. They set up meetings for prayer
in several places, and preached abroad at both ends of the city.
Hearers swiftly increased; the society increased; so did the
number both of the convinced and the converted. I came
when the flame was at the height, and preached abroad, in
the heart of the city, on the south side of it, near the barracks,
and several times in Blackpool, which lies on the north side
of it. More and more were stirred up, and there was a
greater awakening here than in any part of the kingdom.
But misunderstandings crept in between the Leaders, and
between some of them and the Preachers. And these increased
seven-fold, when one of the Leaders was expelled the society;
some believing him faulty, some not, and neither side having
patience with the other. Hence a flame of anger succeeded
the flame of love, and many were destroyed by it. At the same
time some of our brethren learned a new opinion, and warmly
propagated it. This heat was almost as destructive as the
former; and the effect of both was, the Spirit of God was
grieved; his blessing was withheld, and of course the flock
was scattered. When they are convinced of their sin, and
humbled before him, them, and not before, he will return.
Wed, JUNE 3.--As it was fair, though the wind was high
and extremely sharp, I preached in an open place at Black
pool, to a large number of quiet hearers. On the three
following evenings the wind and rain confined us in the
House, much against my will; as those who wanted us most
could not or would not come thither.
JUNE 7.--(Being Whit-Sunday.) The weather turning
fair, between four and five in the afternoon I began preaching
in George's Street, to such a congregation as that in the Old
Camp at Limerick. A solemn awe sat on the faces of the
whole assembly while I explained, “If any man thirst, let
him come unto me and drink.” Surely some of them found
the promise fulfilled, and did drink of the living water |
Mon. 8.--I rode to Youghall. When I was here two
years ago, a flame was kindled among the people: But it was
gone out. And I could not wonder at it; for they have
scarce had any preaching since. I purposed staying only a
night; but, observing the number and deep attention of the
congregation, I stayed another day, and on Tuesday, 9,
282 REv. J. wesDEY’s [June, 1767.
preached in the Exchange again. The hearers were much
increased, and all but a few gentlemen, so called, behaved
with great seriousness. Wednesday, 10. After preaching
to a multitude of people, I took horse, and in the evening
of a very hot day reached Waterford.
Here I found a small, poor, dead society, and but an handful
of even dull, careless hearers. However, I preached in the
yard, and found more life among them than I expected. In
the morning I spoke to the several members of the society,
some of whom seemed much devoted to God. I desired Mr.
Morgan to preach at noon. God gave him acceptable words;
and the whole congregation, rich and poor, appeared to be
greatly moved. They seemed to be still more affected in the
evening. What pity, that this should pass away like a cloud!
Fri. 12.--We rode to Kilkenny. The sun was exceeding
hot; but did not incommode us much, as we had the wind in
our face all the way. The congregation at the Town-Hall in
the evening was large and tolerably serious; a few of the
Gentry excepted, who seemed neither to understand, nor care
for any of these things. We had great part of them at five
in the morning. At noon, when Mr. Morgan preached, I
expected to have seen the largest company of all; but I was
mistaken: The ladies could not rise so soon; at least they
could not huddle on their clothes fit to be seen. In the
evening I spoke exceeding plain, both to the rich and poor:
And a few, at least, received the truth in love. But who
will endure to the end?
Sun. 14.--In the evening I preached at Birr, to a wilder
congregation than I ever saw at Kilkenny. However, as I
stood near the barracks, the number of soldiers that attended
kept them so far in awe, that they durst only laugh and make
a little noise, till the whole body of the Papists ran away
together. The rest were then tolerably attentive, and grew
more and more serious till I concluded.
Mon. 15.--I rode through a pleasant and well-cultivated
country to Aghrim. For many years I have not seen so
large a congregation here, and so remarkably well-behaved.
At the prayer, both before and after sermon, all of them
kneeled upon the grass. A few of the poor Papists only
remained standing, at a distance from the rest of the people.
These would come in droves at every place, if the Priests,
as well as the King, would grant liberty of conscience.
June, 1767.] JOURNAL. 283
At the desire of the good old widow, Mrs. M-, I went
with Mr. S to C . Lord and Lady M- were there
before us; to whom I was probably
A not-expected, much-unwelcome guest.
But whatsoever it was to them, it was a heavy afternoon to
me; as I had no place to retire to, and so was obliged to be in
genteel company, for two or three hours together. O what
a dull thing is life without religion | I do not wonder that
time hangs heavy upon the hands of all who know not God,
unless they are perpetually drunk with noise and hurry of
one kind or another.
Wed. 17.--We came to Athlone. Here the scene was
changed. I was among those that both feared and loved God;
but to this day they have not recovered the loss which they
sustained, when they left off going to church. It is true
they have long been convinced of their mistake: Yet the fruit
of it still remains; so that there are very few who retain that
vigour of spirit which they before enjoyed.
At seven I preached in the new House, which Mr. S. has
built entirely at his own expense. The congregation was, as
usual, both large and serious. I rested the four following days,
only preaching morning and evening. Sunday, 21. We had a
solemn meeting of the society at five. After preaching at eight
I would willingly have gone to church, but was informed there
had been no Service for near two years, and would be none for
a year or two longer, the inside of the church wanting to be
repaired: In the evening I preached in the barracks. I know
not that ever I saw such a congregation at Athlone before;
rich and poor, Protestants and Papists, gathered together from
every side; and deep attention sat on all, while I explained
that solemn declaration, (part of the Gospel for the day,) “If
they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead.”
It was about this time that a remarkable passage happened
at Macclesfield, in Cheshire. One Ellen Stanyers, a young
woman of that town, very religious in her own way, but quite a
stranger to the Scripture-way of salvation, had her work from
one of the shops in the town. A young man belonging to the
same shop fell in love with her. Fearing lest her refusing him
would disoblige her master, she gave him encouragement, and
afterwards, though she never intended it, promised to marry
him. One day, as she was sitting at her work, this sin was
brought to her remembrance, and lay so exceeding heavy upon
her mind that she was utterly distressed. She took her work,
and carried it to her master, telling him, she had destroyed her
soul with it. At the same time she told the young man, she
was resolved never to have him. He came to her and said,
“If you do not keep your.word, I will hang myself at your
door; and then I will come and take you away with me to the
devil.” She was so frighted she fell into black despair. Her
father carried her to a Clergyman, and afterwards to another,
who seemed to pity her case, but knew not how to comfort
her. Willing to try every way, he ordered one to read to
her Burkitt upon the New Testament, till she cried, “Take
it away; I cannot bear it!” and attempted to run away:
But her father held her; and, when she struggled, beat her,
and told her she should hear it, whether she would or no.
She grew worse and worse; could neither eat, drink, nor
sleep; and pined away to a mere skeleton. She wandered
about, as one distracted, in the fields and lanes, seeking rest,
but finding none. She was exceedingly tempted to destroy
herself; but that thought came into her mind, “If I do, I
shall leap into hell immediately. I must go thither; but I
will keep out of it as long as I can.” She was wandering about
one day, when a person met her, and advised her to hear the
Methodists. Although she hated them, yet she was willing
to do anything for ease, and so one evening came to the
preaching. After the service was over, she desired to speak to
the Preacher, Mr. Pawson; but she talked quite wildly.
However, he encouraged her to come to the Saviour of
sinners, and cry to him for deliverance. “The next day” (so
Mr. P. continues the account) “about twelve of us met
together, and prayed with her. I found great freedom, and a
full confidence that God would deliver her. After prayer, she
said, ‘I never felt my heart pray before. I felt my heart go
along with the Preacher's words; they have done me good at
my heart. My despair is all gone, I have a hope that I shall
be saved. The next morning two or three prayed with her
again. She spent all the day with one or another of the
Methodists, and did not go home till night. Her father then
asked, “Nelly, where have you been all this time?” She
answered, ‘I have been among the Methodists.” “The
Methodists!’ said he, ‘have you got any good there?” She
June, 1767.] JOURNAL, 285
replied, ‘Yes, I bless God I have. I now hope I shall be
saved. ‘Well, said he, ‘I care not where you go, if you
only get relief. She then went to bed, but could not sleep.
While she was meditating on what she had heard, those
words were brought to her mind, ‘Is there no balm in
Gilead? Is there no Physician there?” With the words
the Lord spoke peace to her soul; and in one and the same
moment all pain and sorrow fled away, and she was entirely
healed, both body and mind. Early in the morning she
came to the house of one of our friends, and, clapping her
hands together, cried out in an ecstasy of joy, ‘O my Jesus,
my Jesus, my Jesus! What is it that he has done for me?
I feel he has forgiven all my sins. Taking up an hymn
book, she opened it on those words:--
I the chief of sinners am,
But Jesus died for me !
She was quite transported, being overwhelmed with peace
and joy unspeakable. At the same time she was restored to
the full use of her reason, and in a little while was strong
and healthy as ever. She immediately desired to be admitted
into the society, and for about a year enjoyed unspeakable
happiness. She then received a call from her Beloved, and
died full of faith and love.”
Tues. 23.--About one I preached in the market-place at
Clara. I admired the seriousness of the whole congregation.
Indeed, one or two gentlemen appeared quite unconcerned;
but the presence of the greater gentlemen kept them within
bounds: So they were as quiet as if they had been--at the
play-house.
This and the following evening I preached in the market
place at Tullamore. Thursday, 25. I was desired to look
at the monument lately erected for the Earl of Charleville.
It observes, that he was the last of his family, the great
Moores of Croghan. But how little did riches profit either
him, who died in the strength of his years, or his heir, who
was literally overwhelmed by them; being so full of care, that
sleep departed from him, and he was restless day and night,
till, after a few months, life itself was a burden, and an
untimely death closed the scene !
In the evening I preached at Mount-Mellick, near the
market-house. The congregation was exceeding large; and
God made his word “quick and powerful, and sharper than
a two-edged sword.”
Fri. 26.--Finding some of the most earnest persons in the
society were deeply prejudiced against each other, I desired
them to come face to face, and laboured much to remove their
prejudice. I used both argument and persuasion; but it was
all in vain. Perceiving that reasoning profited nothing, we
betook ourselves to prayer. On a sudden the mighty power
of God broke in upon them. The angry ones on both sides
burst into tears, and fell on each other’s necks. All anger
and prejudice vanished away, and they were as cordially
united as ever.
Sat. 27.--The congregation in the market-house at Port
arlington was widely different from that at Mount-Mellick. I
endeavoured to suit my subject to my audience, preaching
from, “Gallio cared for none of these things;” but some of
them were quite above conviction. So, finding that they had
neither sense nor good manners, (of religion I did not suspect
them,) the next day I adjourned to the shell of our new
House, in which I preached morning and evening. And
here the greatest part of the congregation, both Papists and
Protestants, behaved with decency.
Mon. 29.--We took horse about a quarter past three, and
before eight reached Coolylough. At twelve I preached in
the shady walk; afterwards we had the Quarterly Meeting.
I found no reason to complain of any of the societies, only
they want more life and zeal.
Tues. 30.--I observed more good manners at Tyrrel’s Pass,
in rich as well as poor, than at Portarlington. Wednesday,
JULY 1. A friend carried me to Belvidere, a seat built on the
side of a clear lake, with walks and gardens adjoining, so
curiously laid out as to exceed even the late Earl of Charle
ville's. One would scarce think it possible to have such a
variety of beauties in so small a compass. But
How soon, alas ! will these “upbraid
Their transitory master dead!”
We went on to Molingar, where for many years no
Methodist Preacher could appear. The Sessions-House here
was used as a guard-house. I sent to the Commanding
Officer, and desired leave to preach there. This he not only
gave, but came himself. So did many of the soldiers, as well
July, 1767.] JOURNAL. 287
as the townsmen. In the evening, notwithstanding the cold
and blustering winds, I was obliged to preach abroad at
Tyrrel's Pass. But the rain on the two following evenings
drove us into the House at Edinderry. Saturday, 4. Having
now finished my circuit, I went on cheerfully to Dublin.
Sun. 5.--Our House was throughly filled, a sight which
I have seldom seen. Friday, 10, we observed as a day of
fasting and prayer. It was at our last meeting that we found
the answer of our prayers. It seemed as if the windows of
heaven were opened; the Spirit of grace and supplication was
poured out. Many were filled with consolation; and many
who had grown weary resolved to set out anew.
Tues. 14.--A poor backslider, whom I found ten days ago
dying in black despair, told me, “Now I am not afraid to
die. I see Jesus just before me, and his face is all glory.”
Instances of this kind do by no means prove that a saint
cannot fall, even for ever; but only that God is “pitiful, and
of tender mercy, not willing any should perish.”
Thur. 16.--About ten I reached Donard, seven or eight
and twenty English miles from Dublin. Standing under some
shady trees, I enforced upon a serious congregation, “All
things are ready; come unto the marriage.” From hence
I rode on to Baltinglass, and preached on, “By grace are
ye saved through faith.” It was sultry hot as we rode to
Carlow; so that I was weary and faint when we came in :
But I soon recovered, and at seven preached in the Sessions
House, to a numerous congregation. But the greater part
of them were like blocks, and some like wild asses’ colts. I
was constrained to reprove them sharply. They received it
well, and behaved with more decency.
Fri. 17.--We lost our way in setting out of the town. It
rained most of the day: However, this was far better than
sultry heat. In the evening we returned to Dublin.
In my scraps of time this week I read over that wonderful
poem, “Fingal.” If it is genuine, if it is really extant (as
many assure me it is) in the Erse language, it is an amazing
proof of a genius in those barbarous times, little inferior to
Homer or Virgill
Mon. 20.--A friend showed me the apartments in the Castle,
the residence of the Lord-Lieutenant. The Duke of Bedford
made a noble addition to the lodgings, which are now both
grand and convenient. But the furniture surprised me not a
little: It is by no means equal to the building. In England,
many gentlemen of five hundred a year would be utterly
ashamed of it.
Tues. 21.--I received an account of a young woman, the
substance of which was as follows:
“KATHERINE MURRAY was born February 2, 1729,
at Carrick-on-Suir. She feared God from a child, and
abstained from lying and speaking bad words. When about
thirteen, she stole some twigs of gooseberry-bushes from a
neighbour, and planted them in her father's garden. Imme
diately she felt she had sinned, knew she deserved hell, and
feared it would be her portion. She began praying three
times a day; but, notwithstanding, her sin followed her
every where. Day and night it was before her, till, after
some time, that conviction gradually wore off.
“In the year 1749, her sister heard the Methodists, so
called. She was soon convinced of sin, joined the society, and
advised her to do so too. But hearing one named that was in
it, she was filled with disdain: ‘What I meet with such a
man as that !” Yet not long after, she was convinced that
the sins of her own heart, pride and passion in particular,
were as abominable in the sight of God, as the sins of that
man or any other. This conviction was exceeding sharp.
She could no longer despise any, but only cry out, day and
night, ‘God be merciful to me a sinner!’
“In February she went to hear Mr. Reeves. He preached
on part of the hundred-and-third Psalm. She was now
more deeply than ever convinced of heart-sin, of unbelief in
particular; and had such a sight of the excellency of faith,
that she determined to seek it with all her heart.
“In the May following, she was sitting in her room, lament
ing her state, and crying to God for mercy, when suddenly she
had a sight of our Lord, from the manger to the cross. But it
did not bring comfort; on the contrary, it so heightened her
distress, that she cried aloud, and alarmed the family; nor
could she refrain till her strength failed, and she fainted away.
Often her sleep departed from her; her food was tasteless, and
she mingled her drink with weeping; being resolved never to
rest, till she found rest in Him whom alone her soul desired.
“It was not long before the Lord looked upon her. As she
was in prayer, she had a clear representation of our blessed
Lord as crowned with thorns, and clothed with the purple robe.
July, 1767.] JOURNAL, 289
In a moment her soul rested on him, and she knew he had
taken away her sins. Distress was gone; the love of God
flowed into her heart, and she could rejoice in God her
Saviour. Her soul was so ravished with his love, that she
could not hold her peace, but cried out to all she knew, “You
may know your sins forgiven, if you will come unto Jesus.’
“Yet a while after, she dressed herself as fine as ever she
could, and went to worship God, as she expressed it, “proud
as a devil. Upon the spot God convinced her of her folly, of
her pride and vanity. She was stripped of all her comfort,
yea, and brought to doubt the reality of all she had before
experienced. The devil then laboured to persuade her that
she had sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost; and pushed
it so, that she thought her life would fail, and she should
instantly drop into the pit. But the Lord did not leave her
long in the snare; he appeared again, to the joy of her soul.
Her confidence was more strong than ever, and the fear of
God more deeply rooted in her heart. She abhorred all sin,
that in particular which had occasioned her distress; of which,
indeed, she had a peculiar detestation to her last hours.
“God now made her heart strong; she walked seven years
in the clear light of his countenance, never feeling a moment’s
doubt of his favour, but having the uninterrupted witness of
his Spirit. It was her meat and drink to do his will: His
word, read or preached, was her delight, and all his ways were
pleasant to her. She said, she never came from a sermon
unimproved; often so refreshed as to forget weariness or pain.
And she was truly diligent ‘in business,’ as well as “fervent
in spirit.”
“And now she thought she should never be removed, God
had made her hill so strong. But soon after this, she was
present when her sister was ill-used by her husband. She
gave way to the temptation, fell into a passion, and again lost
all her happiness. Yet not long; she continued instant in
prayer, till God again healed her backsliding.
“But from this time, as her temptations were more violent,
so she had a keener sense of the remains of sin. Though she
enjoyed a constant sense of the favour of God, yet she had also
much fear, lest inbred sin should prevail over her, and make her
bring a scandal upon the Gospel. She spent whole days in
prayer, that God would not suffer her to be tempted above that
she was able, and that with every temptation he would make a
way for her to escape. And she was heard, so that her whole
conversation adorned the doctrine of God her Saviour.
“Yet she suffered much reproach, not only from the
children of the world, but also from the children of God.
These wounds sunk deep into her soul, and often made her
weep before the Lord. Sometimes she felt resentment for a
short time, of which darkness was the sure consequence; but
if at any time she lost the consciousness of pardon, it almost
took away her life; nor could she rest satisfied a moment, till
she regained the light of his countenance. She always
judged it was the privilege of every believer, constantly to
‘walk in the light;’ and that nothing but sin could rob any,
who had true faith, of their confidence in a pardoning God.
“She was tried from within and without for about five
years, yet kept from all known sin. In the year 1761, it
pleased God to show her more clearly than ever, under a
sermon preached by John Johnson, the absolute necessity of
being saved from all sin, and perfected in love. And now
her constant cry was, ‘Lord, take full possession of my
heart, and reign there without a rival l’ Nor was this at all
hindered by her disorders, the gravel and colic, which about
this time began to be very violent.
“In the year 1762, she believed God did hear her prayer;
that her soul was entirely filled with love, and all unholy
tempers destroyed; and for several months she rejoiced
evermore, prayed without ceasing, and in everything gave
thanks. Her happiness had no intermission, day or night;
yea, and increased while her disorder increased exceedingly.
“But in the beginning of the year 1763, when some unkind
things were whispered about concerning her, she gave way to
the temptation, and felt again a degree of anger in her heart.
This soon occasioned a doubt, whether she was not deceived
before in thinking she was saved from sin. But she said,
‘Whether I was or no, I am sure I may be; and I am"
determined now to seek it from the Lord.”
“From this time her disorders gradually increased. When
ever I was in town,” I visited her from time to time, and
always found her, whatever her pains were, resigned to
the will of God; having a clear sense of his favour, and a
strong confidence that he would finish his work in her soul.
* Mr. Johnson.
July, 1767.] JOURNAL. 291
“So soon as I came to town, January, 1767, she sent for
me. I found her confined to her bed, and frequently in such
racking pain, that it was thought she could not live many
minutes; but she said, ‘My pain is nothing; the presence of
the Lord bears me up above it all. I have not a murmuring
thought; neither the shadow of a doubt. My way to glory is
plain before me.’ I asked if she was not afraid of having great
sufferings before the soul and body were parted. She said,
“Not in the least. I expect to have sharp pain just before I
depart;’ (which was so;) “but I do not concern myself about
what I shall suffer. It is all at the disposal of the Lord.”
“Two days after, I went again to see her. She said, “My
happiness is much increased. For a day and a night my
pains have been exquisite; yet in the midst of all, my heart
did dance and sing. The Lord so smiles upon me, I cannot
express it in words.’ February 6. She sent for me again. I
found her in a rapture of love, singing and praising God; so
that I was constrained to say, “O Lord, thou hast highly
favoured me, in permitting me to see such a Christian l’ I
cannot attempt to describe how she then appeared; it was with
such a smile as I never saw before. Most of the preceding
day she had spent in singing praise to God, and telling of his
goodness to all that came near her; her soul, she said, being
so happy, that she could not be silent.
“When I spoke to her of death, she said, ‘It is not death
to me; it is only sleep; death is my friend! Death is welcome:
Its sting is gone ! I shall soon be with my Lord! O that I
could sing on to all eternity! My work of praise is begun, and
shall never end.’ I asked, “Do you find the greatest inclina
tion to prayer or praise?” She said, “O praise! praise ! I am
full of love; and I cannot doubt but I shall love and praise
him to all eternity.’ I then asked her concerning her former
profession, of being saved from sin. She said, ‘Sir, I have
it now ! I have it now I and more abundantly. My soul
is so full of love, that my body is almost overpowered. It
will be but a little while, and we shall meet in glory.’
“Mon. 9. I visited her again, and found her singing as well
as her weak body would permit. I asked, ‘Are you as happy
now, as when I saw you last?” She said, ‘Yes, I am; I have
not the shadow of a doubt. I had many conflicts with a wicked
heart; but those are all over now; the Lord has finished his
work. She conversed now like one on Pisgah’s top, in sight of
292 REv. J. wesi.EY’s [July, 1767.
the new Jerusalem; often saying, “My work is begun, which
shall never end; I shall praise him to all eternity.’
“She was asked, ‘Can you wait the Lord’s leisure to
release you?” She said, ‘Yes, yes; as long as he pleases.
My pain is gone; this also he has done for me; and why
should I not wait patiently?’ But it was not long before
her pains returned with redoubled violence; and sometimes
a groan was extorted from her; but not the least complaint.
Yea, she often broke out in a rapture of love, crying, ‘I
cannot express the happiness I feel,’
“Fri. 13. After dozing a little, she awaked in a transport,
saying, ‘O! you cannot conceive the joy I feel. You know
but in part; but when that which is perfect is come, you shall
know even as you are known.” She spoke with regard to some
glorious views which she then had of her dear Redeemer.
“During her last pains, which were the sharpest of all, the
devil made his last effort. She was in a violent struggle about
half an hour. Then she stretched out her hands, and said,
“Glory to Jesus! O love Jesus! love Jesus! He is a
glorious Jesus ! He has now made me fit for himself! When
the harvest is ripe, the sickle is put in.” She asked for a
little wine-and-water; but she could not swallow it. She
said, ‘I have long been drinking wine-and-water here; now I
shall drink wine in my Father's kingdom. She lay still
about a quarter of an hour, and then breathed her soul into
the hands of her Redeemer.”
On Wednesday and Thursday, we had our little Confer
ence at Dublin. Friday we observed as a day of fasting and
prayer; and concluded it with the most solemn watch-night
that I ever remember in this kingdom. I was much tired.
between seven and eight o'clock, but less and less so as the
service went on; and at the conclusion, a little after twelve,
I was fresher than at six in the morning.
Sunday, 26, was a comfortable day indeed; but the
conclusion of it tried my strength, as I was speaking, with
scarce any intermission, from a little after five till between
nine and ten.
Mon. 27.--Having a severe cold, I was in hopes of riding
it away; so I took horse a little after four, and reached Newry
in the evening. But my voice was still so weak, that I doubt
if many of the congregation in the market-house could hear
me; and my cough was so violent at night, I could hardly
Aug. 1767.] JourtNAL. 298
sleep a quarter of an hour together. However, I preached at
five in the morning, without much difficulty. Wednesday, 29.
I hasted on to Donaghadee, but found all the packet-boats
were on the other side. So I agreed with the Captain of a
small vessel, and went on board about two o'clock; but it was
so late when we landed, (after a passage of five hours,) that
we could only reach Stranraer that night.
Thur. 30.--We rode through a country swiftly improving
to Ayr, and passed a quiet and comfortable night. Friday,
31. Before two we reached Glasgow. In the evening I
preached, and again at five in the morning. Saturday,
AUGUST 1. As both my horse and myself were a little tired,
I took the stage-coach to Edinburgh.
Before I left Glasgow I heard so strange an account, that I
desired to hear it from the person himself. He was a sexton,
and yet for many years had little troubled himself about religion.
I set down his words, and leave every man to form his own
judgment upon them:--“Sixteen weeks ago, I was walking, an
hour before sunset, behind the high-kirk; and, looking on one
side, I saw one close to me, who looked in my face, and asked
me how I did. I answered, “Pretty well. He said, ‘You have
had many troubles; but how have you improved them?” He
then told me all that ever I did; yea, and the thoughts that
had been in my heart; adding, ‘Be ready for my second
coming:’ And he was gone I knew not how. I trembled all
over, and had no strength in me; but sunk down to the
ground. From that time I groaned continually under the
load of sin, till at the Lord’s Supper it was all taken away.”
Sun. 2.--I was sorry to find both the society and the
congregations smaller than when I was here last. I impute
this chiefly to the manner of preaching which has been
generally used. The people have been told, frequently and
strongly, of their coldness, deadness, heaviness, and littleness
of faith, but very rarely of any thing that would move thank
fulness. Hereby many were driven away, and those that
remained were kept cold and dead.
I encouraged them strongly at eight in the morning; and
about noon preached upon the Castle-Hill, on, “There is joy
in heaven over one sinner that repenteth.” The sun shone
exceeding hot upon my head; but all was well; for God was in
the midst of us. In the evening I preached on Luke xx. 34,
&c., and many were comforted; especially while I was enlarging
on those deep words, “Neither can they die any more, but
are equal to the angels, and are the children of God, being
the children of the resurrection.”
Mon. 3.--I visited as many as I could, sick and well, and
endeavoured to confirm them. In the evening I preached at
seven, and again at nine. We concluded about twelve. One
then came to me with an unexpected message. A gentleman
in the west of Scotland was a serious, sensible man, but
violently attached both to the doctrine and discipline of the
Kirk. His eldest daughter dreamed, some months since, that
she was poisoned, and must die in an hour. She waked in
the utmost consternation, which issued in a deep conviction
of sin. Soon after she had an earnest desire to see me,
though not perceiving any possibility of it. But business
calling Mr. H to Edinburgh, he brought her with him,
three days before I came. On Sunday morning he heard the
preaching for the first time, and afterwards omitted no oppor
tunity. He now sent his daughter to beg I would come, if
possible, to the west; and to desire that I, or any of our
Preachers, would make his house our home.
Tues. 4.--I rode to Dunbar, and endeavoured, if possible,
to rouse some of the sleepers, by strongly, yea, roughly,
enforcing those words, “Lord, are there few that be saved?”
And this I must say for the Scots in general, I know no men
like them for bearing plain dealing.
On Thursday I reached Newcastle. Saturday, 8. At
the request of Mr. Whitaker, of New-England, I preached,
and afterwards made a collection for the Indian schools in
America. A large sum of money is now collected; but will
money convert Heathens? Find Preachers of David
Brainerd’s spirit, and nothing can stand before them; but
without this, what will gold or silver do? No more than lead
or iron. They have indeed sent thousands to hell; but
never yet brought a soul to heaven.
Sun. 9.--I preached about ten in Mr. Goodday’s church
at Monk-Wearmouth. About two I preached to a willing
multitude at Gateshead-Fell; and at five, near the Garth
Heads at Newcastle.
Mon. 10.--I laboured to set some right, who have much
grace, but little understanding; and I prevailed on all but one,
who appeared indeed to be the twin-soul of poor George Bell.
Tues. 11.--I came to a friendly conclusion (blessed be
Aug. 1767.] JOURNAL. 295
God!) with Mr. L. He agreed to pay the legacies on the
second of November; and we relinquished the residue of the
estate. So the harpy Lawyers are happily disappointed; and
the design of the dying saint in some measure answered.
Wed. 12.--I took coach. The next day we reached
Grantham, and London about seven on Friday evening;
having run, that day, an hundred and ten miles. On the
road I read over Seller’s “History of Palmyra,” and Norden's
“Travels into Egypt and Abyssinia;” two as dry and
unsatisfying books as ever I read in my life.
Sun. 16.--I hoped to have preached in the fields; but the
rain prevented. However, one of our brethren preached
there at seven, to thousands upon thousands; and there was
not the least shadow of interruption. How long will these
halcyon days continue?
Tues. 18.--I met in Conference with our Assistants and a
select number of Preachers. To these were added, on
Thursday and Friday, Mr. Whitefield, Howell Harris,
and many Stewards and Local Preachers. Love and har
mony reigned from the beginning to the end; but we have
all need of more love and holiness; and, in order thereto, of
crying continually, “Lord, increase our faith !”
Having finished my work at London for the present, on
Monday, 24, I rode to Wycombe, and preached in the evening
to a numerous and deeply-attentive congregation.
Tues. 25.--I read Mr. Crantz’s “Account of the Mission
into Greenland.” Although I make much allowance for the
liberty which I know the Brethren take, in their accounts of
one another, yet I do not see any reason to doubt that some
of the Heathens have been converted. But what pity that so
affecting an account should be disgraced with those vile, dog
gerel verses; just calculated to make the whole performance
stink in the nostrils of all sensible men In the evening the
multitude that flocked together obliged me to preach abroad.
I saw but three or four that seemed unaffected; and those, I
suppose, were footmen; a race of men who are commonly lost
to all sense of shame, as well as of good and evil.
Wed. 26.--I rode to Ipstone-Hall, near Stoken church, and
preached about ten o’clock; and, in the evening, at Witney.
The next evening I preached on Wood-Green, near the town,
to an huge congregation, on, “Seek ye the Lord, while he may
be found; call ye upon him, while he is near.” Scarce any
were light or unattentive. Surely some will bring forth fruit
unto perfection.
Fri. 28.--I preached at Stow-in-the-Wold about ten, to a
very dull, quiet congregation; and in the evening to almost
such another, at Gloucester. Saturday, 29. We rode to
Brecknock. Sunday, 30. One of Trevecka gave us a strange
account:--A young woman, who served as dairy-maid there,
was beloved by all the family. She was loving to every one,
never angry, never out of humour. That morning she was
much happier, and had a fuller manifestation of the love of God
than ever. As she was coming through the entry, a lad met her
with a gun in his hand, which he did not know was charged.
He presented it, and said, “Nanny, I will shoot you.” The gun
went off, and shot her through the heart. She fell on her face,
and, without any struggle or groan, immediately expired.
I preached at eight to a large and serious congregation, and
on the Bulwarks at five. A multitude of people attended;
and even the Gentry seemed, for the present, almost persuaded
to be Christians.
Mon. 31.--I rode to Carmarthen, and, a little before six,
went down to the Green. The congregation was near as
large as that at Brecknock, but nothing so gay; being almost
all poor or middling people. To these, therefore, I directly
preached the Gospel. They heard it with greediness; and
though I was faint and weary when I began, I was soon as a
giant refreshed with wine.
Tues. SEPTEMBER 1.--I rode on to Pembroke, and, this
and the next evening, preached in the main street, to far more
than the House could have contained. In the mornings we
were within. Wednesday, 2. Upon inquiry, I found the
work of God in Pembrokeshire had been exceedingly hindered,
chiefly by Mr. Davies's Preachers, who had continually
inveighed against ours, and thereby frightened abundance of
people from hearing, or coming near them. This had some
times provoked them to retort, which always made a bad
matter worse. The advice, therefore, which I gave them
was, 1. Let all the people sacredly abstain from backbiting,
tale-bearing, evil-speaking: 2. Let all our Preachers abstain
from returning railing for railing, either in public or in
private; as well as from disputing: 3. Let them never preach
controversy, but plain, practical, and experimental religion.
Thur. 3.-About noon I preached at Lamphy, a village
Sept. 1767.] JOURNAL, 297
two miles from Pembroke. The rain a little lessened the
congregation, but did not hinder the blessing. God was
eminently present, to comfort the mourners; as likewise at
Pembroke in the evening.
Sat. 5.--I rode to Haverfordwest, but knew not what to
do, because of the rain. However, at six I was constrained,
by the number of people, to stand abroad, near the Castle;
and the whole congregation as quietly attended as if we had
been in a cathedral.
Sun. 6.--I had a large and earnest congregation at six.
About ten I began the Service at St. Daniel’s, a little church
about half a mile from Pembroke, which, till lately, lay in
ruins. It was throughly filled, during the Prayers and sermon,
and a considerable number gladly partook of the Lord’s
Supper. Afterwards I rode back to Haverford, and, notwith
standing the rain, stood in the same place as before, and
applied, “O that thou hadst known, at least in this thy day,
the things that belong unto thy peace l’’
Mon. 7.--I rode to Carmarthen, and preached on the
Green, on, “Is there no balm in Gilead?” In the afternoon,
finding none that could direct us to Oxwych, we were obliged
to ride round by Swansea. The next morning we came to
Oxwych, and found George Story there, who had come to
Swansea the day before, in his way to Cork. Hearing I was
near, he came over just in season to preach to the congregation
who waited for me. At noon I preached to, I suppose, all
the inhabitants of the town, and then rode to Neath.
I had designed to preach abroad, but the rain would not
permit. The preaching-house was much crowded, and the
power of God was in the midst of the congregation. Prejudice
sunk down before it; and the innumerable lies which most of
them had heard of me vanished into air. The same power
rested upon them early in the morning. The bigots on all
sides were ashamed, and felt that, in Christ Jesus, nothing
avails but the “faith that worketh by love.”
Wed. 9.--About twelve I preached to a large and serious
congregation in the assembly-room at Cowbridge; and in the
evening, in the Court-House at Cardiff; where, both this and
the following evening, we had most of the Gentry in the town;
and, both the mornings, the hearers were more than for many
years. Who knows but, even in this desolate town, God
may build up the waste places?
298 REv. J. wesDEY’s [Sept. 1767.
Fri. 11.--I rode to Llanbraddoch, a single house, delight
fully situated near the top of an high mountain; and in the
evening preached to a serious company of plain Welshmen
with uncommon enlargement of heart. Saturday, 12. Setting
out early, I reached Chepstow before noon, and preached at
a friend’s door, to a civil, unconcerned congregation. We
came to the Old Passage, (being told we had time to spare,)
a few minutes after the boat was gone off. Finding they
would not pass again that day, I left my horses behind; and,
crossing over in a small boat, got to Bristol soon enough to
preach in the evening.
The following week I visited most of the Somersetshire
societies. Sunday, 20, (as the Sunday before,) I preached
in Princes-Street at eight; about two under the sycamore-tree
at Kingswood; and at five in the new Square, to a larger
congregation than, I think, was ever there before. Monday,
21. I preached at Pensford, Paulton, and Coleford; on
Tuesday noon, at Midsummer-Norton; (so called, I suppose,
because formerly it was accessible at no other time of the
year;) and in the evening, at Coleford again, where we had
a comfortable love-feast, at which many spoke their experience
with all simplicity.
Wed, 23.--About noon I preached at Buckland, and in
the evening at Frome: But the House was too small, so
that many were constrained to go away. So the next evening
I preached in a meadow, where a multitude, of all denomina
tions, attended. It seems that God is at length giving a
more general call to this town also; the people whereof seemed
before, in every sense, to be “rich and increased in goods,
and having need of nothing.”
Fri. 25.--I was desired to preach at Freshford; but the
people durst not come to the House, because of the small-pox,
of which Joseph Allen, “an Israelite indeed,” had died the
day before. So they placed a table near the church-yard.
But I had no sooner begun to speak, than the bells began to
ring, by the procurement of a neighbouring gentleman.
However, it was labour lost; for my voice prevailed, and the
people heard me distinctly: Nay, a person extremely deaf, who
had not been able to hear a sermon for several years, told his
neighbours, with great joy, that he had heard and understood
all, from the beginning to the end.
I preached at Bristol in the evening, on 2 Cor. iv. 17, a
Sept. 1767.] JOURNAL, 299
text which had been chosen by William New, a little before
God called him hence. He laboured under a deep asthma for
several years, and for seven or eight months was confined to
his bed; where he was, from time to time, visited by a friend,
who wrote the following account :
“He was one of the first Methodists in Bristol, and always
walked as became the Gospel. By the sweat of his brow he
maintained a large family, leaving six children behind him.
When he was no longer able to walk, he did not discontinue
his labour; and, after he kept his room, he used to cut out
glass, (being a glazier,) to enable his eldest son, a child about
fourteen, to do something toward the support of his family.
Yea, when he kept his bed, he was not idle; but still gave
him what assistance he could.
“He was formerly fond of company and diversions; but,
as soon as God called him, left them all, having a nobler
diversion,--visiting the sick and afflicted, in which he spent
all his leisure hours. He was diligent in the use of all the
means of grace; very rarely, during his health, missing the
morning preaching at five, though he lived above a mile
from the Room.
“About a year ago, he took his leave of the society; telling
them, that it was with great pleasure he had joined and con
tinued with them; that it was in this despised place the Lord
first manifested himself to his soul; that no tongue could tell
what he had since enjoyed under that roof; that the same
Jesus had enabled him to hold on thus far, and he hoped to
be with him soon; adding, “I do not expect to see you any
more here, but have no doubt of meeting you in glory.’
“During the last twenty days of his life, he took no other
sustenance than, now and then, a tea-spoon full of wine, or of
balm-tea. About fourteen days before his death, his tongue
turned black, with large chops in it, through the heat of his
stomach; and his lips were drawn two or three inches apart, so
that it was difficult for him to speak. In this condition he lay
waiting for his discharge, saying, sometimes, ‘I am, as it
were, two persons: The body is in torturing pain; the soul is
in sweet peace. He frequently said, ‘I long to be gone !
Come, Lord Jesus; come quickly l’ When I asked, “Do
you desire to see” such a person? He said, ‘I desire to see
none but Jesus. To him I leave my dear wife and children:
I have no care about them.’
“The next day Satan violently assaulted his faith; but
instantly our Lord appeared in all his glory, and he was filled
with love and joy unspeakable, and said, “Call my friend,
and let him see a dying Christian. O what do I feel ! I see my
Lord has overcome for me. I am his : Praise the Lord!
Praise the Lord! Hallelujah I Hallelujah!’ He desired
them that were present to sing; and began,
Jesu, lover of my soul |
He then desired the text for his funeral sermon might be
1 Cor. iv. 17.
“The next time I saw him, having desired him to make
signs rather than speak, which was painful to him, he said,
‘Here is a sign’ (pushing out his feet, and holding up his
hands,) ‘a dying Christian, full of love and joy! A crown,
a never-fading crown awaits me; I am going to everlasting
habitations.’ He then desired us to sing, and quickly
added, ‘He is come! He is come ! I want to be gone:
Farewell to you all !” When he could no longer speak, he
continued smiling, clapping his hands, and discovering an
ecstasy of joy in every motion.
“After a while his speech returned, and he said, ‘To-day
is Friday: To-morrow I expect to go. One said, “Poor
Mr. New !” He said, ‘It is rich New : Though poor in
myself, I am rich in Christ.’
“I saw him on Saturday in the same spirit, praising God
with every breath. He appeared quite transported, pointing
upwards, and turning his fingers round his head, alluding to
the crown prepared for him. I said, ‘Your Lord has kept
the best wine unto the last.’ ‘Yes, yes,” said he ; “it is in
my soul.” When I took my leave he pressed my hand,
pointed upward, and again clapped his hands. Afterward
he spoke little, till he cried out, ‘The chariot, the chariot
of Israel !’ and died.”
Sat. 26.--I was informed, between twelve and one, that
Mrs. B. was dying. Judging I had no time to lose, about one
I left Bristol, and about seven on Sunday morning came to
London. Learning there that she was better, I stayed to
preach and administer the sacrament at the chapel, and
then hastened on, and spent a solemn and profitable hour
at Lewisham. I preached again at West-street chapel in the
afternoon, and made a collection for the poor, as I had
Oct. 1767.] JOURNAL. 301
done in the morning. Soon after I took chaise again, and
on Monday, about noon, came to Bristol.
Wed, 30-I preached to a large and very serious
congregation on Redcliff-Hill. This is the way to overturn
Satan's kingdom. In field-preaching, more than any other
means, God is found of them that sought him not. By this,
death, heaven, and hell, come to the ears, if not the hearts, of
them that “care for none of these things.”
Friday, October 2, and some days in the following
week, I visited the other societies round Bristol. Sunday,
ll. I preached at eight in Princes-Street, and, a little
before five, near the new Square; where, notwithstanding the
keenness of the wind, the congregation was exceeding large.
I permitted all of Mr. Whitefield's society that pleased, to be
present at the love-feast that followed. I hope we shall
“not know war any more,” unless with the world, the flesh,
and the devil.
Mon. 12.--I preached at Bradford; on Tuesday, at Salis
bury; on Wednesday, about one, at Romsey; whence I rode
to Southampton; and, the wind being so high that I could
not well preach abroad, I sent a line to the Mayor, requesting
leave to preach in the Town-Hall. In an hour he sent me
word, I might; but in an hour more he retracted. Poor
Mayor of Southampton | So I preached in a small room, and
did not repent my labour.
Thur. 15.--About noon I preached at Fareham, then went
on to Portsmouth Common. I sent to desire the use of the
Tabernacle, but was answered, Not unless I would preach the
Perseverance of the Saints. At six I preached in our own
Room, which was sufficiently crowded both within and without.
Resolving there should be room for all that would come, I
preached the next afternoon on the side of the Common; and
the whole congregation was as quiet as that in the Square at
Bristol. Saturday, 17. I set out early, and in the evening
came to London.
Tues. 20.--I went to Colchester, and spent three days very
agreeably, among a quiet and loving people. All their little
misunderstandings are now at an end. Yet they had not the
life which they had once: A loss of this kind is not easily
recovered. Saturday, 24. I returned to London.
Mon. 26.--I began my little tour through Northampton
shire and Bedfordshire. I preached at Whittlebury in the
evening. Tuesday, 27. I rode to Weedon, where, the use of
the church being refused, I accepted the offer of the Presby
terian meeting-house, and preached to a crowded audience.
Wednesday, 28. About two in the afternoon I preached at
Towcester, where, though many could not get in, yet all were
quiet. Hence we rode to Northampton, where, in the evening,
(our own Room being far too small,) I preached in the
riding-school to a large and deeply-serious congregation. After
service, I was challenged by one that was my parishioner
at Epworth, near forty years ago. I drank tea at her house
the next afternoon with her daughter-in-law from London,
very big with child, and greatly afraid that she should die in
labour. When we went to prayers, I enlarged in prayer for
her in particular. Within five minutes after we went away her
pangs began, and soon after she was delivered of a fine boy.
Friday, 30. I rode across the country to Bedford, and
preached in the evening to a civil, heavy congregation.
Saturday, 31. After preaching at Luton in the way, I
returned to London.
Sun. NoveMBER 1.--Being All-Saints' Day, (a festival I
dearly love,) I could not but observe the admirable propriety
with which the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel for the day are
suited to each other. As I was to set out for Kent in the
morning, Mr. B. invited me to spend the evening with him
at Lewisham. Soon after we took horse, we found one of
our horses lame. On inquiry, it appeared that five nails were
driven into the quick: So we were at a full stop. But Mr.
B. supplying us with another horse, we rode on, through
heavy rain, to Staplehurst. In the evening I met with a
young Clergyman, who seemed to have no desire, but to save
his own soul and those that heard him. I advised him to
expect crosses and persecution. But he was sure his Rector
would stand by him. Vain hope, that the children of the
world should long stand by the children of God! Soon after,
his Rector told him, unless he kept away from this people he
must leave his curacy.
Tues. 3.--I rode to Rye, and preached in the evening. A
poor prodigal, who was cut to the heart the first time I was
there, was one of the audience; but exceeding drunk. He dined
with us the next day; but was still so muddled, that I could
make no impression on him. He was almost persuaded to be a
Christian; but I doubt is now farther off than ever. In the
Nov. 1767.] JOURNAL. 303
evening I dealt once more exceeding plain with him and his
fellow sinners. If they now perish in their iniquity, their
blood is on their own head. Thursday, 5. About noon I
preached at Norjam. I was surprised, at one, to hear the
Tower guns so plain at above fifty miles' distance. In the
afternoon we rode through miserable roads to the pleasant
village of Ewhurst, where I found the most lively congrega
tion that I have met with in the county. Saturday, 7. I
called at the house of mourning at Shoreham, where I found
Mr. P. sorrowing, like a Christian, for his youngest son, the
staff of his age, the fourth that has been snatched from him
in the bloom of youth. After spending a profitable hour
here, I rode forward to London.
Sun. 8.--I buried the remains of that excellent young
man, Benjamin Colley. He did “rejoice evermore,” and
“pray without ceasing;” and I believe his backsliding cost
him his life. From the time he missed his way, by means of
Mr. Maxfield, he went heavily all his days. God, indeed,
restored his peace, but left him to be buffeted of Satan in an
uncommon manner: And his trials did not end but with
his life. However, some of his last words were, “Tell all the
society, tell all the world, I die without doubt or fear.”
Thur. 12.--I occasionally looked into a book which I had
long thrown by, as not worth reading, entitled, “Thoughts
on God and Nature.” But how agreeably was I surprised !
It contains a treasure of ancient learning, delivered in clear'
and strong language; and is, indeed, a master-piece in
its kind, a thunder-bolt to Lord Bolingbroke, and all his
admirers.
Sun. 15.--I buried the remains of Rebecca Mills. She
found peace with God many years since, and about five years
ago was entirely changed, and enabled to give her whole soul
to God. From that hour she never found any decay, but
loved and served him with her whole heart. Pain and sick
ness, and various trials, succeeded almost without any inter
mission: But she was always the same, firm and unmoved,
as the rock on which she was built; in life and in death
uniformly praising the God of her salvation. The attain
ableness of this great salvation is put beyond all reasonable
doubt by the testimony of one such (were there but one)
living and dying witness.
Fri. 20.--I preached to the condemned felons in Newgate,
304 REv. J. wesi.EY’s [Nov. 1767.
on, “To-day shalt thou be with me in Paradise.” All of them
were struck, and melted into tears: Who knows but some of
them may “reap in joy?”
In the evening I preached at Leytonstone. How good
would it be for me to be here, not twice in a year, but in a
month ! So it appears to me: But God is wiser than man.
When it is really best, will he not bring it to pass?
About this time I received two or three remarkable letters;
extracts from which I here subjoin:
“REveREND SIR,
“LATELY I was requested to read Mr. Marshall’s
“Gospel-Mystery of Sanctification. It was represented to
me as the most excellent piece ever published on that
subject. I have read it, and, lest I should be mistaken,
submit to you the following short remarks :
“It must be acknowledged, he is, on the one hand, copious
in showing the impracticability of real, genuine holiness, or
of doing any works acceptable to God, till we “repent and
believe the Gospel. On the other hand, he shows the deadly
consequences of that faith which sets aside our obligations to
observe God’s holy Law.
“I rejoice, likewise, to find him showing how well able
a believer is to keep this Law; and proving that this faith
implies a divine assurance of our belonging to Christ; but
most of all, to observe him speaking so excellently of the
growth of a believer in holiness. “We are always,’ says
he, “to resist the devil, to quench all his fiery darts, and to
perfect holiness in the fear of God. We are to be built
up in Christ, until we come to a perfect man, to the measure
of the stature of the fulness of Christ.’
“But how does this agree with his asserting, “our natural
state doth remain, in a measure, with all its corrupt principles
and practices, as long as we live in the present world? You
may as well wash a Blackamoor white, as purge the flesh from its
evillusts. It will lust against the Spirit in the best saints upon
earth.” How then am I to come “to a perfect man, to the
measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ?’ Is there a
reconciliation between the ‘fulness of Christ’ in a believer, and
all his ‘corrupt principles and practices?’ Is it thus, that the
strong man armed is to be cast out, with the spoiling of his
goods? Does he tell me, I am to quench all ‘the fiery darts
of the devil;’ and in the same breath that I ‘may as well wash
Nov. 1767.] JOURNAL, 305
a Blackamoor white;’ that I ‘can do all things through
Christ strengthening me;’ and yet, that the flesh shall never
be purged from its evil lusts; no, not in the best saints on
earth, so long as they live in the present world? What a
wonderful communion is here between light and darkness!
What strange fellowship between Christ and Belial |
“What can we infer from hence, but that Mr. Marshall’s
book, containing so much poison mixed with food, is an
exceeding dangerous one, and not fit to be recommended to
any but experienced Christians?”
The following letter is of a very different kind:--
“I was yesterday led to hear what God would say
to me by your mouth. You exhorted us to ‘strive to
enter in at the strait gate.” I am willing so to do. But
I find one chief part of my striving must be, to feed the
hungry, to clothe the naked, to instruct the ignorant, to
visit the sick and such as are in prison, bound in misery
and iron.
“But if you purge out all who scorn such practices, or at
least are not found in them, how many will remain in your
society? I fear scarce enough to carry your body to the
gravel Alas, how many, even among those who are called
believers, have plenty of all the necessaries of life, and yet
complain of poverty How many have houses and lands, or
bags of money, and yet cannot find in their hearts to spare
now and then to God’s poor a little piece of gold ! How many
have linen in plenty, with three or four suits of clothes, and
can see the poor go naked ! They will change them away
for painted clay, or let the moths devour them, before they
will give them to cover the nakedness of their poor brethren,
many of whose souls are clothed with glorious robes, though
their bodies are covered with rags. Pray, Sir, tell these, you
cannot believe they are Christians, unless they imitate
Christ in doing good to all men, and hate covetousness, which
is idolatry.”
I do tell them so : And I tell them it will be more tolerable
in the day of judgment for Sodom and Gomorrah than for
them. I tell them, the Methodists that do not fulfil all
righteousness will have the hottest place in the lake of fire!
To awaken, if possible, these sleepers, I add one extract
ImOre :
“SoME time ago I acquainted you how graciously the
Lord had dealt with me, in delivering me out of all my
troubles. For some time past I have been amazed at my
speech, memory, and understanding, in all which I was
remarkably defective. I have had power to explain the
Scriptures to my friends that meet here, in a manner that
astonished me. But I immediately saw from whence these
blessings came, and with an overflow of love and joy, wor
shipped the great Fountain of all goodness. I never was so
sensible of my unprofitableness, never so abhorred myself as I
do now. And yet I feel no condemnation, nor any withdraw
ing of my Redeemer’s love. He is my shield and buckler,
my God and my all. Glory be to God and the Lamb for
ever ! Praise him for me, and praise him for ever ! Let
everything that hath breath praise the Lord.
“Since the Lord has not only been gracious to my soul,
but has entrusted me with a share of this world’s good, I am
under an equal obligation to be faithful, in this as in the other
gifts of God. Now especially, when help is so much wanted,
I ought to be the more careful. Suffer me, Sir, to speak
freely of myself: I have about forty-seven pounds a year.
As to my disbursements, for apparel, I buy the most lasting
and, in general, the plainest I can. I buy no furniture but
what is necessary and cheap. I make my own fire, and get
my own breakfast and supper. I pay six-pence to one of our
friends for my dinner. I drink herb-tea, and thereby save
at least a shilling a week. I seldom drink tea in an afternoon,
but sup at six, on bread and cheese, with milk and water; so
I save at least eight-pence by dropping tea in the afternoon.
I fasted much till my health was greatly impaired. Then I
used abstinence on Wednesdays, Fridays, and other fast-days,
till I was obliged to leave this off too; but not till I was quite
indifferent as to what I eat. So I determined, if I cannot
retrench a meal, I can retrench the expense of a meal twice
a week, as on other fast-days; using potatoes, milk, or some
other cheap thing. Thus I have four-pence per dinner twice
a week, which, with the one shilling and eightpence, makes
two shillings and four-pence per week, without retrenching
one necessary meal. Now this two shillings and four-pence
would buy as much meat as, made into broth, would nearly
suffice for a small family. To be short, the expense for
Nov. 1767.] JOURNAL. 307
myself-meat, drink, clothes, and washing, is not twenty-eight
pounds per annum; so that I have near twenty pounds to
return to God in the poor. Now, if every Christian family,
while in health, would thus far deny themselves, would twice
a week dine on the cheapest food, drink in general herb-tea,
faithfully calculate the money saved thereby, and give it to the
poor over and above their usual donations, we should then
hear no complaining in our streets, but the poor would eat
and be satisfied. He that gathered much would have nothing
over, and he that gathered little would have no lack. O
how happy should we all be, if this was the case with us ! I
mentioned this some time ago in a meeting at London, when
a brother said, ‘These are but little things.” As I went
home, I thought of his words: ‘Little things!’ Is the want
of fire, in frost and snow, a little thing? Or the want of food,
in a distressed, helpless family? Gracious God! “Feed
me with food convenient for me! Give me not poverty; lest
I steal, and take the name of my God in vain l’
“Dear Sir, I know what you feel for the poor, and I also
sympathize with you. Here is a hard season coming on,
and everything very dear; thousands of poor souls, yea,
Christians, dread the approaching calamities. O that God
would stir up the hearts of all that believe themselves his
children, to evidence it by showing mercy to the poor, as
God has shown them mercy! Surely the real children of
God will do it of themselves; for it is the natural fruit of
a branch in Christ. I would not desire them to lose one
meal in a week, but to use as cheap food, clothes, &c., as
possible. And I think the poor themselves ought to be
questioned, with regard to drinking tea and beer. For I
cannot think it right for them to indulge themselves in those
things which I refrain from, to help them. My earnest
prayers shall accompany yours, that God would give us all,
in this our day, to know the things which belong unto our
peace, and to acknowledge the blessings which are freely
given to us of God!”
Mon. 23.--I went to Canterbury. Here I met with the Life
of Mahomet, wrote, I suppose, by the Count de Boulanvilliers.
Whoever the authoris, he is a very pert, shallow, self-conceited
coxcomb, remarkable for nothing but his immense assurance
and thorough contempt of Christianity. And the book is a
dull, ill-digested romance, supported by no authorities at all:
Whereas Dean Prideaux (a writer of ten times his sense)
cites his authorities for everything he advances.
In the afternoon I rode to Dover; but the gentleman I was
to lodge with was gone a long journey. He went to bed well,
but was dead in the morning: Such a vapour is life! At six I
preached; but the House would by no means contain the con
gregation. Most of the officers of the garrison were there. I
have not found so much life here for some years. After preach
ing at Sandwich and Margate, and spending a comfortable day
at Canterbury, on Saturday I returned to London.
Mon. 30.--I took coach for Norwich, and in the evening
came to Newmarket. Tuesday, DECEMBER 1. Being alone
in the coach, I was considering several points of importance.
And thus much appeared clear as the day:
That a man may be saved, who cannot express himself
properly concerning Imputed Righteousness. Therefore, to do
this is not necessary to salvation:
That a man may be saved, who has not clear conceptions
of it. (Yea, that never heard the phrase.) Therefore, clear
conceptions of it are not necessary to salvation: Yea, it is not
necessary to salvation to use the phrase at all:
That a pious Churchman who has not clear conceptions
even of Justification by Faith may be saved. Therefore,
clear conceptions even of this are not necessary to salvation:
That a Mystic, who denies Justification by Faith, (Mr.
Law, for instance,) may be saved. But if so, what becomes
of articulus stantis vel cadentis ecclesiae P* If so, is it not
high time for us
Projicere ampullas et sesquipedalia verba; +
and to return to the plain word, “He that feareth God, and
worketh righteousness, is accepted with him?”
Every evening this week I preached at Norwich, to a quiet,
well-behaved congregation. Our friends, the mob, seem to
have taken their leave; and so have triflers: All that remain
seem to be deeply serious. But how easily are even these
turned out of the way ! One of our old members, about a year
ago, left the society, and never heard the preaching since,
because Mr. Lincoln said, “Mr. Wesley and all his followers
* The grand doctrine by which a church stands or falls.-EDIT.
+ To lay aside big words that have no determinate meaning.
Dec. 1767.] JOURNAL, 309
would go to hell together l” However, on Tuesday night he
ventured to the House once more; and God met him there,
and revealed his Son in his heart.
Sat. 5.--Believing it was my duty to search to the bottom
some reports which I had heard concerning Mr. B--, I
went to his old friend Mr. G. , an Israelite indeed, but
worn almost to a skeleton. After I had explained to him the
motives of my inquiry, he spoke without reserve; and, if his
account be true, that hot, sour man does well to hold fast his
opinion, for it is all the religion he has.
Mon. 7.--I went on to Yarmouth, and found confusion
worse confounded. Not only B W ’s society was
come to nothing, but ours seemed to be swiftly following.
They had almost all left the Church again, being full of
prejudice against the Clergy, and against one another. How
ever, as two or three retained their humble, simple love, I
doubted not but there would be a blessing in the remnant.
My first business was to reconcile them to each other; and
this was effectually done by hearing the contending parties,
first separately, and afterwards face to face. It remained to
reconcile them to the Church; and this was done partly by
arguments, partly by persuasion.
Fri. 11.--We set out at three in the morning, but did not
reach Bury till past seven in the evening. The people being
ready, I began preaching immediately. Many seemed really
desirous to save their souls. The next day we went on to
London.
Sun. 13.--I was desired to preach a funeral sermon for
William Osgood. He came to London near thirty years ago,
and, from nothing, increased more and more, till he was worth
several thousand pounds. He was a good man, and died in
peace. Nevertheless, I believe his money was a great clog
to him, and kept him in a poor, low state all his days,
making no such advance as he might have done, either in
holiness or happiness.
To-day I found a little soreness on the edge of my tongue,
which the next day spread to my gums, then to my lips, which
inflamed, swelled, and, the skin bursting, bled considerably.
Afterward, the roof of my mouth was extremely sore, so that
I could chew nothing. To this was added a continual
spitting. I knew a little rest would cure all. But this was
not to be had; for I had appointed to be at Sheerness on
310 REv. J. wesDEY’s [Jan. 1768.
Wednesday, the 16th. Accordingly, I took horse between
five and six, and came thither between five and six in the
evening. At half an hour after six, I began reading Prayers,
(the Governor of the fort having given me the use of the
chapel,) and afterwards preached, though not without difficulty,
to a large and serious congregation. The next evening it was
considerably increased, so that the chapel was as hot as an
oven. In coming out, the air, being exceeding sharp, quite
took away my voice, so that I knew not how I should be able
the next day to read Prayers or preach to so large a congre
gation. But in the afternoon the good Governor cut the knot,
sending word, I must preach in the chapel no more. A room
being offered, which held full as many people as I was able
to preach to, we had a comfortable hour; and many seemed
resolved to “seek the Lord while he may be found.”
Examining the society, consisting of four or five and thirty
members, I had the comfort to find many of them knew in
whom they had believed. And all of them seemed really
desirous to adorn the doctrine of God their Saviour.
Such a town as many of these live in, is scarce to be found
again in England. In the dock adjoining to the fort there are
six old men-of-war. These are divided into small tenements,
forty, fifty, or sixty in a ship, with little chimneys and win
dows; and each of these contains a family. In one of them,
where we called, a man and his wife and six little children
lived. And yet all the ship was sweet and tolerably clean;
sweeter than most sailing ships I have been in. Saturday,
19. I returned to London.
Sat. 26.--I visited poor Mrs. H., whose wild husband
has very near murdered her, by vehemently affirming, it
was revealed to him that she should die before such a day.
Indeed the day is past; but her weak, nervous constitution
is so deeply shocked by it, that she still keeps her bed, and
perhaps will feel it all the days of her life.
Sat. JANUARY 2, 1768.--I called on a poor man in the
Marshalsea, whose case appeared to be uncommon. He is by
birth a Dutchman, a Chemist by profession. Being but half
employed at home, he was advised to come to London, where
he doubted not of having full employment. He was recom
mended to a countryman of his to lodge, who after six weeks
arrested him for much more than he owed, and hurried him
away to prison, having a wife near her time, without money,
Feb. 1768.] JOURNAL, 311
friend, or a word of English to speak. I wrote the case to Mr.
T , who immediately gave fifteen pounds; by means
of which, with a little addition, he was set at liberty, and put
in a way of living. But I never saw him since: And reason
good; for he could now live without me.
Mon. 4.--At my leisure hours this week, I read Dr.
Priestley’s ingenious book on Electricity. He seems to have
accurately collected and well digested all that is known on
that curious subject. But how little is that all ! Indeed
the use of it we know; at least, in some good degree. We
know it is a thousand medicines in one: In particular, that
it is the most efficacious medicine, in nervous disorders of
every kind, which has ever yet been discovered. But if we
aim at theory, we know nothing. We are soon
Lost and bewilder'd in the fruitless search.
Mon. 11.--This week I spent my scraps of time in reading
Mr. Wodrow’s “History of the Sufferings of the Church of
Scotland.” It would transcend belief, but that the vouchers
are too authentic to admit of any exception. O what a
blessed Governor was that good-natured man, so called, King
Charles the Second ! Bloody Queen Mary was a lamb, a
mere dove, in comparison of him !
Monday, 25, and the following days, in the intervals of
more important work, I carefully read the pleadings at Edin
burgh, in the famous Douglas cause. So intricate a one I
never heard, I never read of before. I cannot but believe
the birth was real. But the objections are so numerous,
and so strongly urged, I cannot at all wonder that many
should believe otherwise.
Mon. FEBRUARY 8.--I met with a surprising poem,
entitled, “Choheleth; or, the Preacher.” It is a paraphrase,
in tolerable verse, on the Book of Ecclesiastes. I really think
the author of it (a Turkey Merchant) understands both the
difficult expressions, and the connexion of the whole, better
than any other, either ancient or modern, writer whom I have
seen. He was at Lisbon during the great earthquake, just
then sitting in his night-gown and slippers. Before he could
dress himself, part of the house he was in fell, and blocked
him up. By this means his life was saved; for all who had
run out were dashed in pieces by the falling houses.
Thur. 18.--Having been importunately pressed thereto,
I rode (through a keen east wind) to Chatham. About six in
the evening I preached at the barracks, in what they call the
church. It is a large room, in which the Chaplain reads
Prayers, and preaches now and then. It was soon as hot as
an oven, through the multitude of people; some hundreds of
whom were soldiers: And they were “all ear,” as Mr. Boston
says, scarce allowing themselves to breathe. Even between
five and six the next morning the Room was warm enough.
I suppose upwards of two hundred soldiers were a part of
the audience. Many of these are already warring a good
warfare, knowing in whom they have believed.
Tues. 23.--I rode to Shoreham, and preached at five in
Mr. P.'s house; but the next day I preached in the church,
being St. Matthias's Day. I then rode back to a large Room,
which is taken in Redriff, above three miles from London
Bridge. Although the people were strangely squeezed
together, yet they appeared to be all attention. Not a cough
was to be heard. I strongly exhorted them to “call upon
the Lord while he is near.” And when I had concluded, no
one offered to move, but every one stood still in his place,
till I had passed through them.
Fri. 26.--I translated from the French one of the most
useful tracts I ever saw, for those who desire to be “fervent
in spirit.” How little does God regard men’s opinions !
What a multitude of wrong opinions are embraced by all
the members of the Church of Rome! Yet how highly
favoured have many of them been I
Mon. 29.--I dined at Mr. M ’s. His strangeness is
now gone. He has drank of my cup. Reproach has at length
found out him also. Afterwards I spent an hour at Mr.
G ’s. I can trust myself about once a year in this warm
sunshine; but not much oftener, or I should melt away.
Sun. MARCH 6.--In the evening I went to Brentford,
and on Tuesday, 8, I reached Bristol, where I did not find
any decay in the work of God, though it did not go on so
vigorously as at Kingswood. Here the meetings for prayer
had been exceedingly blessed; some were convinced or
converted almost daily; and near seventy new members had
been added to the society in about three months’ time. The
school likewise is in a flourishing condition. Several of the
children continue serious; and all of them are in better order
than they have been for some years.
March, 1768.] JOURNAL, 313
Mon. 14.--I set out on my northern journey, and preached
at Stroud in the evening. Tuesday, 15. About noon I
preached at Painswick, and in the evening at Gloucester.
The mob here was for a considerable time both noisy and
mischievous. But an honest Magistrate, taking the matter
in hand, quickly tamed the beasts of the people. So may any
Magistrate, if he will; so that wherever a mob continues any
time, all they do is to be imputed not so much to the rabble
as to the Justices.
Wed. 16.--About nine I preached at Cheltenham,-a
quiet, comfortable place; though it would not have been so,
if either the Rector or the Anabaptist Minister could have
prevented it. Both these have blown the trumpet with their
might; but the people had no ears to hear. In the afternoon
I preached at Upton, and then rode on to Worcester. But
the difficulty was, where to preach. No room was large
enough to contain the people; and it was too cold for them to
stand abroad. At length we went to a friend’s, near the
town, whose barn was larger than many churches. Here a
numerous congregation soon assembled; and again at five,
and at ten in the morning. Nothing is wanting here but a
commodious House: And will not God provide this also?
In the afternoon we rode to Evesham. As all was hurry
and confusion on account of the election, I was glad Mr. D.
asked me to preach in his church, where we had a large and
exceeding quiet congregation. How long a winter has been
at this place | Will not the spring at length return ?
Fri. 18.--The Vicar of Pebworth had given notice in the
church on Sunday, that I was to preach there on Friday. But
the Squire of the parish said, “It is contrary to the Canons,”
(wise Squire !) “and it shall not be.” So I preached about
a mile from it, at Broadmarston, by the side of Mr. Eden’s
house. The congregation was exceeding large, and remarkably
attentive. In the morning, the chapel (so it anciently was)
was well filled at five. The simplicity and earnestness of the
people promise a glorious harvest.
Sat. 19.--We rode to Birmingham. The tumults which
subsisted here so many years are now wholly suppressed by a
resolute Magistrate. After preaching, I was pleased to see a
venerable monument of antiquity, George Bridgins, in the one
hundred and seventh year of his age. He can still walk to the
preaching, and retains his senses and understanding tolerably
well. But what a dream will even a life of a hundred years
appear to him, the moment he awakes in eternity |
Sun. 20.--About one I preached on West-Bromwich
Heath; in the evening, near the preaching-house in Wednes
bury. The north wind cut like a razor; but the congregation,
as well as me, had something else to think of.
Tues. 22.--I read over a small book, “Poems, by Miss
Whateley,” a farmer’s daughter. She had little advantage from
education, but an astonishing genius. Some of her Elegies I
think quite equal to Mr. Gray’s. If she had had proper helps
for a few years, I question whether she would not have excelled
any female poet that ever yet appeared in England.
Wed. 23.--After preaching at several other places, I rode
on to Wolverhampton. Here too all was quiet; only those
who could not get into the House made a little noise for a time:
And some hundreds attended me to my lodging; but it was
with no other intent than to stare.
Thur. 24.--I rode to Newcastle-under-Line, (a river so
called,) one of the prettiest towns in England. Many here
already know themselves: Not a few know Christ. The
largeness of the congregation constrained me, though it was
very cold, to preach in the open air, on, “God commandeth
all men everywhere to repent.” I scarce ever saw a more
attentive or better-behaved congregation.
Fri. 25.--I turned aside a little to Burslem, and preached
in the new House. That at Congleton is about the same
size, but better contrived, and better finished. We had an
elegant congregation at Congleton, yet earnestly attentive.
It seems, the behaviour of the society in this town has
convinced all the people in it but the Curate, who still refuses
to give the sacrament to any that will not promise to hear
these Preachers no more.
Sat. 26.--We rode to Macclesfield. Sunday, 27. At
eleven one of the Ministers preached a useful sermon, as did
the other in the afternoon. At five in the evening we had
thousands upon thousands; and all were serious, while I
enforced, “Now is the day of salvation.”
Mon. 28.--I met the Stewards of the several societies at
Manchester. The times of outward distress are now over:
God has given us plenty of all things. It remains only, to
give ourselves up to Him who “giveth us all things richly to
enjoy.”
April, 1768.] JOURNAL. 315
Tues. 29.--I preached in Stockport at noon, and
Manchester in the evening. Wednesday, 30. I rode to a
little town called New-Mills, in the High Peak of Derbyshire.
I preached at noon in their large new chapel, which (in
consideration that preaching-houses have need of air) has a
casement in every window, three inches square ! That is
the custom of the country !
In the evening and the following morning I brought strange
things to the ears of many in Manchester, concerning the
government of their families, and the education of their
children. But some still made that very silly answer, “O,
he has no children of his own l” Neither had St. Paul, nor
(that we know) any of the Apostles. What then? Were
they, therefore, unable to instruct parents? Not so. They
were able to instruct every one that had a soul to be saved.
Sat. APRIL 2.--I preached at Little-Leigh, and in the
evening at Chester. At eight in the morning, Easter-Day,
I took my old stand, in the little Square, at St. Martin’s Ash.
The people were as quiet as in the House. While I stayed
here I corrected Miss Gilbert’s Journal,--a masterpiece in
its kind. What a prodigy of a child ! Soon ripe, and soon
gone !
Tues. 5.--About noon I preached at Warrington; I am
afraid, not to the taste of some of my hearers, as my subject
led me to speak strongly and explicitly on the Godhead of
Christ. But that I cannot help; for on this I must insist,
as the foundation of all our hope.
Wed. 6.--About eleven I preached at Wigan, in a place
near the middle of the town, which I suppose was formerly a
play-house. It was very full and very warm. Most of the
congregation were wild as wild might be; yet none made
the least disturbance. Afterwards, as I walked down the
street, they stared sufficiently; but none said an uncivil word.
In the evening we had an huge congregation at Liverpool:
But some pretty, gay, fluttering things did not behave with so
much good manners as the mob at Wigan. The congregations
in general were quite well-behaved, as well as large, both
morning and evening; and I found the society both more
numerous and more lively than ever it was before.
Sun. 10.--I rode to Prescot, eight miles from Liverpool,
and came thither just as the church began. The Vicar
preached an excellent sermon, on, “Whatsoever is born of
God overcometh the world: And this is the victory that
overcometh the world, even our faith.” After Service, many
followed me to a vacant place, where we were tolerably shel
tered from the cold wind. Fifty or sixty of our Liverpool
friends also were there, who had walked over; and God made
it both a solemn and a comfortable opportunity to many souls.
Mon. 11.--I rode to Bolton; on Wednesday, to Kendal.
Seceders and mongrel Methodists have so surfeited the people
here, that there is small prospect of doing good; however, I
once more “cast” my “bread upon the waters,” and left the
event to God.
Thur. 14.--I rode on, through continued rain, to Amble
side. It cleared up before we came to Keswick, and we set
out thence in a fair day; but on the mountains the storm met
us again, which beat on us so impetuously, that our horses
could scarce turn their faces against it. However, we made
shift to reach Cockermouth; but there was no room for
preaching, the town being in an uproar through the election
for Members of Parliament; so, after drying ourselves, we
thought it best to go on to Whitehaven.
I found the society here more alive to God than it had
been for several years; and God has chosen the weak to make
them strong: The change has been wrought chiefly by
means of Joseph G. Many of the children likewise are serious
and well-behaved; and some of them seem to be awakened.
Sun. 17.--I commended them to the grace of God, and rode
to Cockermouth. I had designed to preach near the market
house, but the rain constrained us to go into the House, where
I explained, (out of the First Lesson,) “Let me die the death
of the righteous.” In the evening I preached at Coldbeck, in
the mountains, to an exceeding serious congregation. Monday,
18. Taking horse at four, I reached Solway-Frith before eight,
and, finding a guide ready, crossed without delay, dined at
Dumfries, and then went on to Drumlanrig.
Tues. 19.--I rode through heavy rain to Glasgow. On
Thursday and Friday I spoke to most of the members of the
society. I doubt we have few societies in Scotland like this:
The greater part of those I saw, not only have found peace
with God, but continue to walk in the light of his countenance.
Indeed that wise and good man, Mr. G , has been of
great service to them; encouraging them, by all possible
means, to abide in the grace of God.
April, 1768.] JOURNAL, 317
Sat. 23.--I rode over the mountains to Perth. I had
received magnificent accounts of the work of God in this
place; so that I expected to find a numerous and lively
society. Instead of this, I found not above two believers, and
scarce five awakened persons in it. Finding I had all to
begin, I spoke exceeding plain in the evening to about a
hundred persons, at the Room; but, knowing this was doing
nothing, on Sunday, 24, I preached about eight at the end
of Watergate. A multitude of people were soon assembled,
to whom I cried aloud, “Seek ye the Lord while he may be
found; call ye upon him while he is near.” All were deeply
attentive; and I had a little hope that some were profited.
At the old kirk we had useful sermons, both in the morn
ing and at five in the afternoon. Immediately after Service,
I preached on, “God forbid that I should glory, save in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.” The congregation was so
exceeding large, that I doubt many could not hear. After
preaching, I explained the nature of a Methodist society;
adding, that I should not look on any persons at Perth as
such, unless they spoke to me before I left the city. Four
men and four women did speak to me; two of whom I think
were believers; and one or two more seemed just awakening,
and darkly feeling after God. In truth, the kingdom of
God, among these, is as yet but as a grain of mustard-seed.
Mon. 25.-Mr. Fr , Minister of a neighbouring parish,
desired us to breakfast with him. I found him a serious,
benevolent, sensible man; not bigoted to any opinions. I did
not reach Brechin till it was too late to preach. Tuesday, 26.
I came to Aberdeen.
Here I found a society truly alive, knit together in peace
and love. The congregations were large both morning and
evening, and, as usual, deeply attentive. But a company
of strolling players, who have at length found place here also,
stole away the gay part of the hearers. Poor Scotland:
Poor Aberdeen This only was wanting to make them as
completely irreligious as England.
Fri. 29.--I read over an extremely sensible book, but one
that surprised me much: It is “An Inquiry into the Proofs
of the Charges commonly advanced against Mary, Queen of
Scotland.” By means of original papers, he has made it
more clear than one would imagine it possible at this distance,
1. That she was altogether innocent of the murder of Lord
Tarnley, and no way privy to it: 2. That she married Lord
Bothwell (then near seventy years old, herself but four-and
twenty) from the pressing instance of the Nobility in a
body, who at the same time assured her, he was innocent
of the King’s murder: 3. That Murray, Morton, and
Lethington, themselves contrived that murder, in order to
charge it upon her; as well as forged those vile letters and
sonnets which they palmed upon the world for hers.
“But how then can we account for the quite contrary story,
which has been almost universally received?” Most easily.
It was penned and published in French, English, and Latin,
(by Queen Elizabeth’s order,) by George Buchanan, who was
Secretary to Lord Murray, and in Queen Elizabeth’s pay;
so he was sure to throw dirt enough. Nor was she at liberty to
answer for herself. “But what then was Queen Elizabeth?”
As just and merciful as Nero, and as good a Christian as
Mahomet.
Sun. MAY 1.--I preached at seven in the new Room; in
the afternoon at the College kirk, in Old-Aberdeen. At six,
knowing our House could not contain the congregation, I
preached in the Castle-gate, on the paved stones. A large
number of people were all attention; but there were many
rude, stupid creatures round about them, who knew as little of
reason as of religion: I never saw such brutes in Scotland
before. One of them threw a potato, which fell on my arm:
I turned to them; and some were ashamed.
Mon. 2.--I set out early from Aberdeen, and about noon
preached in Brechin. After sermon, the Provost desired to
see me, and said, “Sir, my son had epileptic fits from his
infancy: Dr. Ogylvie prescribed for him many times, and at
length told me, he could do no more. I desired Mr. Blair
last Monday to speak to you. On Tuesday morning my son
said to his mother, he had just been dreaming that his fits
were gone, and he was perfectly well. Soon after I gave him
the drops you advised: He is perfectly well, and has not
had one fit since.” In the evening I preached to a large
congregation at Dundee. They heard attentively, but
seemed to feel nothing. The next evening I spoke more
strongly, and to their hearts rather than their understanding;
and I believe a few felt the word of God sharp as a two-edged
sword.
Thur. 5.--We rode through the pleasant and fruitful Carse
May, 1768.] JOURNAL. 319
of Gowry, a plain, fifteen or sixteen miles long, between the
river Tay and the mountains, very thick inhabited, to Perth.
In the afternoon we walked over to the Royal Palace at Scoon.
It is a large old house, delightfully situated, but swiftly
running to ruin. Yet there are a few good pictures, and
some fine tapestry left, in what they call the Queen’s and
the King's chambers. And what is far more curious, there is
a bed and a set of hangings, in the (once) royal apartment,
which was wrought by poor Queen Mary, while she was
imprisoned in the castle of Lochlevin. It is some of the
finest needlework I ever saw, and plainly shows both her
exquisite skill and unwearied industry.
About this time a remarkable work of God broke out
among the children at Kingswood School. One of the
Masters sent me a short account of it as follows:-
“REv. AND DEAR SIR, April 27, 1768.
“ON Wednesday, the 20th, God broke in upon our boys
in a surprising manner. A serious concern has been observable
in some of them for some time past; but that night, while
they were in their private apartments, the power of God
came upon them, even like a mighty, rushing wind, which
made them cry aloud for mercy. Last night, I hope, will
never be forgotten, when about twenty were in the utmost
distress. But God quickly spoke peace to two of them,
J Gl t, and T M e. A greater display of
his love I never saw ; they indeed rejoice with joy unspeak
able. For my own part, I have not often felt the like power.
We have no need to exhort them to pray, for that spirit runs
through the whole school; so that this house may well be
called, “an house of prayer. While I am writing, the cries
of the boys, from their several apartments, are sounding in
my ears. There are many still lying at the pool, who wait
every moment to be put in. They are come to this, ‘Lord,
I will not, I cannot, rest without thy love.’ Since I began
to write, eight more are set at liberty, and now rejoice in
God their Saviour. The names of these are John Coward,
John Lion, John Maddern, John Boddily, John Thurgar,
Charles Brown, William Higham, and Robert Hindmarsh.
Their age is from eight to fourteen. There are but few
who withstand the work; nor is it likely they should do it
long; for the prayers of those that believe in Christ seem
to carry all before them. Among the colliers likewise the
320 REv. J. wesDEY’s Journal. [May, 1768.
work of God increases greatly; two of the colliers' boys
were justified this week. The number added to the society
since the Conference is an hundred and thirty.
“I had sealed my letter, but have opened it to inform
you, that two more of our children have found peace. Several
others are under deep conviction. Some of our friends from
Bristol are here, who are thunderstruck. This is the day we
have wished for so long; the day you have had in view,
which has made you go through so much opposition for the
good of these poor children.
“JAMEs HINDMARSH.”
A few days after, one wrote thus:
“I CANNoT help congratulating you on the happy situation
of your family here. The power of God continues to work
with almost irresistible force; and there is good reason to
hope it will not be withdrawn, till every soul is converted to
God. I have had frequent opportunities of conversing alone
with the boys, and find the work has taken deep root in
many hearts. The house rings with praise and prayer, and
the whole behaviour of the children strongly speaks for God.
The number of the new-born is increased since you received
your last information. I have been a witness of part; but
the whole exceeds all that language can paint.”
Another writes, MAY 18:
“THE work of God still goes on at Kingswood. Of the
hundred and thirty members who have been added to the
society since the last Conference, the greater part have
received justifying faith, and are still rejoicing in God their
Saviour; and (what is the most remarkable) I do not know
of one backslider in the place. The outpouring of the Spirit
on the children in the school has been exceeding great. I
believe there is not one among them who has not been affected
more or less. Twelve of them have found peace with God,
and some in a very remarkable manner. These have no more
doubt of the favour of God than of their own existence:
And the Lord is still with them, though not so powerfully as
he was two or three weeks since.”
J Oly RN AL
Saturday, MAY 14, 1768.--I walked once more through
Holyrood-House, a noble pile of building; but the greatest
part of it left to itself, and so (like the Palace at Scone)
swiftly running to ruin. The tapestry is dirty, and quite
faded; the fine ceilings dropping down; and many of the
pictures in the gallery torn or cut through. This was the
work of good General Hawley’s soldiers, (like General, like
men ) who, after running away from the Scots, at Falkirk,
revenged themselves on the harmless canvass!
Sun. 15.--At eight I preached in the High-School yard;
and I believe not a few of the hearers were cut to the heart.
Between twelve and one a far larger congregation assembled
on the Castle-Hill; and I believe my voice commanded them
all, while I opened and enforced those awful words, “I saw
the dead, small and great, stand before God.” In the evening
our House was sufficiently crowded, even with the rich and
honourable. “Who hath warned” these “to flee from the
wrath to come?” O may they at length awake and “arise
from the dead l”
Mon. 16.--I preached in the evening at Dunbar, near the
shore, to an unusually large congregation. Tuesday, 17. I
looked over Dr. Shaw’s Travels: Great part of them is very dull
and unentertaining; but some remarks are extremely curious.
I was a little surprised at one of them; namely, that the cele
brated Mount Atlas is not higher than many of our English
mountains, and nothing near so high as the Alps. But it was
much farther from Rome: So travellers might make it as high
as the moon; and few in Italy could contradict them.
Wed. 18.--I came to poor dead Berwick. However, I
found a few living souls even here. At seven I preached in the
Town-Hall, to an exceeding serious, though not numerous,
congregation. The next evening I preached in the
market-place at Alnwick. Friday, 20. I went on in
324 REv. J. wesDEY’s [May, 1768.
reading that fine book, Bishop Butler’s “Analogy.” But I
doubt it is too hard for most of those for whom it is chiefly
intended. Freethinkers, so called, are seldom close thinkers.
They will not be at the pains of reading such a book as this.
One that would profit them must dilute his sense, or they
will neither swallow nor digest it.
Sat. 21.--About noon I preached at Morpeth, and in the
evening at Newcastle, in the old Custom-House, a large
commodious room near the quay-side, the grand resort of
publicans and sinners. Sunday, 22. I preached in the
morning under the trees in Gateshead, to a large and serious
multitude; and at two, on the Fell, to a much larger. But
the largest of all attended at the Garth-Heads in the evening;
and great part of them were not curious hearers, but well
acquainted with the things of the kingdom of God.
Wednesday, 25, and the two following days, being at
Sunderland, I took down, from one who had feared God
from her infancy, one of the strangest accounts I ever read;
and yet I can find no pretence to disbelieve it. The well
known character of the person excludes all suspicion of fraud;
and the nature of the circumstances themselves excludes the
possibility of a delusion.
It is true there are several of them which I do not
comprehend; but this is, with me, a very slender objection :
For what is it which I do comprehend, even of the things I
see daily? Truly not
The smallest grain of sand, or spire of grass.
I know not how the one grows, or how the particles of the
other cohere together. What pretence have I then to deny
well-attested facts, because I cannot comprehend them?
It is true, likewise, that the English in general, and indeed
most of the men of learning in Europe, have given up all
accounts of witches and apparitions, as mere old wives’ fables.
I am sorry for it; and I willingly take this opportunity of
entering my solemn protest against this violent compliment
which so many that believe the Bible pay to those who do not
believe it. I owe them no such service. I take knowledge,
these are at the bottom of the outcry which has been raised, and
with such insolence spread throughout the nation, in direct
opposition not only to the Bible, but to the suffrage of the
wisest and best of men in all ages and nations. They well
May, 1768.] JOURNAL, 325
know, (whether Christians know it, or not,) that the giving
up witchcraft is, in effect, giving up the Bible; and they
know, on the other hand, that if but one account of the
intercourse of men with separate spirits be admitted, their
whole castle in the air (Deism, Atheism, Materialism) falls
to the ground. I know no reason, therefore, why we should
suffer even this weapon to be wrested out of our hands.
Indeed there are numerous arguments besides, which abun
dantly confute their vain imaginations. But we need not be
hooted out of one: Neither reason nor religion require this.
One of the capital objections to all these accounts, which I
have known urged over and over, is this, “Did you ever see
an apparition yourself?” No: Nor did I ever see a murder;
yet I believe there is such a thing; yea, and that in one
place or another murder is committed every day. Therefore
I cannot, as a reasonable man, deny the fact; although I
never saw it, and perhaps never may. The testimony of
unexceptionable witnesses fully convinces me both of the one
and the other.
But to set this aside, it has been confidently alleged, that
many of these have seen their error, and have been clearly
convinced that the supposed preternatural operation was the
mere contrivance of artful men. The famous instance of this,
which has been spread far and wide, was the drumming in Mr.
Mompesson’s house at Tedworth; who, it was said, acknow
ledged it was all a trick, and that he had found out the whole
contrivance. Not so: My eldest brother, then at Christ
Church, Oxon, inquired of Mr. Mompesson, his fellow
collegian, whether his father had acknowledged this or not.
He answered, “The resort of gentlemen to my father's
house was so great, he could not bear the expense. He
therefore took no pains to confute the report that he had found
out the cheat; although he, and I, and all the family, knew
the account which was published to be punctually true.”
This premised, I proceed to as remarkable a narrative as any
that has fallen under my notice. The reader may believe it
if he pleases; or may disbelieve it, without any offence to me.
Meantime, let him not be offended if I believe it, till I see better
reason to the contrary. I have added a few short remarks,
which may make some passages a little more intelligible.
1. ELIZABETH Hobson was born in Sunderland, in the year
1744. Her father dying when she was three or four years old,
her uncle, Thomas Rea, a pious man, brought her up as his
own daughter. She was serious from a child, and grew up in
the fear of God. Yet she had deep and sharp convictions of
sin, till she was about sixteen years of age, when she found
peace with God, and from that time the whole tenor of her
behaviour was suitable to her profession.
On Wednesday, MAY 25, 1768, and the three following
days, I talked with her at large; but it was with great
difficulty I prevailed on her to speak. The substance of what
she said was as follows:
“2. From my childhood, when any of our neighbours died,
whether men, women, or children, I used to see them, either
just when they died, or a little before: And I was not fright
ened at all, it was so common. Indeed many times I did not
then know they were dead. I saw many of them by day, many
by night. Those that came when it was dark brought light with
them. I observed all little children, and many grown persons,
had a bright, glorious light round them. But many had a
gloomy, dismal light, and a dusky cloud over them.
“3. When I told my uncle this, he did not seem to be at all
surprised at it; * but at several times he said, ‘Be not afraid,
only take care to fear and serve God. As long as he is on your
side, none will be able to hurt you.” At other times he said,
(dropping a word now and then, but seldom answering me any
questions about it,) ‘Evil spirits very seldom appear but
between eleven at night and two in the morning: But after
they have appeared to a person a year, they frequently come
in the day-time. Whatever spirits, good or bad, come in the
day, they come at sunrise, at noon, or at sunset.’t
“4. When I was between twelve and thirteen my uncle
had a lodger, who was a very wicked man. One night I was
sitting in my chamber, about half-hour after ten, having by
accident put out my candle, when he came in, all over in a
flame. I cried out, ‘William, why do you come in so to
fright me?” He said nothing, but went away. I went after
him into his room, but found he was fast asleep in bed. A
day or two after, he fell ill, and, within the week, died in
raging despair.
* It appears highly probable that he was himself experimentally acquainted
with these things.
t How strange is this ! But how little do we know concerning the laws of the
invisible world !
May, 1768.] JOURNAL, 327
“5. I was between fourteen and fifteen, when I went very
early one morning to fetch up the kine. I had two fields to
cross, into a low ground which was said to be haunted. Many
persons had been frighted there, and I had myself often seen
men and women (so many, at times, that they are out of
count) go just by me, and vanish away. This morning, as
I came toward it, I heard a confused noise, as of many people
quarrelling. But I did not mind it, and went on till I came
near the gate. I then saw, on the other side, a young man
dressed in purple, who said, ‘It is too early; go back from
whence you came. The Lord be with you, and bless you;’
and presently he was gone.
“6. When I was about sixteen, my uncle fell ill, and grew
worse and worse for three months. One day, having been sent
out on an errand, I was coming home through a lane, when
I saw him in the field, coming swiftly toward me. I ran to
meet him; but he was gone. When I came home, I found
him calling for me. As soon as I came to his bedside, he
clasped his arms round my neck, and, bursting into tears,
earnestly exhorted me to continue in the ways of God. He
kept his hold, till he sunk down and died: And even then they
could hardly unclasp his fingers. I would fain have died
with him, and wished to be buried with him, dead or alive.
“7. From that time I was crying from morning to night,
and praying that I might see him. I grew weaker and weaker,
till, one morning, about one o’clock, as I was lying crying, as
usual, I heard some noise, and, rising up, saw him come to
the bedside. He looked much displeased, shook his head at
me, and in a minute or two went away.
“8. About a week after, I took my bed, and grew worse and
worse; till, in six or seven days, my life was despaired of.
Then, about eleven at night, my uncle came in, looked well
pleased, and sat down on the bedside. He came every night
after, at the same time, and stayed till cock-crowing. I was
exceeding glad, and kept my eyes fixed upon him all the
time he stayed. If I wanted drink or any thing, though I
did not speak or stir,” he fetched it, and set it on the chair by
the bedside. Indeed I could not speak; t many times I
* So it is plain, he knew her thoughts. But this is widely distant from
knowing the hearts of all men.
+ Such an impression, even though she felt no fear, did the presence of a
superior nature make upon her |
strove, but could not move my tongue. Every morning,
when he went away, he waved his hand to me, and I heard
delightful music, as if many persons were singing together.
“9. In about six weeks, I grew better. I was then musing,
one night, whether I did well in desiring he might come; and
I was praying that God would do his own will, when he came
in, and stood by the bedside. But he was not in his usual
dress; he had on a white robe, which reached down to his feet.
He looked quite pleased. About one, there stood by him a
person in white, taller than him, and exceeding beautiful. He
came with the singing as of many voices, and continued till
near cock-crowing. Then my uncle smiled, and waved his hand
toward me twice or thrice. They went away with inexpressibly
sweet music, and I saw him no more.
“10. In a year after this, a young man courted me, and in
some months we agreed to be married. But he purposed to
take another voyage first, and one evening went aboard his
ship. About eleven o’clock, going out to look for my mother,
I saw him standing at his mother’s door, with his hands in his
pockets, and his hat pulled over his eyes. I went to him, and
reached my hand to put up his hat; but he went swiftly by
me, and I saw the wall, on the other side of the lane, part as
he went through, and then immediately close after him. At
ten the next morning he died.
“11. A few days after, John Simpson, one of our neigh
bours, a man that truly feared God, and one with whom I was
particularly acquainted, went to sea, as usual. He sailed out
on a Tuesday. The Friday night following, between eleven
and twelve o’clock, I heard one walking in my room; and
every step sounded as if he was stepping in water. He then
came to the bedside, in his sea-jacket, all wet, and stretched
his hand over me. Three drops of water fell on my breast,”
and felt as cold as ice. I strove to wake his wife, who lay
with me; but I could not, any more than if she was dead.
Afterward I heard he was cast away that night. In less than
a minute he went away: But he came to me every night, for
six or seven nights following, between eleven and two. Before
he came, and when he went away, I always heard sweet
music.t. Afterwards he came both day and night; every
* Was this real, or did he only raise such a sensation in her ?
+ Was this a real modulation of the air? Was it designed to show that he
was happy, and to encourage her to speak?
May, 1768.] JOURNAL, 329
night about twelve, with the music at his coming and going,
and every day at sunrise, noon, and sunset. He came, what
ever company I was in ; at church, in the preaching-house, at
my class; and was always just before me, changing his posture
as I changed mine. When I sat, he sat; when I kneeled, he
kneeled; when I stood, he stood likewise. I would fain
have spoke to him, but I could not; when I tried, my heart
sunk within me. Meantime it affected me more and more,
so that I lost both my stomach, my colour, and my strength.
This continued ten weeks, while I pined away, not daring to
tell any one. At last, he came four or five nights without any
music, and looked exceeding sad. On the fifth night he
drew the curtains of the bed violently to and fro, still looking
wishfully at me, and as one quite distressed. This he did two
nights. On the third, I lay down, about eleven, on the side
of the bed. I quickly saw him walking up and down the
room. Being resolved to speak to him, but unwilling any
should hear, I rose and went up into the garret. When I
opened the door, I saw him walking toward me, and shrunk
back; on which he stopped, and stood at a distance. I said,
“In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, what is
your business with me?” He answered, ‘Betsy, God forgive
you for keeping me so long from my rest.* Have you forgot
what you promised before I went to sea,--to look to my
children, if I was drowned? You must stand to your word,
or I cannot rest: I said, ‘I wish I was dead.” He said,
“Say not so; you have more to go through before then :
And et, if you knew as much as I do, you would not care
how soon you died. You may bring the children on in their
learning, while they live; they have but a short time.’t I
said, ‘I will take all the care I can.” He added, ‘Your
brother has wrote for you, to come to Jamaica; but if you
go, it will hurt your soul. You have also thoughts of altering
your condition; but if you marry him you think of, it will
draw you from God, and you will neither be happy here nor
hereafter. Keep close to God, and go on in the way wherein
you have been brought up.’ I asked, “How do you spend your
time?’ He answered, “In songs of praise. But of this you
will know more by and by; for where I am, you will surely be.
* Who can account for this ?
+ By what means could he know this?
# So he likewise knew her thoughts.
I have lost much happiness by coming to you:* And I
should not have stayed so long without using other means to
make you speak; but the Lord would not suffer me to fright
you. Have you anything more to say? It draws near two,
and after that I cannot stay. I shall only come to you twice
more before the death of my two children. God bless you.’
Immediately I heard such singing, as if a thousand voices
joined together. He then went down stairs, and I followed
him to the first landing. He smiled, and I said, ‘I desire
you will come back. He stood still till I came to him.
I asked him one or two questions, which he immediately
answered; but added, ‘I wish you had not called me back;
for now I must take something from you.’t He paused a
little, and said, ‘I think you can best part with the hearing
of your left ear. He laid his hand upon it, and in the
instant it was deaf as a stone; and it was several years before
I recovered the least hearing of it. The cock crowed as
he went out of the door, and then the music ceased. The
eldest of his children died at about three years and an half,
the younger before he was five years old. He appeared
before the death of each, but without speaking: After that I
saw him no more.
“12. A little before Michaelmas, 1763, my brother George,
who was a good young man, went to sea. The day after
Michaelmas-day, about midnight, I saw him standing by my
bedside, surrounded with a glorious light, and looking earnestly
at me. He was wet all over. That night the ship in which
he sailed split upon a rock, and all the crew were drowned.
“13. On April 9, 1767, about midnight, I was lying
awake, and I saw my brother John standing by my bedside.t
Just at that time he died in Jamaica.
“14. By his death I became entitled to an house in
Sunderland, which was left us by my grandfather, John
Hobson, an exceeding wicked man, who was drowned fourteen
years ago. I employed an Attorney to recover it from my
aunts, who kept possession of it. But finding more difficulty
than I expected, in the beginning of December I gave it up.
* I do not understand this.
+ Another instance like this we shall see by and by ; but the reason of it we
cannot so much as conjecture.
# So, a spirit finds no difficulty in travellihg three or four thousand miles in a
moment 1
May, 1768.] JOURNAL, 331
Three or four nights after, as I rose from prayer, a little
before eleven, I saw him standing at a small distance. I
cried out, ‘Lord bless me ! what brings you here?” He
answered, ‘You have given up the house: Mr. Parker
advised you so to do;' but if you do, I shall have no rest:+
Indeed Mr. Dunn,t whom you have hitherto employed, will
do nothing for you. Go to Durham, employ an Attorney
there, and it will be recovered.’$ His voice was loud, and so
hollow and deep, that every word went through me. His
lips did not move at all, (nor his eyes,) but the sound
seemed to rise out of the floor. When he had done speaking,
he turned about, and walked out of the room."
“15. In January, as I was sitting on the bedside, a quarter
before twelve he came in, stood before me, looked earnestly at
me, then walked up and down and stood and looked again.
This he did for half an hour, and thus he came every other
night* for about three weeks. All this time he seemed
angry,tt and sometimes his look was quite horrid and
furious. One night I was sitting up in bed crying, when he
came and began to pull off the clothes. I strove to touch his
hand, but could not; on which he shrunk back and smiled.tt
“16. The next night but one, about twelve, I was again
sitting up and crying, when he came and stood at the bedside.
As I was looking for an handkerchief, he walked to the table,
took one up,§§ brought and dropped it upon the bed. After
this, he came three or four nights and pulled the clothes off,
throwing them on the other side of the bed.
“17. Two nights after, he came as I was sitting on the bed
side, and, after walking to and fro, snatched the handkerchief
from my neck. I fell into a swoon. When I came to myself
he was standing just before me. Presently he came close to
me, dropped it on the bed, and went away.
* How often are spirits present when we do not think of it!
+ Why not ? What had he to do with the things under the sun ?
: Did he then know Mr. Dunn's thoughts P
§ Was he sure of this ? Or did he only conjecture?
| What a picture! Far beyond her invention :
"I That he might not fright her, by vanishing away.
** Surely God saw this was as much as she could bear.
++. At her not speaking. But why could not he speak first P Is this contrary
to a law of the invisible world P
+ Poor ghost ! Did this divert thee for a moment from attending to the
worm that never dieth ?
$$ So, he saw her thought ! But did he not pity her too?
“18. Having had a long illness the year before, having
taken much cold by his frequent pulling off the clothes, and
being worn out by these appearances, I was now mostly
confined to my bed. The next night, soon after eleven, he
came again: I asked, ‘In God’s name, why do you torment
me thus? You know it is impossible for me to go to Durham
now. But I have a fear that you are not happy, and beg to
know whether you are, or not.’ He answered, after a little
pause, “That is a bold question for you to ask. So far as
you knew me to do amiss in my lifetime, do you take care to
do better.” I said, ‘It is a shocking affair to live and die
after that manner. He replied, ‘It is no time for reflections
now : What is done cannot be undone.’ I said, ‘It must be
a great happiness to die in the Lord!’ He said, ‘Hold
your tongue!" Hold your tongue! At your peril, never
mention such a word before me again!’ I was frighted, and
strove to lift up my heart to God. He gave a shriek, and
sunk down at three times, with a loud groan at each time.
Just as he disappeared, there was a large flash of fire, and I
fainted away.
“19. Three days after, I went to Durham, and put the affair
into Mr. Hugill the Attorney’s hands. The next night, about
one, he came in ; but on my taking up the Bible, went away.
A month after, he came about eleven. I said, ‘Lord bless me !
What has brought you here again?’ He said, ‘Mr. Hugillt
has done nothing but write one letter: You must write or go to
Durham again. It may be decided in a few days.” I asked,
‘Why do not you go to my aunts, who keep me out of it?’
He answered, ‘I have no power to go to them: And they
cannot bear it. If I could, I would go to them, were it only
to warn them; for I doubt, where I am I shall get too many
to bear me company. He added, ‘Take care:$ There is
mischief laid in Peggy's hands: She will strive to meet you
coming from your class. I do not speak to hinder you from
going to it, but that you may be cautious. Let some one go
with you, and come back with you; though whether you will
escape or no, I cannot tell.’ I said, ‘She can do no more
* This seems to have been peculiarly intolerable to him, the thought of what
he had lost.
+ So he had observed him narrowly, though unseen.
# Is not this like the concern of Dives for his five brethren P § Here, at least, he shows some remains of real affection. Luke xvi. 28.
| Her aunt.
May, 1768.] JOURNAL. 333
than God will let her. He answered, ‘We have all too little
to do with Him. Mention that word no more. As soon as
this is decided, meet me at Boyldon-Hill,” between twelve
and one at night.’ I said, ‘That is a lone place for a woman to
go to at that time of night. I am willing to meet you at the
Ballast-Hills, or in the churchyard.’ He said, ‘That will
not do. But what are you afraid of?’ I answered, ‘I am
not afraid of you,t but of rude men. He said, ‘I will set
you safe, both thither and back again. I asked, ‘May I not
bring a Minister with me?” He replied, “Are you there
abouts? I will not be seen by any but you. You have
plagued me sore enough already. If you bring any with
you, take what follows.”
“20. From this time he appeared every night, between
eleven and two. If I put out the fire and candle, in hopes I
should not see him, it did not avail. For as soon as he came,
all the room was light, but with a dismal light, like that of
flaming brimstone. But whenever I took up the Bible, or
kneeled down, yea, or prayed in my heart, he was gone.
“21. On Thursday, May 12, he came about eleven, as I
was sitting by the fire. I asked, ‘In God’s name, what do you
want?” He said, ‘You must either go or write to Durham.
I cannot stay from you till this is decided; it and I cannot stay
where I am.’$ When he went away, I fell into a violent
passion of crying, seeing no end of my trouble. In this
agony I continued till after one, and then fell into a fit.
About two, I came to myself, and saw standing, at the bed
side, one in a white robe, which reached down to his feet. I
cried, ‘In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost--’
He said, ‘The Lord is with you, I am come to comfort you.
What cause have you to complain and murmur thus? Why
do you mourn thus for your friends? Pray for them, and
leave them to God. Arise and pray.’ I said, ‘I can pray
none.’ He said, ‘But God will help you; only keep close
to God. You are backward likewise in praying with others,
and afraid to receive the Lord’s Supper. Break through that
backwardness and that fear. The Lord bless you, and be
* About half a mile from the town.
+ No ! Not though she knew him to be a damned spirit.
# Why not? Who can tell ?
§ And where canst thou stay with any comfort? Dost not thou carry with
thee thy own hell?
ever with you !’ As he went away, I heard many voices singing
Hallelujah, with such melody as I never heard before. All
my trouble was gone, and I wanted nothing but to fly away
with them.
“22. Sat. 28.--About twelve, my grandfather stood at the
bedside. I said, ‘In God’s name, what do you want?” He
said, ‘You do not make an end of this thing: Get it decided
as soon as possible. My coming is as uneasy to myself as it
can be to you.” Before he came, there was a strong smell of
burning, and the room was full of smoke, which got into my
eyes, and almost blinded me for some time after.
“23. Wed. June 21.--About sunset, I was coming up
stairs, at Mrs. Knot's, and I saw him coming toward me out
of the opposite room. He went close by me on the stair-head.
Before I saw him, I smelt a strong smell of burning, and so
did Miss Hosmer. It got into my throat, and almost stifled
me. I sat down, and fainted away.
“24. On Friday, July 3, I was sitting at dinner, when I
thought I heard one come along the passage. I looked about,
and saw my aunt, Margaret Scot, of Newcastle, standing at
my back. On Saturday I had a letter, informing me that she
died on that day.”--Thus far Elizabeth Hobson.
On Sunday, JULY 10, I received the following letter from
a friend, to whom I had recommended her:--
“Sunderland, July 6, 1768.
“I wroTE you word before, that Elizabeth Hobson was
put into possession of the house. The same night her old
visitant, who had not troubled her for some time, came again,
and said, ‘You must meet me at Boyldon-Hill, on Thursday
night, a little before twelve. You will see many appear
ances,” who will call you to come to them; but do not stir,
neither give them any answer. A quarter after twelve, I shall
come and call you; but still do not answer, nor stir. She
said, ‘It is an hardship upon me for you to desire me to meet
you there. Why cannot you take your leave now?” He
answered, ‘It is for your good that I desire it. I can take
my leave of you now; but if I do, I must take something
from you, which you would not like to part with. She
said, ‘May not a few friends come with me?” He said,
“They may; but they must not be present when I come.”
* How strange is this I Who can account for it?
June, 1768.] JOURNALs 335
“That night twelve of us met at Mr. Davison's," and spent
some time in prayer. God was with us of a truth. Then six
of us went with her to the place, leaving the rest to pray for
us. We came thither a little before twelve, and then stood
at a small distance from her. It being a fine night, we kept
her in our sight, and spent the time in prayer. She stood
there till a few minutes after one. When we saw her move,
we went to meet her. She said, ‘Thank God, it is all over
and done. I found everything as he told me. I saw many
appearances, who called me to them; but I did not answer
or stir. Then he came and called me at a distance; but I
took no notice. Soon after, he came up to me, and said,
You are come well-fortified.” He then gave her the reasons
why he required her to meet him at that place, and why he
could take his leave there, and not in the house, without
taking something from her. But withal he charged her to
tell this to no one; adding, “If you disclose this to any
creature, I shall be under a necessity of troubling you as long
as you live. If you do not, I shall never trouble you, nor see
you any more, either in time or eternity.’ He then bid her
farewell, waved his hand, and disappeared.”
Tues. 31.--I made a little excursion into Weardale, and
found a people ready prepared for the Lord. I had designed
to preach abroad, but had scarce done singing, when a storm
of rain drove us into the House. We had a blessed
opportunity there, particularly for healing the backsliders.
Wed. JUNE 1.--I preached in Teesdale. The sun was
scorching hot when I began, but was soon covered with clouds.
Many of the Militia were present at Barnard-Castle in the
evening, and behaved with decency. I was well pleased to
lodge at a gentleman’s, an old school-fellow, half a mile from
the town. What a dream are the fifty or sixty years that
have slipped away since we were at the Charter-House!
Thur. 2.--I preached, at noon, at a farmer's house, near
Brough, in Westmoreland. The sun was hot enough, but some
shady trees covered both me and most of the congregation.
A little bird perched on one of them, and sung without
intermission, from the beginning of the service unto the end.
Many of the people came from far; but I believe none of
them regretted their labour.
• About a quarter of a mile from the hill
The evening congregation in Swaledale was far larger,
and equally attentive: And the society was one of the most
lively which I have met with in England. Many of them do
rejoice in the pure love of God, and many more are earnestly
seeking it.
Fri. 3.--I rode to Richmond, intending to preach near the
house of one of our friends; but some of the chief of the
town sent to desire me to preach in the market-place. The
Yorkshire Militia were all there, just returned from their
exercise: And a more rude rabble-rout I never saw; without
sense, decency, or good manners.
In running down one of the mountains yesterday, I had
got a sprain in my thigh: It was rather worse to-day; but
as I rode to Barnard-Castle, the sun shone so hot upon it,
that, before I came to the town, it was quite well. In the
evening the Commanding Officer gave orders there should
be no exercise, that all the Durham Militia (what a
contrast I) might be at liberty to attend the preaching.
Accordingly, we had a little army of Officers as well as
soldiers; and all behaved well. A large number of them
were present at five in the morning. I have not found so
deep and lively a work in any other part of the kingdom,
as runs through the whole circuit, particularly in the vales
that wind between these horrid mountains. I returned to
Newcastle in the evening.
Sun. 5.--I preached in the morning at Placey, to some of
the most lively colliers in England; and about two at Hartley,
to a still larger congregation; but to the largest of all, in the
Castlegarth, at Newcastle.
Tues. 7.--I went down by water to South-Shields, and
preached at noon, to far more than could hear. We went, after
dinner, to Tynemouth Castle, a magnificent heap of ruins.
Within the walls are the remains of a very large church, which
seems to have been of exquisite workmanship; and the stones
are joined by so strong a cement, that, but for Cromwell’s
cannon, they might have stood a thousand years.
Mon. 13.--I left Newcastle, and in the residue of the month
visited most of the societies in Yorkshire. Thursday, JULY
14. I crossed over into Lincolnshire, and, after spending
about ten days there, returned by Doncaster, Rotherham,
and Sheffield, and thence crossed over to Madeley.
On Tuesday, 19, I wrote the following letter:
July, 1768.] JOURNAL. 337
“REv. AND DEAR SIR, Swinfleet, July 19, 1768.
“ONE of Wintringham informed me yesterday, that you
said, no sensible and well-meaning man could hear, and much
less join, the Methodists; because they all acted under a lie,
professing themselves members of the Church of England,
while they licensed themselves as Dissenters.--You are a
little misinformed. The greater part of the Methodist
Preachers are not licensed at all; and several that are, are
not licensed as Dissenters. I instance particularly in Thomas
Adams and Thomas Brisco. When Thomas Adams desired
a license, one of the Justices said, ‘Mr. Adams, are not you
of the Church of England? Why then do you desire a
license?” He answered, ‘Sir, I am of the Church of England;
yet I desire a license, that I may legally defend myself from
the illegal violence of oppressive men.” T. Brisco being
asked the same question, in London, and the Justice
adding, ‘We will not grant you a license, his Lawyer
replied, “Gentlemen, you cannot refuse it : The act is a
mandatory act. You have no choice. One asked the Chair
man, ‘Is this true?” He shook his head, and said, “He
is in the right. The objection, therefore, does not lie at all
against the greater part of the Methodist Preachers; because
they are either licensed in this form, or not licensed at all.
“When others applied for a license, the Clerk or Justice
said, ‘I will not license you, but as Protestant Dissenters.”
They replied, “We are of the Church; we are not Dissenters:
But if you will call us so, we cannot help it.’ They did call
them so in their certificates, but this did not make them so.
They still call themselves members of the Church of England;
and they believe themselves so to be. Therefore neither do
these act under a lie. They speak no more than they verily
believe. Surely then, unless there are stronger objections
than this, both well-meaning and sensible men may, in perfect
consistence with their sense and sincerity, not only hear, but
join the Methodists.
“We are in truth sofar from being enemies to the Church,
that we are rather bigots to it. I dare not, like Mr. Venn,
leave the parish church where I am, to go to an Independent
meeting. I dare not advise others to go thither, rather than
to church. I advise all, over whom I have any influence,
steadily to keep to the Church. Meantime, I advise them to
see that the kingdom of God is within them; that their
hearts be full of love to God and man; and to look upon all,
of whatever opinion, who are like-minded, as their ‘brother,
and sister, and mother.' O, Sir, what art of men or devils is
this, which makes you so studiously stand aloof from those
who are thus minded? I cannot but say to you, as I did to
Mr. Walker, (and I say it the more freely, because Quid mea
refert P* I am neither better nor worse, whether you hear
or forbear,) ‘The Methodists do not want you; but you
want them.’ You want the life, the spirit, the power which
they have; not of themselves, but by the free grace of God:
Else how could it be, (let me speak without reserve,) that so
good a man, and so good a Preacher, should have so little
fruit of his labour,--his unwearied labour, -for so many
years? Have your parishioners the life of religion in their
souls? Have they so much as the form of it? Are the
people of Wintringham in general any better than those of
Winterton, or Horton? Alas! Sir, what is it that hinders your
reaping the fruit of so much pains and so many prayers?
“Is it not possible this may be the very thing, your
setting yourself against those whom God owns by the
continual conviction and conversion of sinners?
“I fear, as long as you in anywise oppose these, your rod
will not blossom, neither will you see the desire of your soul,
in the prosperity of the souls committed to your charge.
“I pray God to give you a right judgment in all things,
and am, dear Sir,
“Your affectionate brother,
Sun. 31.--I preached for Mr. Fletcher in the morning, and
in the evening at Shrewsbury.
Mon. AUGUST 1.--I lodged at the Abbey in Cardiganshire;
and on Wednesday morning reached Haverfordwest. Here
abundance of people flocked together, and willingly “suffered
the word of exhortation.” Indeed, a more quiet, humane,
courteous people, I have scarce ever seen. But I fear, they
were surfeited with preaching before we set foot in the town.
Sat. 6.--I went to Pembroke. We were here several times
before we had any place in Haverfordwest. But we have
reason to fear lest the first become last. Sunday, 7. I took
a good deal of pains to compose the little misunderstandings
which have much obstructed the work of God. At ten I
* What is it to me 2
Aug. 1768.] JOURNAL. 339
read Prayers, preached, and administered the sacrament to a
serious congregation at St. Daniel's; and the next morning
left the people full of good desires, and in tolerable good
humour with each other.
Mon. 8.--I rode to Llanelly, and preached to a small,
earnest company, on, “Ye are saved through faith.” Thence
we found a kind of a way to Oxwych, where I pressed the one
thing needful, on a plain, simple people, right willing to hear,
with great enlargement of heart.
Tues. 9.--I took a full view of the castle, situate on the top
of a steep hill, and commanding a various and extensive
prospect, both by sea and land. The building itself is far
the loftiest which I have seen in Wales. What a taste had
they who removed from hence, to bury themselves in the
hole at Margam !
When we came to Neath, I was a little surprised to hear I
was to preach in the church; of which the Churchwardens had
the disposal, the Minister being just dead. I began reading
Prayers at six, but was greatly disgusted at the manner of
singing. 1. Twelve or fourteen persons kept it to themselves,
and quite shut out the congregation: 2. These repeated the
same words, contrary to all sense and reason, six or eight or
ten times over: 3. According to the shocking custom of
modern music, different persons sung different words at one
and the same moment; an intolerable insult on common
sense, and utterly incompatible with any devotion.
Wed. 10.--At five I had the pleasure of hearing the
whole congregation at the room “sing with the spirit and
the understanding also ;” and again, at one in the afternoon,
at Cowbridge, where I found uncommon liberty of speech,
while I was explaining to many of the rich and gay, as well
as to the poor, “The kingdom of God is within you.”
I did not reach Cardiff till after seven; where, finding
the congregation waiting, I began immediately in the Town
Hall, strongly exhorting them not to “receive the grace of
God in vain.”
Fri. 12.--I preached at that lovely place, Llanbraddoch;
Saturday, 13, about noon at Chepstow. Thence I hastened
to the Passage, though every one told me I had time enough
and to spare. I had so; for I waited six hours, the boat
being just gone when we came. About nine we got over, and
reached Bristol between eleven and twelve.
Sun. 14.--Hearing my wife was dangerously ill, I took
chaise immediately, and reached the Foundery before one in
the morning. Finding the fever was turned, and the danger
over, about two I set out again, and in the afternoon came
(not at all tired) to Bristol.
Our Conference began on Tuesday, 16, and ended on
Friday, 19. O what can we do for more labourers? We
can only cry to “the Lord of the harvest.”
Sun. 21.--Thousands of hearers, rich and poor, received
the word, near the new Square, with the deepest attention.
This is the way to shake the trembling gates of hell. Still I
see nothing can do this so effectually as field-preaching.
Mon. 22.--I rode through impetuous rain to Weston, a
village near Bridgewater. A while ago the people here were
lions; but now they are become lambs. Tuesday, 23. I saw
a serious congregation at Taunton | And shall we have fruit
here also? In the evening I preached to the poor backsliders
at Collumpton, on, “Will the Lord be no more entreated?”
Wed. 24.--I rode to Launceston, where both the seriousness
and largeness of the congregation, evening and morning, gave
us reason to hope, that all our labour here will not be in vain.
Fri. 26.--I came to Camelford, where the society is once
more shrunk from seventy to fourteen. I preached in the
market-place on, “O that thou hadst known, at least in this
thy day, the things that make for thy peace l” Many were
moved for the present; as they were the next day while I was
applying those awful words, “The harvest is past, the summer
is ended, and we are not saved !”
Sat. 27.--I went on to Port-Isaac, now the liveliest place in
the circuit. I preached from a balcony in the middle of the
town, a circumstance I could not but observe. Before I came
to Port-Isaac the first time, one Richard Scantlebury invited
me to lodge at his house; but when I came, seeing a large
mob at my heels, he fairly shut the door upon me: Yet in
this very house I now lodged; Richard Scantlebury being
gone to his fathers, and the present proprietor, Richard Wood,
counting it all joy to receive the servants of God.
About this time I wrote to a friend as follows:
“DEAR LAwRENCE,
“BY a various train of providences you have been led to
the very place where God intended you should be. And you
have reason to praise him, that he has not suffered your labour
Aug. 1768.] JOURNAL, 341
there to be in vain. In a short time, how little will it signify,
whether we had lived in the Summer Islands, or beneath
The rage of Arctos and eternal frost !
How soon will this dream of life be at an end | And when
we are once landed in eternity, it will be all one, whether we
spent our time on earth in a palace, or had not where to lay
our head.
“You never learned, either from my conversation, or
preaching, or writings, that ‘holiness consisted in a flow of
joy.’ I constantly told you quite the contrary; I told you it
was love; the love of God and our neighbour; the image of
God stamped on the heart; the life of God in the soul of
man; the mind that was in Christ, enabling us to walk as
Christ also walked. If Mr. Maxfield, or you, took it to be
any thing else, it was your own fault, not mine. And when
ever you waked out of that dream, you ought not to have
laid the blame of it upon me. It is true that joy is one part
of ‘the fruit of the Spirit, of the kingdom of God within us.
But this is first ‘righteousness, then ‘peace,’ and ‘joy in
the Holy Ghost. It is true, farther, that if you love God
with ‘all your heart, you may ‘rejoice evermore. Nay, it
is true still farther, that many serious, humble, sober-minded
believers, who do feel the love of God sometimes, and do
then rejoice in God their Saviour, cannot be content with
this; but pray continually, that he would enable them to
love, and ‘rejoice in the Lord always.” And no fact under
heaven is more undeniable, than that God does answer this
prayer; that he does, for the sake of his Son, and through
the power of his Spirit, enable one and another so to do. It
is also a plain fact, that this power does commonly overshadow
them in an instant; and that from that time they enjoy that
inward and outward holiness, to which they were utter strangers
before. Possibly you might be mistaken in this; perhaps you
thought you had received what you had not. But pray do not
measure all men by yourself; do not imagine you are the
universal standard. If you deceived yourself, (which yet I do
not affirm,) you should not infer that all others do. Many
think they are justified, and are not; but we cannot infer,
that none are justified. So neither, if many think they are
‘perfected in love,’ and are not, will it follow that none are
so. Blessed be God, though we set an hundred enthusiasts
aside, we are still ‘encompassed with a cloud of witnesses,”
who have testified, and do testify, in life and in death, that
perfection which I have taught these forty years I This per
fection cannot be a delusion, unless the Bible be a delusion
too; I mean, “loving God with all our heart, and our neigh
bour as ourselves.’ I pin down all its opposers to this defini
tion of it. No evasion l No shifting the question | Where
is the delusion of this? Either you received this love, or you
did not; if you did, dare you call it a delusion? You will
not call it so for all the world. If you received any thing
else, it does not at all affect the question. Be it as much
a delusion as you please, it is nothing to them who have
received quite another thing, namely, that deep communion
with the Father and the Son, whereby they are enabled to
give him their whole heart; to love every man as their own
soul, and to walk as Christ also walked.
“O Lawrence, if sister Coughlan and you ever did enjoy
this, humble yourselves before God, for casting it away; if
you did not, God grant you may !”
Mon. 29.--I rode to St. Columb, intending to preach
there; but finding no place that was tolerably convenient, I
was going to take horse, when one offered me the use of his
meadow, close to the town. A large congregation quickly
assembled, to whom I explained the nature and pleasantness
of religion. I have seldom seen a people behave so well the
first time I have preached to them.
Tues. 30.--Calling at St. Agnes, I found a large congre
gation waiting; so I preached without delay. At Redruth,
likewise, I found the people gathered from all parts; and
God gave a loud call to the backsliders. Indeed there was
need; for T. Rankin left between three and four hundred
members in the society, and I found an hundred and ten :
In the evening I preached in the meadow at St. Ives, to a
very numerous and deeply-serious congregation. Wednesday,
31. I met the children, a work which will exercise the talents
of the most able Preachers in England. Thursday,
SEPTEMBER 1. The grass being wet, we could not stand in
the meadow; but we found an open space, where I called a
listening multitude to return to Him who “ hath not forgotten
to be gracious.”
Fri. 2.-I preached at noon to an earnest company at Zen
mor, and in the evening to a far larger at St. Just. Here being
Sept. 1768.] JOURNAL, 343
informed that one of our sisters in the next parish, Morva, who
entertained the Preachers formerly, was now decrepit, and had
not heard a sermon for many years, I went on Saturday, 3,
at noon, to Alice Daniel's, and preached near the House,
on, “They who shall be accounted worthy to obtain that
world, and the resurrection from the dead, are equal unto the
angels, and are the children of God, being the children of the
resurrection.” I have always thought there is something
venerable in persons worn out with age; especially when they
retain their understanding, and walk in the ways of God.
Sun. 4.--I went to Sancreet church, where I heard an
excellent sermon. Between one and two I confirmed it, by
explaining that happy religion which our Lord describes in the
Eight Beatitudes. About five in the evening I preached at
Newlyn; about nine the next morning at Penzance. Surely
God will have a people even in this place, where we have so
long seemed only to beat the air. At noon I preached in St.
Hilary, and at St. John’s this and the next evening: I believe
the most senseless then felt the word of God sharp as a
two-edged sword.
Wed. 7.--After the early preaching, the select society
met; such a company of lively believers, full of faith and
love, as I never found in this county before. This, and the
three following days, I preached at as many places as I
could, though I was at first in doubt, whether I could preach
eight days together, mostly in the open air, three or four
times a day. But my strength was as my work; I hardly
felt any weariness, first or last.
Sun. 11.--About mine I preached at St. Agnes, and again
between one and two. At five I took my old stand at
Gwennap, in the natural amphitheatre. I suppose no human
voice could have commanded such an audience on plain
ground: But the ground rising all round gave me such an
advantage, that I believe all could hear distinctly.
Mon. 12.--I preached about noon at Callistick, and in the
evening at Kerley. It rained all the time; but that did
not divert the attention of a large congregation. At noon,
Tuesday, 13, I preached in Truro, and in the evening, at
Mevagissey. It was a season of solemn joy: I have not
often found the like. Surely God’s thoughts are not as our
thoughts l Can any good be done at Mevagissey?
Wed. 14.--After preaching at St. Austle and Medros, I
rode over to Roach, and spent a comfortable evening with my
old acquaintance, Mr. Furly.
Thur. 15.--We had our Quarterly meeting at Medros; but
it was not now as formerly, when the whole society was in a
flame: “The love of many” is now “waxed cold.”
Fri. 16.--I rode, through heavy rain, to Polperro. Here
the room over which we were to lodge, being filled with pilch
ards and conger-eels, the perfume was too potent for me; so
that I was not sorry when one of our friends invited me to
lodge at her house. Soon after I began to preach, heavy rain
began; yet none went away till the whole service was ended.
Sat. 17.--When we came to Crimble-Passage, we were at a
full stop. The boatmen told us the storm was so high, that it
was not possible to pass: However, at length we persuaded
them to venture out; and we did not ship one sea till we got
OVer.-
Sun. 18.--Our Room at the Dock contained the morning
congregation tolerably well. Between one and two I began
preaching on the quay in Plymouth. Notwithstanding the
rain, abundance of people stood to hear. But one silly man
talked without ceasing, till I desired the people to open to
the right and left, and let me look him in the face. They
did so. He pulled off his hat, and quietly went away.
At five I preached in the Square at the Dock, to an exceed
ing large congregation; and the rain, though it prevented
some from coming, did not cause any to go away. Monday,
19. In the evening, I preached in what is vulgarly called
Mr. Whitefield’s Room. Afterwards I met the society in
our own, and exhorted them to “stand fast in one mind and
one judgment.” I set out early in the morning, and in the
evening preached at Tiverton.
Thur. 22.--I rode to Axminster. The rain prevented
my preaching abroad, though the Room would ill contain
the congregation. Observing many there who seemed quite
unawakened, I opened and strongly applied Ezekiel’s vision
of the dry bones. Lord, “breathe upon these slain, that they
may live!”
Fri. 23.--I rode across the country to Charlton, and found
the congregation waiting. In the afternoon we went on to
Lympsham; but not without some difficulty. The waters
were out; so that it was no easy matter either to ride or walk.
My horse got into a ditch over his back in water: Nor could
Oct. 1768.] JOURNAL. 345
I get to my lodgings the foot-way, till an honest man took
me on his shoulders, and so waded through.
Sat. 24.--I returned to Bristol. Tuesday, 27. I preached
in Pensford at eight; in Shepton-Mallet at one; and at
Wincanton in the evening, with far greater freedom than I
used to find among that dead people. About one, Wednes
day, 28, I preached at Stallbridge, to a large and seriously
attentive congregation. Hence I went on to cold, uncomfort
able Shaftesbury, and spoke exceeding strong words. All
seriously attended; some seemed to understand, and a few
to feel, what was spoken.
Thur. 29.--I rode to Frome. The people here seem more
alive than most I have seen in the circuit; and this is the
more strange, because in this town only there is such a mixture
of men of all opinions,--Anabaptists, Quakers, Presbyterians,
Arians, Antinomians, Moravians, and what not. If any hold
to the truth, in the midst of all these, surely the power must
be of God.
Friday, 30, we observed as a day of fasting and prayer;
and it was a good day for many, who no sooner called,
than God answered them in the joy of their heart.
Sun. OcToBER 2.--I preached at Kingswood, upon,
“Quench not the Spirit.” Possibly this people may now
have ears to hear, and may despise prophesyings no more.
Hereby they have frequently quenched the Spirit, and
destroyed his work in their hearts.
Wed. 5.--I rode over to Maiden-Bradley, and preached at
a httle distance from the town, to as serious a congregation
as I ever saw, many of whom were in tears. It is a wonder
there should be room for the Gospel here, among so many
Lords and gentlemen | But indeed they neither meddle nor
make; and this is all we desire of them.
Fri. 7.--I spent an hour, much to my satisfaction, with
the children at Kingswood. There is reason to hope that the
grace of God is still working among them. Some are still
alive to God; and all behave in such a manner, that I have
seen no other school-boys like them.
Sun. 9.--I began examining the society in Kingswood,
much increased both in grace and number, chiefly by means
of those meetings for prayer which God still blesses greatly.
On Monday and Tuesday I examined the society at Bristol,
and found cause to rejoice over these also; although there is
still an heaviness of spirit upon many, indeed on all who are
not going on to perfection.
Wed. 12.--In the evening I preached at Kingswood. I
have not seen such a congregation there, on a week-day, for
above these twenty years. Nor have I seen such a congre
gation at Pill for many years, as was present on Thursday
in the afternoon. It is possible, even on this barren soil, we
may see a little fruit of much labour.
Fri. 14.--I dined with Dr. Wrangel, one of the King
of Sweden’s Chaplains, who has spent several years in
Pennsylvania. His heart seemed to be greatly united to
the American Christians; and he strongly pleaded for our
sending some of our Preachers to help them, multitudes of
whom are as sheep without a shepherd. Tuesday, 18. He
preached at the new Room, to a crowded audience, and
gave general satisfaction by the simplicity and life which
accompanied his sound doctrine.
Sat. 22.--I was much surprised in reading an “Essay on
Music,” wrote by one who is a thorough master of the
subject, to find that the music of the ancients was as simple
as that of the Methodists; that their music wholly consisted
of melody, or the arrangement of single notes; that what is
now called harmony, singing in parts, the whole of counter
point and fugues, is quite novel, being never known in the
world till the popedom of Leo the Tenth. He farther
observes, that as the singing different words by different
persons at the very same time necessarily prevents attention
to the sense, so it frequently destroys melody for the sake
of harmony; meantime it destroys the very end of music,
which is to affect the passions.
Mon. 24.--I left Bristol, and went, by Bath and Bradford,
to Salisbury. Wednesday, 26. At one I preached in Romsey,
to a very quiet, unaffected audience; and in the evening at
Winchester, to a company of as poor people as I have seen for
many years. Thursday, 27. The scene was changed: At
Portsmouth rich and poor flocked together from all parts.
Abundance of them came again at five in the morning. In
the evening the House ill contained them; and never did I
see any receive the word with greater earnestness. The next
day I returned to London.
Mon. 31.--I took horse at five, and just then found that
my horse had scarce a shoe on his feet. However, I was obliged
Nov. 1768.] JOURNAL, 347
(not having a minute to spare) to ride on as far as Colney.
There I procured one to shoe my horse all round, and lame
him on both his fore-feet. However, he halted on to Hockley,
where an honest and skilful smith so altered and removed
the shoes, that he did not halt any more. But by this means
we had lost so much time that the sun set before we reached
Whittlebury-Forest. We had then wonderful road; some
of the ridings (so called) being belly-deep. However, between
six and seven we came safe to Whittlebury.
James Glasbrook was so wearied out, that he could scarce
stir hand or foot; so I desired him to go to rest. I was
weary enough myself, till I began to speak; but weariness
then vanished away, and we all praised God with joyful lips.
Tues. NoveMBER 1.--I preached at Weedon, and at five
in the morning; about eleven at Towcester; and in the
evening to many more than the House would hold at
Northampton. Friday, 4. James Glasbrook (who had a fit of
an ague at Whittlebury) undertook to conduct me to Bedford;
but he was taken ill on the road. I preached there at seven,
on, “Awake, thou that sleepest:” And never was more need;
for a more sleepy audience I have not often seen.
Sat. 5.--About noon I preached at Hertford, in the new
Room, to a large and serious congregation. The Mayor’s
usage of Mr. Colley for preaching in the market-place, with Mr.
Colley’s firm and calm behaviour, was the means of convincing
Mr. Andrews, who built this Room at his own expense.
Mon. 7.--I set out for Oxfordshire; preached at Wycombe
in the evening, and on Tuesday and Wednesday at Witney.
On Thursday, in my return, I was desired to preach at
Oxford. The Room was throughly filled, and not with
curious, but deeply serious hearers. Many of these desired
that our travelling Preachers would take them in their turn,
with which I willingly complied.
In the evening I preached in the chapel at Henley, to a
considerable number of serious people. One or two of the
baser sort made some noise; but I reproved them, and, for
once, they were ashamed.
Fri. 11.--I returned to London. The next week I visited
the classes, and at intervals read Mr. Boswell’s “Account of
Corsica.” But what a scene is opened therein How little
did we know of that brave people! How much less were
we acquainted with the character of their General, Pascal
Paoli; as great a lover of his country as Epaminondas, and
as great a General as Hannibal!
Sat. 19.--I read Dr. Nowell's answer to Mr. Hill,
concerning the expulsion of the Students at Oxford. He
has said all that could be said for that stretch of power,
that instance of summum jus;* and he says quite enough,
to clear the Church of England from the charge of Predes
tination: A doctrine which he proves to be utterly inconsistent
with the Common Prayer, the Communion Service, the Office
of Baptism, the Articles, the Homilies, and the other
writings of those that compiled them.
Mon. 28.--In the evening I preached in the barracks at
Chatham. I spoke louder than I have done for years; yet the
skirts of the congregation could not hear. Few of those that
did hear, heard in vain; for God was in the midst of them.
Tues. 29.--At moon I preached at Sittingbourne, to a
deeply-attentive audience; and in the evening at Canterbury,
in an House half filled,--a sight I do not often see.
Wed. 30.--I rode to Dover, and came in just before a
violent storm began. It did not hinder the people. Many
were obliged to go away after the House was filled. What a
desire to hear runs through all the sea-port towns wherever
we come ! Surely God is besieging this nation, and
attacking it at all the entrances !
Thur. DECEMBER 1.--The storm was ready to bear away
both man and beast. But it abated about noon; so that, after
preaching at Margate, I had a pleasant ride to Canterbury.
I made an odd observation here, which I recommend to all
our Preachers. The people of Canterbury have been so often
reproved, (and frequently without a cause,) for being dead
and cold, that it has utterly discouraged them, and made them
cold as stones. How delicate a thing is it to reprove ! To do
it well, requires more than human wisdom.
Fri. 2.--Those who are called Mr. Whitefield’s society, at
Chatham, offered me the use of their preaching-house, which
I suppose is nearly four times as large as that at the barracks.
In the morning I walked on, ordering my servant to overtake
me with my carriage: And he did so; but not till I had
walked seven or eight miles.
Tues. 13.--Having heard an heavy charge brought against
* Supreme law.-EDIT.
Dec. 1768.] JOURNAL, 349
W G-, a member of our society, I desired the parties
concerned to meet me together. But this afternoon we could
not get half through. At the second hearing I was convinced,
1. That he had spoken unkindly and unjustly: 2. That he
had done wrong in leaving Mr. Dear at so short a warning:
But I was equally convinced, 3. That there had been no
dishonesty on either side.
Wed. 14.--I saw the Westminster scholars act the
“Adelphi” of Terence; an entertainment not unworthy of
a Christian. O how do these Heathens shame us! Their very
comedies contain both excellent sense, the liveliest pictures
of men and manners, and so fine strokes of genuine morality,
as are seldom found in the writings of Christians.
Mon. 19.--I spent an hour with B a I n. If the
account she gives is true, what blessed creatures are both those
gentlemen and their wives that would use the most scurrilous
language, yea, strike and drive out of their house, and that
in a rainy night, a young gentlewoman, a stranger, far from
home, for joining with the Methodists Do these call them
selves Christians? Nay, and Protestants? Call them Turks.
Papist is too good a name.
Tues. 20.--I went to Shoreham. Here I read Mr. Arch
deacon Blackburne’s “Considerations on the Penal Laws
against Papists.” In the Appendix, p. 198, to my no small
surprise, I read these words, said to be wrote by a gentleman
at Paris: “The Popish party boast much of the increase of
the Methodists, and talk of that sect with rapture. How far
the Methodists and Papists stand connected in principles I
know not; but I believe, it is beyond a doubt, that they are
in constant correspondence with each other.”
It seems this letter was published in the “St. James's
Chronicle.” But I never saw or heard of it, till these
words were printed in the “Canterbury Journal,” as Mr.
Blackburne’s own.
And he has nearly made them his own, by his faint note
upon them, “I would willingly hope some doubt may be
made of this.” Indeed he adds, “Mr. Whitefield took
timely care to preclude all suspicions of his having any
connexions with Popery.” Yea, and Mr. Wesley much
more, even as early as Aug. 31, 1738. Again, in my Journal,
Aug. 27, 1739, I published the only letter which I ever
wrote to a Popish Priest. And it is in proof of this proposi
tion, (an extraordinary proof of my connexions with Popery!)
“No Romanist, as such, can expect to be saved, according to
the terms of the Christian covenant.”
Many things to the same purpose occur in the “Journals,”
and the “Appeals to Men of Reason and Religion;” over
and above those whole treatises which I have published
entirely upon the subject:--“A Word to a Protestant,”
a “Roman Catechism,” and “The Advantages of the
Members of the Church of England over the Members of the
Church of Rome.”
What amazing ignorance then, not to say impudence, does
it imply, for any one at this time of day to tax me with
having any connexions with Popery !
In the latter end of the month I took some pains in
reading over Dr. Young’s “Night Thoughts,” leaving out the
indifferent lines, correcting many of the rest, and explaining
the hard words, in order to make that noble work more
useful to all, and more intelligible to ordinary readers.
Sun. JANUARY 1, 1769.--We met, as usual, at Spitalfields
chapel, to renew our covenant with God. And we never do
this without a blessing. Many were comforted, and many
strengthened.
Mon. 9.--I spent a comfortable and profitable hour with
Mr. Whitefield, in calling to mind the former times, and the
manner wherein God prepared us for a work which it had
not then entered into our hearts to conceive.
Tues. 17.--I rode to Chesham. Our own Room being
neither so large, nor so convenient, Mr. Spooner, the Dissent
ing Minister, gave me the use of his meeting. There was a
great number of hearers. They were very attentive; and I
doubt that was all.
Tues. 24.--I went (by land and water) to Sheerness. Our
place here would by no means contain the congregation. A
large number of them attended in the morning, and seemed
just ripe for the blessing. It is an advantage to the people
here that they are in a little corner of the land, shut up, as it
were, from all the world; but not from the Gospel or Spirit
of Christ.
Thur. 26.--I returned to Chatham, and preached in the
great Meeting, on, “God forbid that I should glory, save in
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.” Friday, 27. I returned
to London. The same day Elizabeth Vandome went to rest.
Jan. 1769.] JOURNAL, 851
A month or two ago, when she was first taken ill, she dictated
the following letter:
“DEAR AND REv. S1R,
“WHEN I first heard the Gospel from you, I was
convinced of sin, and nothing could satisfy me but a sense
of pardoning love. For a month the garment of weeping
was put upon me night and day; till one day, as I was
repeating those words,
I trust in Him that stands between
The Father's wrath and me;
Jesus, thou great eternal mean,
I look for all from thee!
I was struck down to the ground, and felt the arm of the
Lord revealed in me: I knew that God was reconciled; I
felt sanctification begun. The fight of faith ensued; and
for three quarters of a year I was struggling with my own
will. Sometimes I was in an agony; I was ready to weep
my life away, fearing the sins I felt in my heart would never
be done away. Yet I believed there was a rest for the people
of God; a rest from all sin. One day, conversing with one
about the things of God, he said, ‘You would have all things
become new, before you believe. But that is not the way.
You must believe first.’ When he went away, the Spirit of
prayer and supplication rested upon me. Yet I felt “bound
down with twice ten thousand ties.” However, I wrestled
on, till the Lord broke in upon my soul like the sun in his
glory. He loosed me at once from all my bonds, and I
knew I loved him with all my heart. Jesus appeared with
hair as white as wool, and garments down to his feet, and gave
me to sit with him in heavenly places. And from that time
(which is seven or eight and twenty years ago) I have felt no
temper contrary to love. I have no desire contrary to the
will of God. On this bed of sickness I have communion with
the church triumphant. I know that
Jesus is my brother now,
And God is all my own.
When the tempter comes, my soul cleaves to Jesus, and I
am kept in perfect peace.
“I thought it my duty to leave this short account of
the gracious dealings of God with my soul, as you was the
instrument he was pleased to make use of, for the beginning
and furthering of his work. O may the Lord strengthen you
and your brother, and increase in you every fruit of his
Spirit; and when you fail on earth, may we meet in heaven,
and praise the great Three-One to all eternity!”
“This account was written some time past, when she was
sick in bed. But since then God raised her up, and enabled
her still to be useful to others, though in great weakness of
body. When she took to her bed again, about three weeks
ago, she had a remarkable dream:--She thought she saw Mr.
W., labouring with his might, to keep the people from falling
into a deep pit, which very few of them perceived. The con
cern she was in awaked her in great emotion. On Tuesday
evening last, she desired us to set her up in bed, to meet her
class. Her voice faltered much. She earnestly exhorted them
all to live near to God, and to keep close together; adding,
“I shall soon join the church above.” She spoke no more;
all was silent rapture, till, on Friday morning, without sigh
or groan, she resigned her spirit to God.
“LYDIA VANDoME.”
Such a living and dying witness of the perfect love of God,
which she enjoyed for eight-and-twenty years, one would
think sufficient to silence all the doubts and objections of
reasonable and candid men.
Sat. 28.--I began visiting the classes. In the intervals I
looked over the Transactions of the Royal Society. Is not
that a little too severe,--
Turpe est difficiles habere nugas 3 *
If this be true, and if it had been well considered, would half
of these Transactions have had a being? Nay, were men
convinced of this, what would become of the greater part of
all the philosophical experiments in Europe?
Mon. FEBRUARY6.--I spent an hour with avenerable woman,
near ninety years of age, who retains her health, her senses, her
understanding, and even her memory, to a good degree. In the
last century she belonged to my grandfather Annesley's congre
gation, at whose house her father and she used to dine every
Thursday; and whom she remembers to have frequently seen
in his study, at the top of the house, with his window open, and
without any fire, winter or summer. He lived seventy-seven
* It is a shame to take much pains about trifles.
Feb. 1769.] JOURNAL, 353
years, and would probably have lived longer, had he not
began water drinking at seventy.
Fri. 10.--I went to Deptford, on purpose to see honest
William Brown, worn out with age and pain, and long con
fined to his bed, without the use of either hand or foot. But
he has the use of his understanding and his tongue, and
testifies that God does all things well; that he has no doubt
or fear, but is cheerfully waiting till his change shall come.
Mon. 13.--I rode to Colchester, and had the satisfaction
of seeing such a congregation, both this evening and the
following, as I never saw in that House before. Wednes
day, 15. I rode to Bury, and found not only an attentive
audience, but a little society athirst for God. Thursday,
16. Supposing we had but five-and-forty miles to Yarmouth,
I did not set out till near seven: But it proved threescore;
likewise it rained all day, and part of the road was very bad.
However, God strengthened both man and beast : So we
reached it before six in the evening.
As we were both throughly wet, I was a little afraid for
my companion, who was much older than me, though he
had not lived so many years. But neither of us was any
worse. The congregation was the largest I ever saw at
Yarmouth; and I spoke far more plainly (if not roughly)
than ever I did before. But I doubt, if, after all the
stumbling-blocks laid in their way, any thing will sink into
their hearts.
Fri. 17.--I abridged Dr. Watts's pretty “Treatise on the
Passions.” His hundred and seventy-seven pages will make
an useful tract of four-and-twenty. Why do persons who treat
the same subjects with me, write so much larger books? Of
many reasons, is not this the chief,--We do not write with the
same view Their principal end is to get money; my only
one, to do good.
Sat. 18.--We rode to Norwich. Sunday, 19. At seven
I administered the Lord's Supper to about a hundred and
seventy serious communicants. One person then found
peace with God, and many were comforted. In the evening,
finding the House would not contain one-third of the congre
gation, I was obliged to stand in the open air; a sight which
has not been seen at Norwich for many years. Yet all the
people were still, and deeply attentive, two or three wild
Antinomians excepted. I preached on the Gospel for the
day,--the Woman of Canaan. I believe God spake to many
hearts; but who will obey his voice?
Wed. 22.--I rode to Lakenheath, and had more hearers
there than I had had for several years. I spoke exceeding
plain in the evening; one fruit of which was, that the House
was filled at five in the morning. Thence I returned to Bury,
and found the same little lively company, whose spirit seemed
to reach the whole congregation. I know not when I have
observed such a constraining power as while I was enforcing,
“Seek ye the Lord while he may be found; call upon him
while he is near.”
Fri. 24.--I rode to Braintree. The sharp frost did not
hinder many from attending; and all were serious and
well-behaved. Saturday, 25. I went on to London.
Mon. 27.--I had one more agreeable conversation with my
old friend and fellow-labourer, George Whitefield. His soul
appeared to be vigorous still, but his body was sinking apace;
and, unless God interposes with his mighty hand, he must
soon finish his labours.
Thur. MARCH 2.--I buried the remains of Michael Hayes,
a good old soldier of Jesus Christ. He had lived above an
hundred and four years, and mostly in vigorous health. His
speech and understanding continued to the last; and as he
lived, so he died, praising God.
Sun. 5.--After preaching at Spitalfields in the morning,
and at West-Street in the afternoon, I went to Brentford;
on Monday, to Hungerford; and the next day to Bath.
On the road, I read over Dr. Campbell’s excellent answer
to David Hume's insolent book against miracles; and Dr.
Brown's keen “Animadversions on the Characteristics of
Lord Shaftesbury,”--another lively, half-thinking writer.
In the evening my brother read Prayers, and I preached,
in the Countess of Huntingdon’s chapel. The congregation
was very large and very attentive. Let us despair of nothing.
Wed, 8.--I preached at Bristol, and met the society. The
next three days I examined them, as usual, one by one, and
found some increase in number, with much increase in peace
and love.-
Mon. 13.--I set out northward. We had fine weather
for a while; then the wind rose, and the rain came down
amain. We were thoroughly wet before we came to Stroud,
but took no cold at all. At six the House was, as usual,
March, 1769.] JOURNAL• 355
quite filled, though the wind and rain kept many strangers
away. The people appeared to be all alive, and ready to
devour the word. Afterwards we had a love-feast, at which
many, both men and women, spoke, with all simplicity, what
God had done for their souls.
Tues. 14.--After preaching to a large congregation at
five, we rode toward Tewkesbury: Notice having been given
Qf my preaching about noon at a house a mile from the town.
But we could not get to it; the floods were so high ; so I
intended to go straight to Worcester. But one informing me
a congregation from all parts was waiting, we set out another
way, and waded through the water. This congregation too
seemed quite earnest; so that I did not regret my labour.
But the going and coming was hard work, so that I was a
little tired before we came to Worcester.
I began preaching about six in the riding-house. Abundance
of people were deeply attentive. But toward the close, a large
number of boys made a great noise. When we came out, men
and boys joined together, in shouting and pushing to and fro.
Many were frighted, but none hurt. Hitherto could Satan
come, but no farther.
Wed. 15.--My horse being lame, and part of the road very
bad, I did not reach Mr. Lee's, of Coton, till noon. The
house is delightfully situated in his park, at the top of a
fruitful hill. His Chaplain had just begun reading Prayers.
Afterwards he desired me to give an exhortation. So I could
not take horse till half-hour after one, when I had eight
and-twenty miles to ride on a lame horse. I came, however, to
Shrewsbury between five and six, and preached to a large
and quiet congregation. As we returned, the rabble were noisy
enough; but they used only their tongues. So all was well.
Thur. 16.--We rode, with a furious wind full in our face,
to Chester.
Friday, 17, and the next days, we had a refreshing season,
with a loving people, and in a loving family. The congre
gations were not small in the mornings; in the evenings
exceeding large. And all who attended, behaved as if they
not only understood, but relished, the good word.
Sun. 19.--Elizabeth Oldham called upon me. She told
me, “Some time since my mother said, ‘Call my son to see
me die.’ He asked, ‘Have you any fear of death?” She
said, “O no ! That is gone long since. Perfect love casts
out fear. Do not you see him ? There he is, waiting to
receive my soul!” She then sang with a clear voice,
Praise God from whom all blessings flow.
And ended her song and her life together.
“Every round my husband took lately, being doubtful
when he took horse whether he should not drop by the way,
he carried a paper in his pocket, telling who he was, and
whither he was going. This day five weeks, being exceeding
weak, he feared he should not be able to preach. But I said,
‘My dear, go into the pulpit, and the Lord will strengthen
thee.’ And after he had spoke a few words, the Lord did
strengthen him. Neither did he speak in vain: Many were
comforted; several justified. One of these said, ‘He is going
to rest soon, and I shall go with him.’ He died in full
triumph the next Lord's Day; and she two hours after.
“But a day or two before he died, I felt a kind of
unwillingness to give him up. I was mourning before the
Lord concerning this, when he said to my inmost soul, ‘Wilt
thou not give him back to me, whom I have fitted for
myself?' I said, ‘Lord, I do, I do give him up.’ And
immediately he changed for death.
“On the Sunday following, I was saying to my little maid,
(always a serious and dutiful child, three years and a half
old,) “Hannah, dost thou love God?” She eagerly answered,
‘Yes, mammy, I do. She added, ‘I will go to God; I will
go to God;’ leaned down, and died.”
Tues. 21.--I went to Parkgate, and, about eleven,
embarked on board the King George. We had mild weather
and smooth water all day. The next day, the west wind blew
fresh. Yet about five we were in Dublin Bay, where we pro
eured a fishing-boat, which brought us to Dunleary. Here
we took a chaise, and got to Dublin about eight o’clock.
On Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, I laboured to allay
the ferment which still remained in the society. I heard the
Preachers face to face, once and again, and endeavoured
to remove their little misunderstandings. And they did
come a little nearer to each other: But still a jealousy was
left, without an entire removal of which there can be no
cordial agreement.
MARCH 26.--(Being Easter-Day.) Many felt the power of
the Spirit, which raised Jesus from the dead. On Monday and
April, 1769.] JOURNAL. 357
Tuesday, I visited the classes, and the result of my closest
observation was, 1. That out of five hundred members whom
I left here, only four hundred and fifty remained: 2. That
near half of the believers had suffered loss, and many quite
given up their faith: 3. That the rest were more established
than ever, and some swiftly growing in grace. So that,
considering the heavy storm they had gone through, if there
was cause of humiliation on the one hand, there was, on the
other, more abundant cause of thankfulness to Him who had
saved so many when all the waves went over them.
Thur. 30.--I was summoned to the Court of Conscience,
by a poor creature who fed my horses three or four times
while I was on board. For this service he demanded ten
shillings. I gave him half-a-crown. When I informed the
Court of this, he was sharply reproved: Let all beware of
these land-sharks on our sea-coasts !--My scraps of time this
week I employed in reading the account of Commodore
Byron. I never before read of any who endured such
hardships, and survived them. Sure no Novel in the world
can be more affecting, or more surprising, than this history.
Mon. APRIL 3.--I took horse at four; and notwith
standing the north-east wind, came to Newry before five in
the evening. It was so extremely cold, that the congregation
in the market-house was but small. The next evening it
was considerably increased. Wednesday, 5. I rode to Terry
hugan, where the poor people had raised a tent (so called) to
screen me from the north wind. I urged them, with much
enlargement of heart, not to receive the grace of God in
vain. Thence we rode to Lisburn. The wind was still
piercing cold; yet it did not hinder a multitude of people
from attending at the Linen-hall; an open Square so termed,
as are all the Linen-halls in Ireland.
Thur. 6.--I designed to preach at noon in the market-house
at Belfast; but it was pre-engaged by a dancing-master: So
I stood in the street, which doubled the congregation; to
whom I strongly declared, “All have sinned, and are come
short of the glory of God.” But this many of them had no
ears to hear, being faithful followers of Dr. Taylor.
Coming to Carrickfergus, I found it was the time of the
Quarter Sessions. This greatly increased the congregation;
and most of them seemed to be deeply affected, rich as well
as poor. Friday, 7. I preached at eleven, and, I believe, all
the gentlemen in the town were present. So were all at
Newtown in the evening, while I enforced those solemn words,
“God now commandeth all men, everywhere, to repent.”
Sat. 8.--I returned to Lisburn, where I was agreeably
surprised by a visit from Mr. Higginson, Rector of
Ballinderry. He said, “I was prejudiced in favour of the
Moravians, settled in my parish, till the late affair. One of my
parishioners, Mr. Campbell, died, leaving by will his fortune
to his two daughters; and, in case of their death, a thousand
pounds to the poor of the parish. His widow was extremely
ill; notwithstanding which, some of the Brethren, to whom
she was quite devoted, came in the depth of winter, and
carried her by night several miles to their house. She died
in a few days after she had made a will, wherein she made
two of them executors; a third, guardian to the children;
and in case of their death left the whole estate to the Brethren.
They concealed her death six days. Meantime, two of them
went to Dublin, and procured Letters of Administration, and
of Guardianship. Soon after I was pressed to undertake
the cause of the orphans. I went to Dublin, and laid the
affair before the Lord Chancellor; who, after a full hearing,
cancelled the second will, and ordered the first to stand.”
At my leisure minutes yesterday and to-day, I read Mr.
Glanvill’s Sadducismus Triumphatus. But some of his
relations I cannot receive; and much less his way of account
ing for them. All his talk of “aërial and astral spirits,” I
take to be stark nonsense. Indeed, supposing the facts true,
I wonder a man of sense should attempt to account for them.
at all. For who can explain the things of the invisible world,
but the inhabitants of it?
Tues. 11.--I preached in the market-house in Tanderagee
to one of the liveliest congregations in the kingdom.
Thursday and Friday I preached at Dawson's Grove and
Kilmararty; and on Saturday, 15, rode to Derry-Anvil, a
little village out of all road, surrounded with bogs, just like
my old parish of Wroote, in Lincolnshire. The congregation,
however, was exceeding large and exceeding lively. I talked
largely with several of them who believe they are saved from
sin, and found no cause to disbelieve them: And I met with
many more in these parts who witness the same confession.
Sun. 16.--At nine I preached in a meadow near Cock-Hill
to a listening multitude. I suppose we should have had twice
April, 1769.] JOURNAL. 359
the number in the evening, but the rain prevented. The
grass being wet, I stood in the highway, while many stood
in the neighbouring houses. And the word of God was as
the rain upon the tender herb.
Mon. 17.--In the evening, and twice on Tuesday, I
preached to a genteel yet serious audience, in Mr. M“Gough’s
avenue, at Armagh. But God only can reach the heart.
Wednesday, 19. As it rained, I chose rather to preach in
M“Gough's yard. The rain increasing, we retired into one
of his buildings. This was the first time that I preached in
a stable; and I believe more good was done by this than all
the other sermons I have preached at Armagh.
We took horse about ten, being desired to call at Kinnard,
(ten or eleven miles out of the way,) where a little society had
been lately formed, who were much alive to God. At the
town-end, I was met by a messenger from Archdeacon
C-e, who desired I would take a bed with him; and soon
after by another, who told me, the Archdeacon desired I would
alight at his door. I did so; and found an old friend whom
I had not seen for four or five and thirty years. He received
me with the most cordial affection; and, after a time, said,
“We have been building a new church, which my neighbours
expected me to open; but if you please to do it, it will be as
well.” Hearing the bell, the people flocked together from all
parts of the town, and “received the word with all readiness
of mind.” I saw the hand of God was in this, for the
strengthening of this loving people; several of whom believe
that the blood of Christ has “cleansed” them “from all sin.”
Hence we rode through a pleasant country to Charlemount,
where I preached to a very large and serious congregation,
near the Fort, which has a ditch round it, with some face of
a fortification; and probably (according to custom) costs
the Government a thousand a year, for not three farthings’
service
Thur. 20.--I went on to Castle-Caulfield, and preached on
the Green adjoining to the Castle, to a plain, serious people,
who still retain all their earnestness and simplicity. Thence
I rode to Cookstown; a town consisting of one street about a
mile long, running directly through a bog. I preached to
most of the inhabitants of the town; and so the next day,
morning and evening. Many “received the word with
gladness.” Perhaps they will not all be stony-ground hearers.
We took the new road to Dungiven. But it was hard
work.
Nigh founder'd, on we fared,
Treading the crude consistence.
We were near five hours going fourteen miles, partly on
horseback, partly on foot. We had, as usual, a full House
at Londonderry in the evening, and again at eight on
Sunday morning. In the afternoon we had a brilliant
congregation. But such a sight gives me no great pleasure;
as I have very little hope of doing them good: Only “with
God all things are possible.”
Both this evening and the next I spoke exceeding plain to
the members of the society. In no other place in Ireland
has more pains been taken by the most able of our Preachers.
And to how little purpose ! Bands they have none: Four
and-forty persons in the society | The greater part of these
heartless and cold. The audience in general dead as stones.
However, we are to deliver our message; and let our Lord
do as seemeth him good.
Tues. 25.--I fixed again the meeting of the singers, and of
the children; both which had been discontinued. Indeed, a
general remissness had prevailed since the morning preaching
was given up. No wonder: Wherever this is given up, the
glory is departed from us.
Wed. 26.--Being to preach at Brickfield, four or five
(English) miles from Derry, I chose walking, to show these
poor indolent creatures how to use their own feet. Finding
the bulk of the hearers quite senseless, I spoke as strongly
as I could, on, “Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is
not quenched.” But I did not perceive they were at all
affected. God only can raise the dead.
Thur. 27.--I went to a village called the New-Buildings,
about three miles from the city, and preached in a field near
the town, to a civil, careless congregation. In the evening
I preached in our Room, on, “If thou canst believe, all
things are possible to him that believeth;” and now first I
saw a prospect of doing good here: I mean since I came
last. God did arise to maintain his own cause; and the
stout-hearted trembled before him.
Fri. 28.-I preached again at Brickfield; and God made
some impression on the stony hearts: But much more at
Derry in the evening. Here he spoke with his mighty voice;
May, 1769.] JOURNAL. 361
and I believe many were just on the brink of believing in the
name of the Son of God.
Sun. 30.--I preached to a very large congregation at the
New-Buildings, who now were all attention. I preached in
the evening at Derry; and, having taken a solemn leave of
the society, rode to Brickfield, and slept in peace.
Mon. MAY 1.--I rode to Augher. It being extremely hot,
I came in faint and weary. Before I finished my sermon,
my head turned giddy, and I could hardly stand. But I had
a good night's rest, and rose as well as when I left Dublin.
Tues. 2.--I began preaching at Sydare, about half-hour
after five; and it was a day of God’s power. The impression
was general, if not universal: None appeared to be unmoved.
This constrained me to enlarge in prayer, as I have not done
for some years; so that I did not dismiss the congregation till
it was almost eight o’clock.
Wed. 3.--About noon, I preached in the market-place, at
Enniskillen, once inhabited only by Protestants. But it has
lost its glorying, having now at least five Papists to one
Protestant. There was a large number of hearers, some
civil, some rude, almost all totally unaffected. Thence I
rode six or seven miles to Tommy-Lommon, where was a
congregation of quite another kind. Great part of them
knew in whom they had believed; all were deeply and steadily
attentive; and many were thoroughly convinced of i bred
sin, and groaning for full redemption.
Thur. 4.--I found near Swadlinbar, as artless, as earnest,
and as loving a people as even at Tonny-Lommon. About
six I preached at the town's end, the very Papists appearing
as attentive as the Protestants; and I doubt not thousands of
these would soon be zealous Christians, were it not for their
wretched Priests, who will not enter into the kingdom o God
themselves, and diligently hinder those that would.
Fri. 5.--I rode over the Black Mountains to Manorhamil
ton; so called from a poor wretch who settled here in the last
century, and was famous for nothing else but hanging up ll the
Irish who fell into his hands. There was a general love to the
Gospel here, till simple R. W. preached against the Clergy. It
is strange every one does not see, 1. The sinfulness of railing
at the Clergy; if they are blind leaders of the blind, then (says
our Lord) “Let them alone:” 2. The foolishness of it. It
never can do good; and has frequently done much harm.
At six I preached to a large congregation in the Sessions
House. All behaved well, but one young gentlewoman, who
laughed almost incessantly. She knew there was nothing to
laugh at; but she thought she laughed prettily.
Sat. 6.--In the evening I preached near the market-house
in Sligo, to a large and tolerably quiet congregation; but I
soon found I was shooting over their heads, in talking of
Salvation by Faith: So, at eight in the morning, Sunday, 7,
I suited myself to their capacity, by preaching on, “Where
their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.” The
effect was, that the evening congregation was such as I had
not seen here for many years.
Mon. 8.--I rode to Castlebar, and at seven preached in the
Court-House. Tuesday, 9. I dined at Sir C. B.'s, who asked
me if it would be convenient for me to give them a sermon in
his hall. We sent to the Court-House, and the people who
were waiting there came up without delay. The family were
in the parlour, the bulk of the congregation in the hall and
the long passage. Wednesday, 10. I preached in the Court
House, on, “Put on the whole armour of God;” and taking
horse early in the morning, Thursday, 11, rode to Galway.
About seven I preached in the Sessions-House, a large
commodious place, where were hearers of every sort. All were
silent and tolerably civil; some appeared to be a little affected.
Many Officers, and a considerable number of genteel people,
attended the next evening; and I am in hopes a few of them
will not easily forget what they then heard.
Sat. 13.--We rode to Limerick. This evening I preached
in the Room; and at eight in the morning, Whit-Sunday,
but was much scandalized at the smallness of the congregation.
In the evening I preached in the Old-Camp, where the congre
gation was larger than it had been for several years. So it
was likewise on Monday and Tuesday evening. But still I
observed none wounded among them, nor any thing more
than a calm, dull attention.
Wed. 17.--I preached in Ballygarane at noon, and in
the evening at Newmarket. One gentlewoman, violently
prejudiced against this way, at first stood at a distance:
Then she came a little nearer; afterwards sat down; and
in a short time hid her face. She attended again in the
morning, being much convinced of sin, particularly of
despising the real word of God.
May, 1769.] JOURNAL. 363
We observed Friday, 19, as a day of fasting and prayer,
for a revival of his work. Many attended both at five, nine,
and one, but abundance more at the watch-night. And then
it was that God touched the hearts of the people, even of
those that were “twice dead.”
Sun. 21.--I was in hopes of taking the field in the after
noon, but the rain prevented. Yet I did not repent of the
disappointment, so great was the power of God in the midst
of us. I believe few were untouched; many were deeply
wounded; many rejoiced with joy unspeakable. The same
power was present the next morning and evening, both to
wound and to heal. God employed his two-edged sword on
every side, in a manner I had not seen here for many years.
O how ready is He to answer every “prayer that goeth not
out of feigned lips!”
Tues. 23.--We had an evening congregation at five, and
an exceeding solemn parting. At six in the evening I cried
to a company a little above brutes, “Why will ye die, O
house of Israel?” This was at Kilfinnan. I lodged a mile
from the town, among some that were alive to God.
Wed. 24.--I had a cool, pleasant ride to Cork, where I
soon heard how cold and careless the people were. I asked,
“But are not the society at least alive?” “No; these
are the coldest of all.” “What then? Are we to be
careless, too? Nay, so much the more let us stir up the gift
of God that is in us.” I began in the evening to speak
exceeding plain, and I presently saw some fruit: The
congregation at five in the morning was not much less than
it was in the evening. Many saw their loss; God gave me
again very sharp though loving words. I trust this also is a
token for good, and Satan shall not long triumph over us.
Thur. 25.--I rode to Bandon. Since I was here before,
several have gone home rejoicing; but others are come in
their place. So that the society contains just as many mem
bers as when I left it; and most of the believers seem much
alive; particularly the young men, maidens, and children.
In the evening we were obliged to be in the House; but the
next, Friday, 26, I stood in the main street, and cried to a
numerous congregation, “Fear God, and keep his command
ments; for this is the whole of man.” Afterwards I visited
one that a year or two ago was in high life, an eminent beauty,
adored by her husband, admired and caressed by some of the
first men in the nation. She was now without husband, without
friend, without fortune, confined to her bed, in constant pain,
and in black despair, believing herself forsaken of God, and
possessed by a legion of devils | Yet I found great liberty in
praying for her, and a strong hope that she will die in peace.
Sun. 28.--I returned to Cork. The rain drove us into the
House, which was once more throughly filled. I scarce ever
spoke so plain as I did both this and the two following days;
yet for many years the congregations had not been so large.
Wednesday and Thursday I visited the classes. Decreasing
still ! Seven years ago we had near four hundred members in
this society; five years since, about three hundred members.
Two years ago they were two hundred; now one hundred
and ninety. On Thursday evening, JUNE 1, I preached at
Blackpool, to such a congregation as I never saw there
before. Friday, 2, we observed as a day of fasting and
prayer. At five and at nine we found God was with us; but
much more at one, and most of all at the watch-night, during
the application of those awful words, “Where their worm
dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.”
Sat. 3.-I preached at Blackpool again. Again multitudes
of “publicans and sinners drew near,” and gladly heard that
“there is joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth.”
Sunday, 4. The rain again prevented my preaching at the
Barrack-Hill; but God was again present at the Room, and
filled many souls with strong consolation. When I took my
leave of the society, many were moved, fearing we should
meet no more. If not, is it not enough that we shall meet
again at the resurrection of the just?
Mon. 5.--Having been much importuned to give them a
day or two more, I rode to Limerick. Tuesday, 6. I looked
over a considerable part of Mr. Turner’s “Remarkable
Providences.” What pity is it that the author had not a
little judgment as well as piety | What an heap of things
has he huddled together, good, bad, and indifferent l But
how fine a treatise might a man of sense collect out of it!
After encouraging as many as I could, both in public and
private, to “press on toward the mark,” on Thursday, 8,
I once more took my leave of this loving people, and set out
for Waterford. We intended to dine at Tipperary, but were
directed wrong. At length we stumbled on a little town,
called Golding. And here I found poor Michael Weston,
June, 1769.] JOURNAL. 365
who rambled hither from Westminster, some months since,
in quest of an estate. I clearly saw the providence of God,
directing me hither before he was quite starved. Thence we
rode to the Garter, near Clonmell; (where we had excellent
entertainment;) and the next morning, over exceeding
pleasant and well-cultivated mountains, to Waterford.
Never was the prospect more gloomy here than at present.
Through the continual neglect of the Preachers, the congrega
tion was reduced almost to nothing; and so was the society.
Yet I found much liberty of speech in the evening, and a
strong hope that God would revive his work.
I was invited to lodge at Mr. Scott's, a considerable
tradesman. I found a young gentlewoman there, a visitant,
well-bred, sensible, good-humoured; studious to oblige, and
“lacking nothing” but the “one thing.” Saturday, 10.
The Room was quite filled in the morning. In the evening
I preached in the court to thrice as many as the Room
would contain; and all were not only quiet, but attentive.
Sun. 11.--The congregation at eight was still larger. But
not many seemed to be affected. In the evening the court
was filled, and I believe God opened both the understanding
and the hearts of many. Afterwards I met the society, and
endeavoured to lift up the hands that hung down. Light
began to spring up. Misunderstandings vanished away, and
the spirits of many revived.
Mon. 12.--I laboured to re-unite the poor, shattered
society, and to remove the numberless offences which had
torn them in pieces. Tuesday, 13. In the evening God
began to answer for himself. I scarce ever saw a more deep
and general impression made on a congregation. At the
meeting of the society, likewise, he refreshed us with “the
multitude of peace.”
Wed. 14.--I preached in the market-house at Passage, to
as dull a congregation as I have seen. They would have
been rude enough too, but that they stood in awe of Mr.
Freestone, who gave one and another, when they did not
regard his signs, a stroke on the head with his stick. By
this means the whole multitude was tolerably quiet, and
many seemed much affected.
A little before twelve I came to Old-Ross, and preached to a
small, serious congregation. Thence we went onto Enniscorthy;
but the difficulty was, where I should preach. It rained, but
no House would contain the people. We made the best shift
we could, by stowing as many as possible in the House; the
rest, as I stood near the door, were quiet without. It was an
uncommon time, particularly with regard to those who had
opposed the truth. One dropped down like a stone; many
trembled and wept exceedingly. All declared, that such a
work as this was never seen at Enniscorthy before.
Thur. 15.--I began to preach a little before five, on,
“The kingdom of God within us.” The hearts of the
hearers, one and all, seemed to be as melting wax. Surely
it was not for nothing that Satan fought so furiously to keep
the Gospel from this place.
Indeed there has not been hotter persecution of late years
any where in the kingdom than here. The mob, encouraged
by their superiors, beat and abused whom they pleased, broke
open their houses, and did just what they listed. A wretched
Clergyman confirmed them therein, and applied to the
Methodist Preachers 2 Tim. iii. 6, 7; the very text of that
unhappy gentleman at Bristol, which he uttered, and dropped
down in the pulpit. After he had painted them as black as
devils, he added, “I have not time to finish now; next Sunday
I will give you the rest.” But the next morning he was struck
in a strange manner. He could not bear to be a moment alone.
He cried out, “Those hobgoblins; do not you see them?
There, there ! The room is full of them.” Having continued
thus some days, he screamed out, “See that hobgoblin at the
bed’s feet ! O that roll, that roll which he holds up to me !
All my sins are written therein l” Not long after, without
showing the least sign of hope, he went to his account.
In the afternoon I came to Kilkenny, and in the evening
preached in the Tholsel. A more civil and unawakened
audience I know not when I have seen. The bulk of them
appeared to be no more affected than if I had been talking
Greek. However, many of them attended the next morning,
and more than ever in the evening: And all behaved well but
one gentleman, who took much pains to divert those that were
near him. I fixed my eyes upon him; but he did not regard
it. I was then obliged to speak to him; and he was silent.
Sat. 17.--I finished “Historic Doubts on the Life and
Reign of Richard the Third.” What an amazing monster,
both in body and mind, have our historians and poets painted
him ! And yet I think Mr. Walpole makes it more clear than
June, 1769.] JOURNALs 367
one could expect at this distance of time, 1. That he was
not only not remarkably deformed, but, on the contrary,
remarkably handsome. 2. That his Queen, whom he
entirely loved, died a natural death. 3. That his nephew,
Edward the Fifth, did so too; there being no shadow of
proof to the contrary. 4. That his other nephew, Richard,
was the very person whom Henry the Seventh murdered,
after constraining him to call himself Perkin Warbeck.
5. That the death of his brother, the Duke of Clarence, was
the sole act, not of him, but Edward the Fourth. 6. That
he had no hand at all in the murder of Henry the Sixth, any
more than of his son. And, lastly, That he was clear of all
blame, as to the execution of Lord Hastings; as well as of
Rivers, Grey, and Vaughan. What a surprising thing is it,
then, that all our historians should have so readily swallowed
the account of that wretch who “killed, and also took
possession” of the throne; and blundered on, one after
another ! Only it is to be observed, for fifty years no one
could contradict that account, but at the peril of his head.
Sun. 18.--As it rained, I preached morning and evening
in the Tholsel, to a multitude of people. I spoke exceeding
plain, and all received it in love. Perhaps some may bring
forth fruit.
Mon. 19.--In the evening I preached at Birr, and removed
some misunderstandings which had crept into the society.
Tues. 20.--I went on to Aghrim, and spoke as plain as
possibly I could to a money-loving people, on, “God said
unto him, Thou fool!” But I am afraid many of them are
sermon-proof. Yet God has all power. And sometimes he
sends, when and where it pleases him,
O'erwhelming showers of saving grace.
IBut I have never observed these to last long. And in all the
intervals of them, he acts by his standing rule, “Unto him
that hath,” and uses what he hath, “shall be given; and he
shall have more abundantly: But from him that hath not,”
uses it not, “shall be taken away even that he hath.”
Wed. 21.--I went on to Athlone. Friday, 23. I rode to
Abidarrig, to the Quarterly Meeting. Many of the people came
from far; and God gave them a good reward for their labour.
Saturday, 24. We returned to Athlone. Sunday, 25. In the
afternoon Istood in Barrack-Street, and cried aloud to a mixed
multitude, “Behold, I stand at the door and knock.” I never
before saw so quiet a congregation on this side the water.
There was not only no tumult, but no murmur to be heard,
no smile to be seen on any face.
Mon. 26.--About noon I preached on the Green, at Clara,
to an exceeding serious congregation; and in the evening at
Tullamore. Tuesday, 27. I found a little increase in the
society: But there cannot be much without more field
preaching. Wherever this is intermitted, the work of God
stands still, if it does not go back.
To-day I wrote to a pious and sensible woman as follows :
“DEAR MADAM, Tullamore, 27th June, 1769.
“WHEN I had the pleasure of conversing with you some
years since, you had a regard both for me and the people called
Methodists. If I am rightly informed, you are now of another
mind. May I ask, When did that change begin? Was it at
your last journey to Dublin? Whenever it was, suffer me to
ask, What were the reasons of it? I will tell you what I
conjecture, and I do it in writing because I may not have an
opportunity of talking with you; because I can write more
freely than I could speak; because I can now say all I have
to say at once; whereas, if we were talking together, I might
probably forget some part; and because you may by this
means have the better opportunity of calmly considering it.
“I conjecture (to tell you just what rises in my heart)
that this change was owing to several causes. Some admired
and commended you as a person of uncommon sense and
uncommon attainments in religion. Others told you at large,
from time to time, all the real or supposed faults of the
Methodists. In particular the jars which had lately been
in Dublin, on account of Mr. Morgan and Olivers. This
naturally tended to breed and increase pride on the one hand,
and prejudice on the other. Riches increased; which not
only led you, step by step, into more conformity to the world,
but insensibly instilled self-importance, unwillingness to be
contradicted, and an overbearing temper. And hence you
was, of course, disgusted at those who did not yield to this
temper, and blamed that conformity. Perhaps some of these
professed or expected to be perfected in love; they at least
believed Perfection. Now this you seemed to hate with a
perfect hatred; and on that account disliked them the more.
“Permit me to add a few words on each of these heads. And
June, 1769.] JOURNAL. 369
first, would it not be well, if you started back from every
appearance of admiration, (which you know is deadly poison,)
whether on account of your sense or piety? And if you utterly
discountenanced all who directly or indirectly commended you
to your face? Yea, and all who told you of the jars or faults
of the Methodists, or indeed of any absent person?
“Should you not earnestly strive and pray against thinking
highly of your own understanding, or attainments in religion?
Otherwise, this, by grieving the Holy Spirit, would expose you
to still more prejudice; especially towards those who might
seem to vie with you in religion, if not in understanding.
“Can you be too sensible, how hardly they that have riches
enter into the kingdom of heaven? Yea, or into the kingdom
of an inward heaven? Into the whole spirit of the Gospel?
How hard is it for these (whether you do or no) not to
conform too much to the world ! How hard not to be a little
overbearing, especially to inferiors |
“Is it right to be disgusted at those who fear you conform
too far, who do not sink down before you; nay, perhaps oppose
your judgment, or blame your practice?
“And with regard to Perfection. Have not they that hold
it the same right to be angry with you for denying it, as you
with them for affirming it?
“But what is it you are angry at? What is it you object
to ? Let us understand the question before we dispute about it.
“By Christian Perfection, I mean, 1. Loving God with all
our heart. Do you object to this? I mean, 2. A heart and
life all devoted to God. Do you desire less? I mean, 3.
Regaining the whole image of God. What objection to this?
I mean, 4. Having all the mind that was in Christ. Is this
going too far? I mean, 5. Walking uniformly as Christ
walked. And this surely no Christian will object to. If any
one means anything more, or anything else by Perfection, I
have no concern with it. But if this is wrong, yet what need
of this heat about it, this violence, I had almost said fury,
of opposition, carried so far as even not to lay out anything
with this man, or that woman, who professes it? ‘Nay, says
Mrs. , “I did not refrain from it for this only, but for
their espousing Mr. Olivers's cause against Mr. Morgan.”
Worse and worse! What ! are people to starve, (at least for
me,) unless they think as I think, or like whom I like? Alas,
what religion, what humanity, what common sense is this?
“But I have done. I have once for all taken upon myself
a most unthankful office. I have spoken with all plainness and
simplicity, and now leave the event to God. May He open your
heart, that you may discern his holy, and acceptable, and perfect
will; that you may have a right judgment in all things, and
evermore rejoice in his holy comfort! I am, dear Madam,
“Your affectionate servant,
“JoHN WESLEY.”
Wed. 28.--I rode to Mount-Mellick, and, for the sake of some
tender persons, preached in the new House. It was a solemn
time; in consequence of which it was pretty well filled in the
morning. A serious awe spread over the whole congregation;
but more remarkably the next evening, while I was opening
and applying the story of Dives and Lazarus. Friday, 30. I
rode over to Montrath, a wild place as most in Ireland, and
preached in the shell of a new House to many more than it
would contain. All were quiet and attentive. In the middle
of the sermon a young woman, who was a sinner, endeavoured
for a while to hide her tears, by creeping behind another, till
in a few minutes her strength failed, and she sunk down to
the ground. I was sorry they carried her away; otherwise,
I think she would have soon lifted up her head with joy.
In the evening we had a love-feast at Mount-Mellick; and
great was our rejoicing in the Lord. Many were filled with
consolation, trusting he would soon “make an end of sin,
and bring in everlasting righteousness.”
Sat. JULY 1.--I found a far different face of things at
Portarlington. The large society had once an hundred and
thirty members; (an hundred and four I joined in three days;)
it had now no more than twenty-four; and some of these had
only a name to live. In the evening I applied particularly
to the backsliders; but almost as soon as I began, a large
company of Quality (as they called them) came, and embar
rassed me not a little. I knew this was heathen Greek to
them; but I could not then change my subject. However, I
diluted my discourse as much as I could, that it might not
be quite too strong for their digestion.
Sun. 2.--I read Mrs. Rowe's “Devout Exercises of the
Heart.” It is far superior to anything of hers which I ever
read, in style as well as in sense. Her experience is plain,
sound, and scriptural, no way whimsical or mystical; and
her language is clear, strong, and simple, without any of that
July, 1769.] JOURNAL. 371
affected floridness which offends all who have a tolerable ear,
or any judgment in good writing.
At nine we had a serious congregation, to whom I could
speak of the deep things of God; and the new House held
them tolerably well; but in the evening it was far too small;
so I stood in a little ground adjoining to the House. Many
tender ones sat within, but the bulk of the congregation stood
in the meadow, and the gardens on each side. I have not seen,
in all the world, a people so easy to be convinced or persuaded
as the Irish. What pity that these excellent propensities
should not always be applied to the most excellent purposes!
Mon. 3.--I rode to Coolylough, (where was the Quarterly
Meeting,) and preached at eleven, and in the evening. While
we were singing, I was surprised to see the horses from all
parts of the ground gathering about us. Is it true then that
horses, as well as lions and tigers, have an ear for music?
Wed, 5.--I went on to Tyrrel's Pass. Thursday, 6. At
eleven I preached in the Court-House, at Molingar, to a very
genteel, and yet serious, audience. In the evening I preached
at Tyrrel’s Pass again; and on Friday, 7, at Edinderry.
Here I received from Joseph Fry a particular account of his
late wife, an Israelite indeed. He said, “She was a strict
attendant on all the means of grace, and a sincere lover of the
people of God. She had a remarkably good understanding,
and much knowledge of the things of God. Though she was
of an exceeding bashful temper, yet she was valiant for the
truth; not sparing to speak very plain in defence of it, before
persons of all conditions. Two years ago she began to lose her
health, and grew worse and worse, till September 29th. On
that day she was very restless. Observing her to have an
unusual colour, I judged she could not continue long. She
was sensible of it, and said, “Do not go from me; for my time
is short. O it is an hard thing to die!” After a while, she
said, ‘Dear Jesus, shall it be so with me as with the wicked ?’
I was deeply affected at seeing her in such a state; yet some
thing told me, ‘All will be well.’ I exhorted her, with all my
might, to lean on Jesus; and found myself unusually blessed
in so doing; but still she did not seem to receive it, till I
observed her jaw was fallen. I was then concerned more
than ever, lest she should die without hope. I spoke with more
vehemence, while she lay speechless, with her eyes up to
heaven; but on a sudden, she got her lips together again, and
said, with a loud voice, ‘Now, my love, I experience what
you have said. After all, my Jesus is mine. The devil is
conquered; there, there you may see him going with shame.’
She then praised God so loud, that one might hear her in
the street; and added, “Fine sport, my dear Joel the devil
is cast. After rejoicing in God some time, she closed her
eyes; but in a little while she said, “O was it not very pretty
when the wise virgins went out in white to meet their Lord?
Yet what would their robes have signified, without his
righteousness?’ and died.”
The next day I went on to Dublin, and found all things
as quiet as I left them. Wednesday, 12. I rode through a
lovely country to Ballymore, in the county of Wexford. Near
twenty years ago, all this country was moved by the preaching
of James Morris. Thousands flocked to hear; but one false
step of his quite scattered them again. The House would not
near contain the people; so I stood abroad, in a fair mild
evening; and once more God has given them a loud call to
turn unto Him, that they may save their souls alive.
Thur. 13.--I rode on to Enniscorthy, and preached on,
“Is there no balm in Gilead?” To-day I saw one of the
most lively and sensible children that I have met with in the
kingdom. What a miracle will it be if she saves her soul;
if general admiration does not destroy her |
Hence I rode to Bunklody, a little, ugly, scattered town;
but delightfully situated. I did not find that five persons in the
town would come a bow-shot to hear. So I ordered a table to
be set in the street; and a few slowly crept together: They
were as quiet and seemed as much affected as the trees. Thence
I rode on to Carlow. The Under-Sheriff had promised the
use of the Town-Hall; but the High-Sheriff, coming to town,
would not suffer it. I thank him: For, by this means, I was
driven to the barrack-field, where were twice as many as the
Hall could have contained; over and above many of the poor
Papists, who durst not have come into it. Afterwards I met
the little society. I used to wonder they did not increase:
Now I should wonder if they did; so exquisitely bitter are
the chief of them against the Church. I solemnly warned
them against this evil; and some of them had ears to hear.
Fri. 14.-At noon I preached in Baltinglass, to a handful
of serious people; and in the evening at Donard, to a much
more numerous, but not more serious, congregation. I could
Aug. 1769.] JOURNAL. 373
not but observe one pretty kind of a woman, with a child in
her arms. She stood awhile, then walked to and fro; then
stood, then walked again; and appeared to be as perfectly
unconcerned as some pretty calves which stood behind her.
Saturday, 15. I crossed the country to my old pupil, Mr.
Morgan’s, and in the afternoon returned to Dublin.
All the following week we had a remarkable blessing, both
at the Morning and Evening Service. On Wednesday and
Thursday we had our little Conference, at which most of the
Preachers in the kingdom were present. We agreed to set
apart Friday, the 21st, for a day of fasting and prayer. At
every meeting, particularly the last, our Lord refreshed us in
an uncommon manner. About ten I was a little tired; but
before it struck twelve, my weariness was all gone. It seemed
to be the same with all the congregation; and prayer was
swallowed up in praise.
Sun. 23.--At nine I preached in the Royal Square at the
Barracks, on the dead, small and great, standing before God.
An huge multitude soon gathered together and listened with
deep attention. Many of the soldiers were among them. By
what means but field-preaching could we have reached these
poor souls?
Mon. 24.--After preaching in the evening, I went on board
the packet, and the next afternoon landed at Holyhead. We
reached Chester on Thursday morning. Here I finished Dr.
Warner’s “History of the Irish Rebellion.” Imever saw before
so impartial an account of the transactions of those times. He
really seems to be of no side; but to speak the naked truth of
all, according to the best light he could procure.
Fri. 28.--I rode to Manchester. As we were pretty well
tired, our friends there insisted on my going on in a chaise; so
in the morning, Saturday, 29, we set out. When we were on
the brow of the hill above Ripponden, suddenly the saddle
horse fell, with the driver under him; and both lay without
motion. The shaft-horse then boggled and turned short
toward the edge of the precipice; but presently the driver
and horse rose up unhurt, and we went on safe to Leeds.
Sun. 30.--Mr. Crook being out of order, I read Prayers
and preached in Hunslet church, both morning and afternoon.
At five I preached at Leeds; and on Monday, 31, prepared
all things for the ensuing Conference. Tuesday, AUGUST 1,
it began; and a more loving one we never had. On
Thursday I mentioned the case of our brethren at New-York,
who had built the first Methodist preaching-house in America,
and were in great want of money, but much more of
Preachers. Two of our Preachers, Richard Boardman and
Joseph Pillmoor, willingly offered themselves for the service;
by whom we determined to send them fifty pounds, as a
token of our brotherly love.
Sat. 5.--In the evening I preached at Bradford, to an
extremely crowded audience: The heat was hardly supportable.
Such a day I had seldom, if ever, known in England. It
was nearly as hot at four in the morning, Sunday, 6; but
the rain began before five, and in three or four hours quite
cooled the air. At one we had the usual congregation on the
side of Birstal-Hill; but it was nearly doubled at Leeds in
the evening. Monday, 7. I returned to Manchester; and
on Tuesday, 8, went on to Shrewsbury. I preached at five;
and soon after, receiving an invitation from Mr. Powis, at
Berwick, I went over directly, gave a short exhortation, and
returned to Salop.
Wed. 9.--We reached Welshpool before nine, where notice
had been given of my preaching, the Bailiff having granted
the use of the Town-Hall. But he had now changed his
mind. So I rode on to Newtown, and at one we went to the
market-house. But in a few minutes a poor wretch, exceeding
drunk, came in cursing, and blaspheming, and striking all
that stood in his way. His stick was soon taken from him;
but the noise increasing, I removed to the Brynn, and
quietly finished my discourse.
At six in the evening, I preached at the Tuffin; the next
morning, at Llanidloes; and in the evening, at the Abbey.
Friday, 11. I reached Carmarthen. The rain continuing, Mr.
Peter Williams offered me his preaching-house, in which I
enforced, “God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross.
of our Lord Jesus Christ.” Saturday, 12. I preached at
Haverfordwest. Sunday, 13. I went to St. Daniel’s, and,
after reading Prayers, preached on those words in the Second
Lesson, “What God hath cleansed, that call not thou
common.” The bigots of all sides seemed ashamed before
God, and I trust will not soon forget this day. In the after
noon I read Prayers, and preached again. I then met the
society in Pembroke. Once more their little jars are laid
asleep: God grant they may rise no more !
Aug. 1769.] JOURNAL. 375
Mon. 14.--I preached in the Town-Hall, to almost all the
Gentry in Pembroke; and I think, whatever they had before,
they had then a clear call from God. Tuesday, 15. In the
evening, although the wind was high, yet the largeness of the
congregation obliged me to stand on the outside of the House
at Haverfordwest. Wednesday, 16. I examined the members
of the society, now the most lively one in Wales. Many of
them are rejoicing in the love of God, and many groaning for
full redemption.
To-day I gave a second reading to that lively book, Mr.
Newton’s Account of his own Experience. There is some
thing very extraordinary therein; but one may account for it
without a jot of Predestination. I doubt not but his, as well
as Colonel Gardiner's, conversion, was an answer to his
mother's prayers.
Thur. 17.--At twelve I preached in the Castle at Carmar
then; in the evening at Llanelly. The behaviour of Sir
Thomas’s servants here (four or five of whom belong to the
society) has removed all prejudice from him, as well as from
most of the town. Indeed, they are a pattern to all of their
rank, truly “adorning the doctrine of God our Saviour.”
Fri. 18.--I preached at eleven in Oxwych, and thence
hastened to Swansea, where an effectual door is opened once
more. The rain drove us into the Room, which was as hot
as an oven, being much crowded both within and without.
Saturday, 19. About eight I preached at Neath; about three,
in the church at Bridge-End; (where the rain doubled the
congregation, by stopping the harvest-work;) and at seven, in
the Assembly-room at Cowbridge, on, “Lord, are there few
that be saved?” I was enabled to make a close and pointed
application, I believe not without effect.
Sun. 20.--I preached there again at eight, to a congregation
who seemed to feel what was spoken. At eleven the Vicar
read Prayers, and I preached on those words in the Lesson,
“Gallio cared for none of these things.” Most of the hearers
seemed more awake than I expected; and a few appeared to
be affected. In the evening I took my old stand on the steps
of the Castle at Cardiff. Abundance of people were gathered
together, it being a fair mild evening, on whom I enforced,
“I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God.”
Tues. 22.--Mr. Davies read Prayers, and I preached, in
Caerphilly church, and in the evening at Llanbraddoch.
376 REv. J. wesDEY’s [Aug. 1769.
Wednesday, 23. I went on to Trevecka. Here we found
a concourse of people from all parts, come to celebrate the
Countess of Huntingdon’s birth-day, and the Anniversary of
her School, which was opened on the twenty-fourth of August,
last year. I preached, in the evening, to as many as her
chapel could well contain; which is extremely neat, or rather,
elegant; as is the dining-room, the school, and all the house.
About nine Howell Harris desired me to give a short exhorta
tion to his family. I did so; and then went back to my
Lady’s, and laid me down in peace.
Thur. 24.--I administered the Lord's Supper to the family.
At ten the Public Service began. Mr. Fletcher preached an
cxceeding lively sermon in the court, the chapel being far too
small. After him, Mr. William Williams preached in Welsh,
till between one and two o'clock. At two we dined. Mean
time, a large number of people had baskets of bread and meat
carried to them in the court. At three I took my turn there,
then Mr. Fletcher, and, about five, the congregation was
dismissed. Between seven and eight the love-feast began, at
which I believe many were comforted. In the evening several
of us retired into the neighbouring wood, which is exceeding
pleasantly laid out in walks; one of which leads to a little
mount, raised in the midst of a meadow, that commands a
delightful prospect. This is Howell Harris's work, who has
likewise greatly enlarged and beautified his house; so that,
with the gardens, orchards, walks, and pieces of water that
surround it, it is a kind of little paradise.
Fri. 25.--We rode through a lovely country to Chepstow.
I had designed to go straight on, but yielded to the impor
tunity of our friends to stay and preach in the evening.
Meantime, I took a walk through Mr. Morris's woods. There
is scarce any thing like them in the kingdom. They stand
on the top, and down the side, of a steep mountain, hanging
in a semicircular form over the river. Through these woods
abundance of serpentine walks are cut, wherein many seats
and alcoves are placed; most of which command a surprising
prospect of rocks and fields on the other side of the river.
And must all these be burned up? What will become of us
then, if we set our hearts upon them?
Sat. 26.-Resolving not to be too late now, as I was last
year, I took horse at four; but being earnestly engaged in
conversation, we missed our way, and came to the Passage
Sept. 1769.j JOURNAL. 377
just as the boat was gone. About three in the afternoon it
passed again; and soon after six we reached Bristol.
Sun. 27.--After preaching at Kingswood and Bristol, I
rode to Cross, to lessen the next day’s journey. Monday, 28.
I rode to Tiverton; on Tuesday, to Launceston, where I
strongly applied, “Hath God forgotten to be gracious?”
And I believe he answered for himself in the hearts of several
backsliders.
Being informed it was between sixty and seventy miles to
St. John's, I sent my horse a few miles forward to-night.
Wednesday, 30. I purposed taking horse at four, but the
horse was not brought from the field: So I borrowed another,
and rode on without delay to the house where my own
waited for me. We had incessant rain, driven upon us by
a furious wind. However, I reached Bodmin about eight;
where, at the request of one of our friends, I preached to a
small, serious company, in the Town-Hall. The rain
accompanied us most of the way to Truro. I knew not
where to call, till a friend met me, and told me Mr. Painter
had been very ill. So I rode directly to his house. While
I was there, one of Redruth came in, who lent me a fresh
horse, with which I reached St. John’s about five o’clock.
I preached at six, and was much comforted among a loving,
earnest people.
Thur. 31.--I rode over to St. Just, but could not preach
abroad, because of the violent wind. However, God spoke
to many hearts, both this evening, and in the morning.
SEPTEMBER 1. I now considered Dr. Erskine’s account of
saving faith. He asserts, (if I comprehend him right,) “It
is, in general, an assent to the word of God, in which there
is a light, a glory, a brightness, which believers, and they
only, perceive. In particular, it is an assent of the under
standing to the Gospel method of salvation; in which there
is an excellency and glory which only believers see. A
supernatural conviction of this is faith.” But if this be his
judgment, why does he quarrel with me? For how marvel
lously small is the difference between us! Only change the
word assent for conviction, (which certainly better answers
St. Paul’s word, exs/xos,) and do we not come within an
hair's breadth of each other? I do not quarrel with the
definition of faith in general,--“a supernatural assent to the
word of God;” though I think “a supernatural conviction of
the truths contained in the word of God” is clearer. I allow,
too, that the Holy Spirit enables us to perceive a peculiar light
and glory in the word of God, and particularly in the Gospel
method of salvation: But I doubt whether saving faith be,
properly, an assent to this light and glory. Is it not rather,
an assent (if we retain the word) to the truths which God
has revealed; or, more particularly, a divine conviction that
“God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself?”
The congregation at St. Ives in the evening was the largest
I have seen since I came to Cornwall; and it was a solemn
assembly. We had another happy opportunity at the meeting
of the society. Saturday, 2. Our Quarterly Meeting was at
Redruth. In the evening I preached to eleven or twelve
hundred people; but there was no trifler, much less mocker,
among them. They heard as for eternity.
Sun. 3.--We had a very large congregation, and an useful
sermon, at church. Between one and two I preached to
some thousands in the main street; but to abundantly more
at five, in our amphitheatre at Gwennap; and they were so
commodiously placed, row above row, that I believe all could
hear.
Mon. 4.--About noon I preached in the Lower-Street, at
St. Austle, to a very numerous and very serious congregation;
but at Medros, where was once the liveliest society in Corn
wall, I found but a few, and most of those faint and weary.
Tuesday, 5. I rode on to Plymouth-Dock, and preached on,
“Love is the bond of perfectness.” What pity that any
thing short of this should usurp the name of religion |
Last week I read over, as I rode, great part of Homer's
Odyssey. I always imagined it was, like Milton’s “Paradise
Regained,”--
The last faint effort of an expiring Musa
But how was I mistaken How far has Homer’s latter poem
the pre-eminence over the former ! It is not, indeed, without
its blemishes; among which, perhaps, one might reckon his
making Ulysses swim nine days and nine nights without suste
nance; the incredible manner of his escape from Polyphemus,
(unless the goat was as strong as an ox,) and the introducing
Minerva at every turn, without any dignus vindice nodus.*
* Difficult point, that requires a serious solution.-EDIT.
Sept. 1769.] JOURNAL. 379
But his numerous beauties make large amends for these. Was
ever man so happy in his descriptions, so exact and consistent
in his characters, and so natural in telling a story? He like
wise continually inserts the finest strokes of morality; (which
I cannot find in Virgil;) on all occasions recommending the
fear of God, with justice, mercy, and truth. In this only he
is inconsistent with himself: He makes his hero say,-
Wisdom never lies;
And,
Him, on whate'er pretence, that lies can tell,
My soul abhors him as the gates of hell.
Meantime, he himself, on the slightest pretence, tells deliberate
lies over and over; nay, and is highly commended for so
doing, even by the Goddess of Wisdom |
Wed. 6.--I rode to Collumpton; and on Thursday rested
at Tiverton. Friday, 8. I preached about nine at Taunton,
and then rode on to Bridgewater, where the preaching had
been discontinued for some years. It was supposed there
would be much disturbance; but there was none at all. The
very Gentry (all but two or three young women) behaved
with good sense and decency.
This afternoon I went to the top of Brent-Hill: I know not,
I ever before saw such a prospect. Westward, one may see to
the mouth of the Bristol Channel; and the three other ways,
as far as the eye can reach. And most of the land which you
see is well cultivated, well wooded, and well watered: So that
the globe of earth, in its present condition, can hardly afford
a more pleasing scene. Saturday, 9. I returned to Bristol.
Tues. 12.--I inquired into the state of Kingswood School.
The grievance now is the number of children. Instead of
thirty, (as I desired,) we have near fifty; whereby our masters
are burdened. And it is scarce possible to keep them in so
exact order as we might do a smaller number. However, this
still comes nearer a Christian school, than any I know in the
kingdom.
Sun. 17.--I preached to a serious congregation in Princes
Street, many of whom came from the ships on the river, and
gaped and stared as if they had never heard a sermon before.
In the afternoon, I preached near the new Square, on “What
God hath cleansed, that call not thou common.” I was in
hopes this would remove rather than increase prejudice; but
I was much mistaken. One of the hearers soon after told
his friend, “Mr. W. is as dark and blind as ever.”
Tues. 19.--Between twelve and one, I preached at Fresh
ford; and on White's Hill, near Bradford, in the evening.
By this means many had an opportunity of hearing, who
would not have come to the Room. I had designed to preach
there again the next evening; but a gentleman in the town
desired me to preach at his door. The beasts of the people
were tolerably quiet till I had nearly finished my sermon.
They then lifted up their voice, especially one, called a gentle
man, who had filled his pocket with rotten eggs: But, a
young man coming unawares, clapped his hands on each side,
and mashed them all at once. In an instant he was perfume
all over; though it was not so sweet as balsam.
Fri. 22.--I saw poor Mrs. at Bristol, on the very
brink of despair. I prayed for her in faith, and, not many
days after, found her sweetly rejoicing in God her Saviour.
Saturday, 23. I rode to Pill, and preached in the street, (the
only way to do much good there,) to a more numerous and
more attentive congregation than I have seen there for many
years.
Thur. OCTOBER 5.--I had the satisfaction to find, that two
of our brethren, with whom I had taken much pains, had at
length put an end to their Chancery suit, and closed their
debate by a reference.
Sun. 8.--I permitted all of Mr. Whitefield's society that
desired it, to be present at our love-feast. I suppose there were
a thousand of us in all. And we were not sent empty away.
Mon. 9.--I preached at Bristol, Pensford, Shepton Mallet;
and in the evening at Wincanton. The people here had just
as much feeling as the benches on which they sat. Tuesday,
10. I preached in Shaftesbury at noon; and in the evening at
Salisbury. Here I was as in a new world. The congregation
was alive, and much more the society. How pleasing would
it be, to be always with such ! But this is not our calling.
Wed. 11.--I preached in Romsey, at noon: In the evening
at Winchester. Thursday, 12. I preached at Fareham about
one; and at Portsmouth Common in the evening. Friday, 13.
I very narrowly missed meeting the great Pascal Paoli. He
landed in the dock but a very few minutes after Ileft the water
side. Surely He who hath been with him from his youth up,
hath not sent him into England for nothing. Lord, show
Oct. 1769.] JOURNAL. 381
him what is thy will concerning him, and give him a kingdom
that cannot be moved !
Sat. 14.--Setting out at two in the morning, I came to
London in the afternoon. Sunday, 15. My brother and I
had such a congregation at Spitalfields, as has not been there
since the covenant-night. The Foundery was equally crowded
in the evening: Is God about to work here, as he did some
years ago? If so, having learned experience by the things we
have suffered, I trust we shall not quench the Spirit as we
did before.
Mon. 16.--I began my journey into Oxfordshire, and in the
evening preached at Henley. A great part of the congregation
was perfectly void both of sense and modesty. But at this time
they were unusually quiet, as I did not take them out of their
depth, in opening and applying those words, “It is appointed
unto men once to die.”
Tues. 17.--We went to Wallingford, a town I never saw
before, though I lived so many years at Oxford. How white
are the fields here unto the harvest ! The whole town seemed
flocking together, rich and poor, in the evening, and received
the word with joy. But who will endure to the end? Abun
dance of people came again at five in the morning, and were
ready to devour the word. How pleasant it is to see the dawn
of a work of grace | But we must not lay too much stress
upon it. Abundance of blossoms | But when the sun is up,
how many of these will wither away !
Having appointed to preach in Oxford at ten, I was under
some difficulty. I did not like to preach in the Dissenting
meeting-house; and I did not see how to avoid it. But
the proprietors cut the knot for me, by locking up the doors.
So I preached in James Mears's garden: And to such a
congregation as I had not had in Oxford since I preached in
St. Mary’s church.
Thence we went on to Witney, where we have now a large
and commodious House. It was well filled in the evening; and
(whoever else did) I found it good to be there; especially at
the meeting of the society: The Spirit of glory and of Christ
was among them.
I had designed to spend another day here; but two of our
friends, who were come on purpose from Broadmarston, impor
tuned me much to go thither. So I set out with them on
Thursday, and came to Broadmarston in the afternoon. The
lovely family, and the congregation from all parts, made me
full amends for my labour. Great was our glorying in the
Lord. Many felt the two-edged sword, and many were filled
with consolation.
Fri. 20.--I had appointed to be in Oxford at eight. So
I took horse at two, and took chaises from Shipston, which
brought me thither at my time. After spending an hour quite
agreeably with a few young, serious students, I set out for
Ipstone, near Stoken-church. But I was obliged, when we
came to the bye-road, to quit my chaise, and go as I could,
part on horseback, part on foot. The congregation had waited
for me some time: So I began immediately, on, “Fear God,
and keep his commandments: For this is the whole of man.”
In the evening I preached to a lively congregation at High
Wycombe, and on Saturday reached London.
Mon. 23.--I rode to Towcester, and preached to a heavy,
unawakened people, on what they did not seem at all to think
of, namely, that they were to die. I believe it suited them :
They appeared to be more affected than with any discourse I
had ever preached. Tuesday, 24. I preached at Alston, in a
large malt-room, where one side of my head was very warm,
through the crowd of people, the other very cold, having an
open window at my ear. Between six and seven I preached
at Northampton; and it was an awful season.
This evening there was such an Aurora Borealis as I never
saw before: The colours, both the white, the flame-colour, and
the scarlet, were so exceeding strong and beautiful. But
they were awful too: So that abundance of people were
frighted into many good resolutions.
Wed. 25.--At ten, I was forced to preach abroad at
Brighton, by reason of the great concourse of people; and at
Haddon, about one. I believe at both places, God applied
his word to their hearts. Thursday, 26. About nine, I
preached at Harpole, to a thirsty multitude; at one, to near
the same number at Weedon; in the evening, at Whittlebury.
Friday, 27, about noon, we had a serious congregation at
Cranfield, and at Bedford in the evening. Saturday, 28. I
preached about one at Hertford, and at Snowsfields in the
evening: And after preaching three times a day for three
days, and four times a day for two more, I found no more
hoarseness or weariness than when I set out from London.
Mon. 30.--I set out with a little company of our friends,
TNov. 1769.] JOURNAl. 383
and the next day came to Norwich. At six I preached in
the shell of the new House, crowded enough both within and
without.
Thur. NoveMBER 2.--We went to Yarmouth, a cold,
dead, uncomfortable place. Friday, 3. I laboured to gather
up the fragments of the poor society, shattered to pieces by
Presbyterians, Anabaptists, and disputers of all kinds;
especially by one unhappy man, who had arisen among
ourselves. In the evening I strongly exhorted them to
“repent and do the first works.”
Sat. 4.--We returned to Norwich. In coming to
Yarmouth, I had called upon a young woman, alive to God,
but exceeding ill. She died before I came back. This after
noon I was desired to bury her. I took the opportunity of
preaching at five in the burying-ground, to a multitude of
people, who were all attention, as though they had already
seen “the dead standing before God.”
Monday, 6, and the following days, I visited as many of
the people, sick and well, as I possibly could; and on
Friday, 10, leaving them more united than they had been
for many years, I took coach again, and the next afternoon
came to London.
In the coach, going and coming, I read several volumes of
Mr. Guthrie's ingenious “History of Scotland:” I suppose,
as impartial an one as any to be found, and as much to be
depended upon. I never read any writer before who gave me
so much light into the real character of that odd mixture,
King James the First; nor into that of Mary Queen of
Scots, so totally misrepresented by Buchanan, Queen Eliza
beth’s pensioner, and her other hireling writers; and not
much less, by Dr. Robertson. Them he effectually exposes,
showing how grossly they contradict matter of fact, and one
another. He likewise points out the many and great mistakes
of Dr. R., such as seem to imply either great inattention or
great partiality. Upon the whole, that much-injured Queen
appears to have been far the greatest woman of that age,
exquisitely beautiful in her person, of a fine address, of a
deep, unaffected piety, and of a stronger understanding
even in youth than Queen Elizabeth had at threescore. And
probably the despair wherein Queen Elizabeth died, was owing
to her death, rather than that of Lord Essex.
Fri. 17.--I preached at a chapel near St. John-Street, built
on the very spot of ground whereon, many hundred years ago,
Pardon church stood. In this and the following week I visited
the society in London, containing now scarce nineteen hundred
members. So has God cut us short since the wound received
by a false friend, from which we are now slowly recovering.
Sat. 25.--I went down to Mr. Perronet's, just recovering
from a long illness. In the evening I preached in the House,
and at seven in the morning. On Sunday, 26, Mr. P.
designed to read prayers at ten; but we thought it not safe
for him to go out: So I read Prayers, and then applied,
“What doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to do
justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?”
Many who had constantly appealed to this text, found
themselves short in every particular.
I read Prayers in the afternoon, having been informed
that it was not usual to preach. But observing a numerous
congregation, quite unwilling to go away, I went into the
pulpit, and showed them the mature and the pleasantness of
true religion. At five I preached in the Room. I trust our
Lord has touched many hearts this day.
Thur. 30.--I preached at Wandsworth. For many years
the people here were the most dead, but are now the most alive,
of any about London. Friday, DECEMBER 1. I preached at
Barnet, which was last year what Wandsworth is now.
Monday, 4. I went to Chatham. Mr. Whitefield’s people
(so called) refusing me the use of their Room, I preached in
the barracks to a listening multitude, and our hearts were
sweetly enlarged and knit together. One of their society,
grieved at the bigotry of his brethren, invited me to preach
in his house in the morning, which I did (the barracks not
being open) to as many as it could well contain. Tuesday, 5.
I went to Sheerness, and preached in the old play-house,
filled from end to end. So it was the next night. Our own
Room contained us in the mornings. I was much comforted
among the poor people, which, in the midst of disputers,
keep straight on, following after peace and holiness.
Thur. 7.--I returned to Chatham, and the next day to
London, leaving an earnest people at peace with each other,
and with all the world.
Mon. 11.--Riding an uneasy horse, I was much tired before
I reached Staplehurst. But the serious, earnest congregation
soon made me forget my weariness, and I was not a little helped
Jan. 1770.] JOURNAL. 385
by the spirit of Mr. C., breathing nothing but faith and love.
I was again heartily tired, when I came to Mr. Holman,
near Rye. Judging most of the congregation here to be
unawakened, I preached on the story of Dives and Lazarus.
God gave me to speak strong words, so that I trust some
were pricked to the heart. Wednesday, 13. I preached at
Ewhurst, (it being the Quarterly Meeting,) both at noon and
in the evening. Thursday, 14. We rode through heavy
rain to Newbounds, where Mr. I'Anson and his family gladly
received us; and I never saw the House so filled before, as it
was in the evening. Friday, 15. I preached at Sevenoaks,
and on Saturday returned to London.
Being desirous to finish my winter journeys before Christ
mas, on Monday, 18, I set out for Canterbury. Friday,
22. I preached at Sittingbourne and Chatham, and on
Saturday, came to London.
Mon. 25.--(Being Christmas-Day.) We had such a
congregation at four, as I have not seen for many years.
And from morning to evening we had abundant proof that
God is visiting and redeeming his people.
Tues. 26.--I read the letters from our Preachers in
America, informing us that God had begun a glorious work
there; that both in New-York and Philadelphia multitudes
flock to hear, and behave with the deepest seriousness; and
that the society in each place already contains above an
hundred members.
Friday, 29, we observed as a day of fasting and prayer,
partly on account of the confused state of public affairs, partly
as preparatory to the solemn engagement which we were
about to renew.
Mon. JANUARY 1, 1770.--About eighteen hundred of us
met together: It was a most solemn season. As we did openly
“avouch the Lord to be our God, so did He avouch us to be
his people.”
Wed. 17.--In a little journey, which I took into Bedford
shire, I finished Dr. Burnet’s “Theory of the Earth.” He is
doubtless one of the first-rate writers, both as to sense and
style; his language is remarkably clear, unaffected, nervous,
and elegant. And as to his theory, none can deny that it
is ingenious, and consistent with itself. And it is highly
probable, 1. That the earth arose out of the chaos in some
such manner as he describes: 2. That the antediluvian earth
was without high or abrupt mountains, and without sea,
being one uniform crust, inclosing the great abyss: 3. That
the flood was caused by the breaking of this crust, and its
sinking into the abyss of waters: And, 4. That the present
state of the earth, both internal and external, shows it to be
the ruins of the former earth. This is the substance of his
two former books, and thus far I can go with him.
I have no objection to the substance of his third book upon
the General Conflagration, but think it one of the noblest
tracts which is extant in our language. And I do not much
object to the fourth, concerning the new heavens and the new
earth. The substance of it is highly probable.
Tues. 30.--One informed me that Mrs. Kitely, at Lambeth,
not expected to live many hours, had a great desire to see me
before she died. I went as quick as possible; but when I came
she seemed senseless, as well as speechless. I regarded not
this, but spoke to her immediately; and immediately both her
understanding and her speech returned, to testify an hope
full of immortality. Having had her desire, she fell asleep,
two days before her husband,
A perfect pattern of true womanhood.
A good wife, a good parent, a good mistress; and “her
works shall praise her in the gates.” How suitable was her
death to her life! After many years spent in doing good,
she redeemed a poor, friendless youth out of prison, took the
gaol-distemper, and died.
Sat. FEBRUARY 3, and at my leisure moments on several
of the following days, I read with much expectation, a
celebrated book,-Rousseau upon Education. But how
was I disappointed ! Sure a more consummate coxcomo
never saw the sun How amazingly full of himself!
Whatever he speaks he pronounces as an oracle. But
many of his oracles are as palpably false, as that “young
children never love old people.” No ! Do they never love
grandfathers and grandmothers? Frequently more than
they do their own parents. Indeed they love all that love
them, and that with more warmth and sincerity than when
they come to riper years.
But I object to his temper more than to his judgment:
He is a mere misanthrope; a cynic all over. So indeed is his
brother-infidel, Voltaire; and well nigh as great a coxcomb.
Feb. 1770.] JOURNAL, 387
But he hides both his doggedness and vanity a little better;
whereas here it stares us in the face continually.
As to his book, it is whimsical to the last degree; grounded
neither upon reason nor experience. To cite particular passages
would be endless; but any one may observe concerning the
whole, the advices which are good are trite and common,
only disguised under new expressions. And those which are
new, which are really his own, are lighter than vanity itself.
Such discoveries I always expect from those who are too wise
to believe their Bibles.
Thur. 8.--I went to Wandsworth. What a proof have
we here, that God’s “thoughts are not as our thoughts!”
Every one thought no good could be done here; we had tried
for above twenty years. Very few would even give us the
hearing; and the few that did, seemed little the better for it.
But all on a sudden, crowds flock to hear; many are cut to
the heart; many filled with peace and joy in believing; many
long for the whole image of God. In the evening, though it
was a sharp frost, the Room was as hot as a stove. And
they drank in the word with all greediness; as also at five in
the morning, while I applied, “Jesus put forth his hand and
touched him, saying, I will; be thou clean l’’
Tues. 13.--I read, with all the attention I was master of,
Mr. Hutchinson's Life, and Mr. Spearman's Index to his
Works. And I was more convinced than ever, 1. That he
had not the least conception, much less experience, of inward
religion: 2. That an ingenious man may prove just what he
pleases, by well devised scriptural etymologies; especially if
he be in the fashion, if he affects to read the Hebrew without
vowels. And, 3. That his whole hypothesis, philosophical
and theological, is unsupported by any solid proof.
Fri. 23.--I was desired to hear Mr. Leoni sing at the Jewish
synagogue. I never before saw a Jewish congregation behave
so decently. Indeed the place itself is so solemn, that it might
strike an awe upon those who have any thought of God.
Wed. 28.--I sat down to read and seriously consider some
of the writings of Baron Swedenborg. I began with huge
prejudice in his favour, knowing him to be a pious man, one
of a strong understanding, of much learning, and one who
thoroughly believed himself. But I could not hold out long.
Any one of his visions puts his real character out of doubt.
He is one of the most ingenious, lively, entertaining madmen
that ever set pen to paper. But his waking dreams are so
wild, so far remote both from Scripture and common sense,
that one might as easily swallow the stories of “Tom Thumb,”
or “Jack the Giant-Killer.”
Mon. MARCH 5-1 came to Newbury, where I had been
much importuned to preach. But where? The Dissenters
would not permit me to preachin their meeting-house. Some
were then desirous to hire the old playhouse; but the good
Mayor would not suffer it to be so profaned ! So I made use
of a workshop,-a large, commodious place. But it would by no
means contain the congregation. All that could hear behaved
well; and I was in hopes God would have a people in this place
also. The next evening I preached at Bristol, and spent the rest
of the week there. Monday, 12. I went to Stroud, where the
House was filled as usual. Tuesday, 13. I went by Painswick
and Gloucester to Tewkesbury. Wednesday, 14. I preached
in the new Room, which is just finished, at Upton; and
thence rode on to Worcester, where I preached in a large, old,
awkward place, to a crowded and much-affected audience.
Afterwards I met the society of about an hundred members,
all of one heart and one mind; so lovingly and closely united
together, that I have scarce seen the like in the kingdom.
Thur. 15.--I met the select society. How swiftly has God
deepened his work in these ! I have seen very few, either in
Bristol or London, who are more clear in their experience. The
account all whom I had time to examine gave, was scriptural and
rational: And, suppose they spoke true, they are witnesses of
the Perfection which I preach. Yet, that they may fall
therefrom I know; but that they must, I utterly deny.
After preaching at Evesham about noon, we rode through
a furious shower of snow, driven full in our faces, to Broad
marston. The very uncommon severity of the weather
somewhat lessened the congregation in the evening. All who
were there seemed prepared for that awful subject, “I saw
the dead, small and great, stand before God.”
Sat.17.--We rode, in another bitter day, with the wind and
snow just in our face, to Birmingham. In the evening the
people were wedged in as close as possible; yet many were
obliged to go away. We had just the same congregation in
the morning. Sunday, 18. At half-hour after one I was to
preach at Bromwich-Heath; but the House would scarce
contain a fourth part of the congregation. So I made a virtue
March, 1770.] JOURNAL, 389
of necessity, and preached in a ground where there was room
for all that came : And I believe God kindled a fire in many
frozen hearts.
In the evening I preached in the House at Wednesbury
a funeral sermon for Elizabeth Longmore; I think, the first
witness of Christian Perfection whom God raised up in these
Parts. I gave some account of her experience many years ago.
From that time her whole life was answerable to her profession,
every way holy and unblamable. Frequently she had not
bread to eat; but that did not hinder her “rejoicing ever
more.” She had close trials from her poor, apostate husband,
in the midst of sharp pain, and pining sickness. But she was
superior to all; still seeing her Father's hand, and “in every
thing giving thanks.” Her death was suitable to her life.
No cloud could arise,
To darken the skies,
Or hide for a moment her Lord from her eyes.
All was noon-day. She praised God with every breath till
he took her to himself.
Mon. 19.--I rode to Craidley. Here also the multitude of
people obliged me to stand abroad, although the north wind
whistled round my head. About one I took the field again
at Stourbridge. Many of the hearers were wild as colts
untamed; but the bridle was in their mouths. At six I
began at Dudley. The air was as cold as I had almost ever
felt. But I trust God warmed many hearts.
Wed. 21.--I took my leave of Wednesbury at five;
preached about ten at Bilstone; about one, at Bilbrook; and
about five in the evening, at Wolverhampton. Many here
were wild and stupid enough: However, the greater part
were deeply attentive.
I now procured an account of two remarkable children,
which I think ought not to be buried in oblivion:
“About three weeks before Christmas, 1768, William Cooper,
at Walsal, in Staffordshire, then mine years old, was convinced
of sin, and would frequently say he should go to hell, and the
devil would fetch him. Sometimes he cried out, ‘I hate him.’
IBeing asked, ‘Whom?’ he answered, with great vehemence,
“God.” This terrified his mother, who, not knowing what
was the matter with the child, strove to keep it secret.
“But in about a fortnight, it pleased God to reveal to him
his pardoning love. His mouth was then filled with praise,
declaring to all what God had done for his soul.
“A few days after Billy was awakened, God was pleased
to convince his sister Lucy, then eleven years old. He
soon put a song of praise into her mouth also, so that they
mightily rejoiced together in God their Saviour. At the
same time they were both heavily afflicted in their bodies.
But so much the more was the power of God manifested,
causing them to continue in the triumph of faith, throughout
their sharpest pains.
“On December 30, one of their sisters coming to see them,
Billy told her he had been very ill. “But,” said he, ‘I do not
mean in my body, but in my soul: I felt my sins so heavy,
that I thought I should go to hell; and I saw the devil ready
to drag me away. Nay, for a week, I thought myself just in
the flames of hell. The sins that troubled me most were,
telling lies, and quarrelling with my sister. I saw, if God did
not forgive me, I was lost: And I knew quarrelling was as
great a sin in Lucy as in me; and if she did not get a pardon,
and feel the love of Jesus, she could not go to heaven.’
“Lucy said, “When I heard Mr. A. describe two sorts of
people, one sort washed in the blood of Christ, and the other
not, I found I was not; and therefore, if I died so, must go to
hell. Being asked what sin lay most on her conscience, she
replied, ‘Taking his name in vain, by repeating my prayers
when I did not think of God.”
“When Billy was confessing that he had loved money,
Lucy said, “And so did I; and was angry if I had not as
much as Billy. I loved money more than God, and he
might justly have sent me to hell for it.’
“When Billy was asked how he knew his sins were
forgiven, he answered, ‘Christ told me so. I had a great
struggle in my heart with the devil and sin, till it pleased
Jesus to come into my soul. I now feel his love in my
heart, and he tells me he has forgiven my sins.”
“Being asked how he did, he replied, ‘Happy in Jesus:
Jesus is sweet to my soul.” “Do you choose to live, or die?’
He answered, “Neither. I hope, if I live, I shall praise
God; and if I die, I am sure I shall go to him; for he has
forgiven my sins, and given me his love.”
“One asked Lucy, how long she had been in the triumph
of faith. She answered, ‘Only this week: Before I had much
March, 1770.] JOURNAL, 391
to do with Satan; but now Jesus has conquered him for
me. While she was speaking, feeling great pain of body, she
said, “O I want more of these pains, more of these pains, to
bring me nearer to Jesus!’
“One speaking of knowing the voice of Christ, she said,
“The voice of Christ is a strange voice to them who do not
Know their sins forgiven: But I know it; for he has pardoned
all my sins, and given me his love. And O what a mercy
that such a hell-deserving wretch as me, as me, should be
made to taste of his love!’
“Billy had frequent fits. When he found one coming,
he, with a smile, laid down his head, saying, ‘O sweet love!’
or, ‘O sweet Jesus!’ And as soon as he came to himself,
being asked how he did, he would reply, ‘I am happy in the
love of Christ.’
“When a gentleman said, ‘My dear, you could praise God
more, if it were not for those ugly fits, he replied, ‘Sir, they
are not ugly; for my dear Jesus sent them; and he has given
me patience to bear them; and he bore more for my sins.”
“One night, a gentleman and his wife came to see them;
and the gentlewoman, looking on Lucy, said, ‘She looks as if
nothing was the matter with her; she is so pleasant with her
eyes. She replied, ‘I have enough to make me look so; for
I am full of the love of God.” While she spoke, her eyes
sparkled exceedingly, and the tears flowed down her cheeks.
At this Billy smiled, but could not speak; having been
speechless for more than an hour. It seemed he was just
going into etermity; but the Lord revived him a little; and
as soon as he could speak, he desired to be held up in bed,
and looked at the gentleman, who asked him how he did.
He answered, ‘I am happy in Christ, and I hope you are.’
He said, ‘I hope I can say I am. Billy replied, ‘Has
Christ pardoned your sins?” He said, ‘I hope he has.’
‘Sir,’ said Billy, ‘hope will not do; for I had this hope, and
yet if I had died then, I should surely have gone to hell.
But he has forgiven me all my sins, and given me a taste of
his love. If you have this love, you will know it, and be
sure of it; but you cannot know it without the power of
God. You may read as many books about Christ as you
please;’ (he was a great reader;) “but if you read all your
life, this will only be in your head, and that head will perish:
So that, if you have not the love of God in your heart, you
will go to hell. But I hope you will not: I will pray to God
for you, that he may give you his love.’
“Another, coming to see them, inquired how they were.
Billy said, ‘Happier and happier in Christ: Are you so?’
He said, ‘No: I am not so happy as you.’ ‘Why, said Billy,
‘what is the matter? I am afraid you do not pray to Christ;
for I am sure he is willing to make you happy.”
“One who sat by seemed struck with the discourse, but did
not speak. Billy, observing her, said, “And you do not pray
as you ought: For if you had the love of Christ in your
heart, you would not look down so. I wish you and every
one had it.’ One said, ‘My dear, would not you give it them,
if you might?” He answered, ‘No; for that would be to
take Christ's work out of his hands.’
“Many who heard what great things God had done for
them, said, ‘It will not be so with you always. If you
should live to come into the world again, he would leave you
in the dark. They answered, “We do not think so; for
our Jesus has promised that he will never leave us.”
“A young woman, who had told them so before, speaking
in this manner a second time, Billy said to her, “Miss, are
you assured of your interest in Christ?” She answered, ‘I
hope I am in Christ; but assurance is no way essential.” He
replied, “But if you have his love, you will be sure you have
it: You will know it in your heart. I am afraid your hope
is only in your head. Do you never quarrel with anybody?’
She said, ‘No.” “But,’ says he, “you quarrel with God’s
word: For he has promised me, none shall pluck me out of
his hand; and you say, the world will: So you make God
a story-teller. At this she went away displeased.
“There were few came to see them, when either of them
was able to speak, but they inquired into the state of their
souls; and, without fear, told them the danger of dying
without an assurance of the love of God.
“One coming to see them, was talked to very closely by
Billy, till she could bear no more. She turned to Lucy,
and said, ‘You were always good children, and never told
stories.’ ‘Yes, Madam,” said Lucy, “but I did, when I was
afraid of being beat; and when I said my prayers; for I did
not think of God; and I called him, My Father, when I was
a child of wrath: And as to praying, I could not pray till it
pleased him by his Spirit to show me my sins. And he
March, 1770.] JOURNAL, 393
showed me, we might say as many prayers as we would, and
go to church or meeting; yet all this, if we had not Christ
for our foundation, would not do.”
“When they were asked, if they were afraid to die, they
always answered, ‘No; for what can death do? He can only
lay his cold hand upon our bodies.’
“One told Lucy, ‘Now you may live as you please, since
you are sure of going to heaven. She replied, ‘No, I would
not sin against my dear Saviour if you would give me this
room full of gold.’
“On the Monday before he died, Billy repeated that hymn
with the most triumphant joy,--
Come, let us join our cheerful songs
With angels round the throne !
Afterwards he repeated the Lord's Prayer. The last words he
spoke intelligibly were, ‘How pleasant is it to be with Christ, for
ever and ever,-for ever and ever ! Amen | Amen | Amen l’
“While he lay speechless, there came into the room some
who he feared knew not God. He seemed much affected,
wept and moaned much, waved his hand, and put it on his
sister’s mouth; intimating, as she supposed, that she should
speak to them. On Wednesday evening, February 1, his
happy spirit returned to God.” She died soon after.
In the following days I went on slowly, through Staffordshire
and Cheshire, to Manchester. In this journey, as well as in
many others, I observed a mistake that almost universally pre
vails; and I desire all travellers to take good notice of it, which
may save them both from trouble and danger. Near thirty years
ago, I was thinking, “How is it that no horse ever stumbles
while I am reading?” (History, poetry, and philosophy I com
monly read on horseback, having other employment at other
times.) No account can possibly be given but this: Because
then I throw the reins on his neck. I then set myself to
observe; and I aver, that in riding above an hundred thousand
miles, I scarceever remember any horse (except two, that would
fall head over heels any way) to fall, or make a considerable
stumble, while I rode with a slack rein. To fancy, therefore,
that a tight rein prevents stumbling is a capital blunder. I
have repeated the trial more frequently than most men in the
kingdom can do. A slack rein will prevent stumbling, if any
thing will. But in some horses nothing can.
Thur. 29.--I preached in the new preaching-house at
Rochdale, and on Saturday, 31, at Chester. Tuesday,
APRIL 3. I went on to Liverpool. On Wednesday and
Thursday I read Mr. Sellon’s answer to Elisha Coles's book
on God’s Sovereignty, so plausibly written, that it is no
wonder so many are deceived thereby.
Fri. 6.--I preached in Wigan at noon, and in the evening
at Bolton. Sunday, 8. After preaching at eight and one, I
hastened on to James Edmundson’s, preached to a few serious
people, and gave directions to his poor sick daughter, which
it is possible may save her life. Monday, 9. I rode on to
Ambleside; on Tuesday, to Whitehaven.
Here I found a faintness had spread through all. No
wonder, since there had been no morning preaching for some
months. Yet, every morning I was here, the congregations
were as large as they had been for many years. Thursday,
12. I met such a company of children as I have not found
within an hundred miles. Several of them appeared to be
convinced of sin; five rejoicing in God their Saviour: And,
upon inquiry, I found their whole behaviour was suitable to
their profession.
APRIL 13.--(Being Good-Friday.) Notice having been
given, through mistake, of my preaching at Carlisle, I was
obliged to set out from Whitehaven, immediately after the
morning preaching. I preached in Cockermouth at one, and
then rode on to Carlisle. It was here the day of small things;
the society consisting but of fifteen members. I preached at
six; and as many as could hear, behaved with the utmost
seriousness. Afterwards I walked to Houghton, a village
two miles from Carlisle, and on an hard, clean bed, slept in
peace.
Sat. 14.--I preached at five to most of the village, though
on so short a warning; and at eight in Carlisle. Leaving
Mr. Rankin to preach in the evening, I rode on to Long
town; where, finding no better place to screen us from the
wind, I stood in a large, broad entry, with a room on either
hand. Many crowded in here; the rest stood at the door.
APRIL 15.--(Being Easter-Day.) Joseph Guilford preached
at five. At eight I preached in a little Square; but at one I
was desired to preach in the market-place, where was a far
more numerous congregation. Afterwards we took horse,
and before eight reached an admirable inn at Dumfries.
April, 1770.] JOURNAL, 395
Mon. 16.--We had a fair morning till we began to climb
up Enterkine, one of the highest mountains in the west of
Scotland. We then got into a Scotch mist, and were drop
ping wet, before we came to the Lead-Hills. In the evening
we reached Lesmahagoe, and Glasgow on Tuesday, where
I spent two days with much satisfaction. I had designed
to go straight from hence to Perth; but being desired to
take Edinburgh in my way, I rode thither on Friday, and
endeavoured to confirm those whom many had strove to turn
out of the way. What pity is it that the children of God
should so zealously do the devil’s work How is it that
they are still ignorant of Satan’s devices? Lord, what is
man P
Sat. 21.--Pushing through violent wind and rain, we came
to Perth in the afternoon. This evening the Tolbooth
contained the congregation, and at eight in the morning.
The stormy wind would not suffer me to preach abroad in
the evening; so we retired into the Court-House, as many as
could, and had a solemn and comfortable hour. Monday, 23.
I walked over to Scone, and took another view of that palace
of ancient men of renown, long since mouldered into common
dust. The buildings too are now decaying apace. So passes
the dream of human greatness!
Tues. 24.--I spent a few agreeable hours with Dr. O
an upright, friendly, sensible man. Such, likewise, I found
Mr. Black, the senior Minister at Perth, who, soon after,
went to Abraham’s bosom.
Wed. 25.--Taking horse at five, we rode to Dunkeld, the
first considerable town in the Highlands. We were agreeably
surprised: A pleasanter situation cannot be easily imagined.
Afterwards we went some miles on a smooth, delightful road,
hanging over the river Tay; and then went on, winding through
the mountains, to the Castle of Blair. The mountains, for the
next twenty miles, were much higher, and covered with snow.
In the evening we came to Dalwhinny, the dearest inn I have
met with in North-Britain. In the morning we were informed,
so much snow had fallen in the night, that we could get no
farther. And, indeed, three young women, attempting to
cross the mountain to Blair, were swallowed up in the snow.
However, we resolved, with God’s help, to go as far as we
could. But about noon we were at a full stop: The snow,
driving together on the top of the mountain, had quite
blocked up the road. We dismounted, and, striking out of
the road warily, sometimes to the left, sometimes to the right,
with many stumbles, but no hurt, we got on to Dalmagarry,
and before sunset, to Inverness.
Benjamin and William Chappel, who had been here three
months, were waiting for a vessel to return to London. They
had met a few people every night to sing and pray together;
and their behaviour, suitable to their profession, had removed
much prejudice.
Fri. 27.--I breakfasted with the senior Minister, Mr.
M‘Kenzie, a pious and friendly man. At six in the evening
I began preaching in the church, and with very uncommon
liberty of spirit. At seven in the morning I preached in the
library, a large commodious room; but it would not contain
the congregation: Many were constrained to go away.
Afterwards I rode over to Fort-George, a very regular fortifi
cation, capable of containing four thousand men. As I was
just taking horse, the Commanding Officer sent word, I was
welcome to preach. But it was a little too late: I had then
but just time to ride back to Inverness.
Sun. 29.--At seven, the benches being removed, the library
contained us tolerably well; and, I am persuaded, God shook
the hearts of many outside Christians. I preached in the
church at five in the afternoon. Mr. Helton designed to
preach abroad at seven; but the Ministers desired he would
preach in the church, which he did, to a large and attentive
congregation. Many followed us from the church to our
lodgings, with whom I spent some time in prayer, and then
advised them, as many as could, to meet together, and spend
an hour every evening in prayer and useful conversation.
Mon. 30.--We set out in a fine morning. A little before
we reached Nairn, we were met by a messenger from the
Minister, Mr. Dunbar; who desired, I would breakfast with
him, and give them a sermon in his church. Afterwards we
hastened to Elgin, through a pleasant and well-cultivated
country. When we set out from hence, the rain began, and
poured down till we came to the Spey, the most impetuous
river I ever saw. Finding the large boat was in no haste
to move, I stepped into a small one, just going off. It
whirled us over the stream almost in a minute. I waited at
the inn at Fochabers, (dark and dirty enough in all reason,)
till our friends overtook me with the horses. The outside
May, 1770.] JOURNAL, 397
of the inn at Keith was of the same hue, and promised us
no great things. But we were agreeably disappointed.
We found plenty of every thing, and so dried ourselves at
leisure.
Tues. MAY 1.--I rode on to Aberdeen, and spent the rest
of the week there. It fell out well, for the weather was
uncommon: We had storms of snow or rain every day. And
it seems the weather was the same as far as London. So
general a storm has scarce been in the memory of man.
Sun. 6.--I preached in the College Kirk, at Old-Aberdeen,
to a very serious (though mostly genteel) congregation. In
the evening I preached at our own Room, and early in the
morning took my leave of this loving people. We came to
Montrose about noon. I had designed to preach there; but
found no notice had been given. However, I went down to
the Green, and sung a hymn. People presently flocked from
all parts, and God gave me great freedom of speech; so that
I hope we did not meet in vain.
At seven in the evening I preached at Arbroath (properly
Aberbrothwick). The whole town seems moved: The con
gregation was the largest I have seen since we left Inverness:
And the society, though but of nine months’ standing, is the
largest in the kingdom, next that of Aberdeen.
Tues. 8.--I took a view of the small remains of the
Abbey. I know nothing like it in all North-Britain. I
paced it, and found it an hundred yards long. The breadth
is proportionable. Part of the west end, which is still
standing, shows it was full as high as Westminster Abbey.
The south end of the cross-aisle likewise is standing, near the
top of which is a large circular window. The zealous
Reformers, they told us, burnt this down. God deliver us
from reforming mobs !
I have seen no town in Scotland which increases so fast,
or which is built with so much common sense, as this. Two
entire new streets, and part of a third, have been built within
these two years. They run parallel with each other, and have
a row of gardens between them. So that every house has a
garden; and thus both health and convenience are consulted.
Wed. 9.--I rode on to Dundee. The Ministers here, parti
cularly Mr. Small, are bitter enough: Notwithstanding which,
the society is well established, and the congregation exceeding
large. I dealt very plainly with them at six, and still more so
the next evening: Yet none appeared to be offended. Friday,
11. I went forward to Edinburgh. Saturday, 12. I received
but a melancholy account of the state of things here. The
congregations were nearly as usual; but the society which,
when I was here before, consisted of above an hundred and
sixty members, was now shrunk to about fifty. Such is the
fruit of a single Preacher’s staying a whole year in one place |
together with the labours of good Mr. Townshend.
Sun. 13.--At seven I preached in the chapel taken by Lady
Glenorchy, which stands at a great distance from ours, in the
most honourable part of the city. Between twelve and one I
preached in the High-School yard, it being too stormy to
preach on the Castle-Hill. A little before six I preached in
our chapel, crowded above and below; but I doubt, with little
effect: Exceeding few seemed to feel what they heard.
Mon. 14.--After ten years' inquiry, I have learned what
are the Highlands of Scotland. Some told me, “The High
lands begin when you cross the Tay;” others, “when you
cross the North Esk;” and others, “when you cross the
river Spey:” But all of them missed the mark. For the
truth of the matter is, the Highlands are bounded by no
river at all, but by Carns, or heaps of stones laid in a row,
south-west and north-east, from sea to sea. These formerly
divided the kingdom of the Picts from that of the Caledonians,
which included all the country north of the Carns; several
whereof are still remaining. It takes in Argyleshire, most
of Perthshire, Murrayshire, with all the north-west counties.
This is called the Highlands, because a considerable part
of it (though not the whole) is mountainous. But it is not
more mountainous than North-Wales, nor than many parts
of England and Ireland: Nor do I believe it has any
mountain higher than Snowdon hill, or the Skiddaw in
Cumberland. Talking Erse, therefore, is not the thing that
distinguishes these from the Lowlands. Neither is this or
that river; both the Tay, the Esk, and the Spey running
through the Highlands, not south of them.
Thur. 17.--At five in the morning I took a solemn leave
of our friends at Edinburgh. About eight I preached at
Musselburgh, and found some hope, there will be a blessing
in the remnant. In the evening I preached in the new
House at Dunbar, the cheerfullest in the kingdom. Friday,
18. We rode over to the Earl of Haddington's seat, finely
June, 1770.] JOURNAL,- 399
situated between two woods. The house is exceeding large
and pleasant, commanding a wide prospect both ways; and
the Earl is cutting walks through the woods, smoothing the
ground, and much enlarging and beautifying his garden.
Yet he is to die! In the evening I trust God broke some of
the stony hearts of Dunbar. A little increase here is in the
society likewise; and all the members walk unblamably.
Sat. 19.--At noon I preached in the Town-Hall at
Berwick. Coming to Alnwick in the afternoon, I found that
wise and good man, William Coward, had been buried two or
three days before. I judged it right to do honour to his
memory, by preaching a kind of funeral sermon, on, “There
is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the
grave, whither thou goest.”
Sun. 20.--At seven I preached in the House; at four and
at seven in the market-place; but the multitude was so great,
that I doubt many could not hear. I then met the society,
and we seemed to breathe the same spirit with him that was
just entered into the joy of his Lord.
Mon. 21.--I preached at Morpeth and at Newcastle. On
Wednesday, 23, I went over to Sunderland. Saturday, 26.
We went by water to North-Biddick. The preaching here
had been discontinued for many years, as it seemed to be
sowing upon the sand; but at length we found the fruit of our
labour. Many are both convinced and converted to God. In
returning, as we were four large boats in company, we made
The mountains and vales his praises rebound.
So is even the water-language now changed !
Sun. 27.--At eight I preached near the Cross in Sunderland,
to such an assembly as was never seen there before. But I
believe that at Gateshead-Fell was still larger; as was that at
the Castle-Garth, in Newcastle. Monday, 28. I began again
the meeting of the children, which had been neglected for
some months; and we had a token for good: Two or three
were cut to the heart; and many seemed much affected.
On Tuesday, 29, and the following days, I took a little
circuit through Weardale, Teesdale, and Swaledale. The ten
days following I spent in and near Newcastle. Monday,
JUNE 11. I took a cheerful leave of that loving people; about
noon preached at Durham; and in the evening, before Mr.
Watson’s door, to a numerous congregation at Stockton.
Tuesday, 12. At five I preached in the new House, strangely
raised, when the case appeared quite desperate, by God’s
touching the heart of a man of substance, who bought the
ground and built it without delay. I preached at Norton
at noon, and afterwards met those who can “rejoice ever
more,” and “pray without ceasing.” We had another com
fortable opportunity at Yarm in the evening, where I found
a greater number of those who believe God has enabled them
to love him with all their heart and soul.
Wed. 13.--I preached at Halsey, ten miles from Yarm,
and in the evening at Thirsk. Thursday, 14. About two, at
Potto; and in the evening at Hutton. Here, as well as else
where, those who believe they are saved from sin undergo
many trials from their brethren. But so much the more will
“the God of all grace, after” they “have suffered a while,
stablish, strengthen, and settle” them.
Fri. 15.--I was agreeably surprised to find the whole
road from Thirsk to Stokesley, which used to be extremely
bad, better than most turnpikes. The gentlemen had exerted
themselves, and raised money enough to mend it effectually.
So they have done for several hundred miles in Scotland,
and throughout all Connaught in Ireland; and so they
undoubtedly might do throughout all England, without
saddling the poor people with the vile imposition of turnpikes
for ever.
In the afternoon we came to Whitby. Having preached
thrice a day for five days, I was willing to preach in the
House; but notice had been given of my preaching in the
market-place; so I began at six, to a large congregation,
most of them deeply attentive.
Sat. 16.--I found our Preacher, James Brownfield, had
just set up for himself. The reasons he gave for leaving the
Methodists were, 1. That they went to church. 2. That they
held Perfection. I earnestly desired our society to leave him
to God, and say nothing about him, good or bad. In the
afternoon I looked over Dr. Priestley’s “English Grammar.”
I wonder he would publish it after Bishop Lowth's.
Sun. 17.--I met the select society, consisting of sixty-five
members. I believe all of these were saved from sin; most of
them are still in glorious liberty. Many of them spake with
admirable simplicity; and their words were like fire. Imme
diately the flame kindled, and spread from heart to heart. At
June, 1770.] JOURNAL. 401
eight I preached; at nine, met the children, most of whom
had known the love of God; and several of them were able
still to rejoice in God their Saviour. Almost as soon as I
began to speak, God spoke to their hearts, and they were ill
able to contain themselves. I observed one little maid in
particular, who heaved and strove for some time, till at length
she was constrained to yield, and break out into strong cries
and tears.
We had a poor sermon at church. However, I went again
in the afternoon, remembering the words of Mr. Philip
Henry, “If the Preacher does not know his duty, I bless
God that I know mine.”
Between one and two I met the Bands, being near two
thirds of the society. Their openness was quite surprising,
as well as the spirit with which they spoke. One plain woman
cried, and spoke, and cried again, so that they were in tears
on every side. I suppose, if I could have stayed so long,
some or other would have spoke till night.
At five I preached in the market-place again, to a far larger
congregation than before. Our love-feast took up the next
two hours, at which many were filled with solemn joy. After
wards I met a few of the children again, all of whom had
tasted that the Lord is gracious. I asked her that cried so
violently in the morning, what was the matter with her. She
said, “I was so overwhelmed with the power and love of
God that I could not hide it.” When I questioned her
farther, she said, “A quarter of a year ago, one Saturday
night, I was quite convinced I was a sinner, and afraid of
dropping into hell; but on Sunday I felt the pardoning love
of God; yet I had many doubts till Monday evening, when
they were all taken away in a moment. After this, I saw
and felt the wickedness of my heart, and longed to be
delivered from it; and on Sunday I was delivered, and had
as clear a witness of this, as of my justification. But I was
sometimes off my watch; then it was not so clear; and people
commended me, till, by little and little, I lost it. Indeed I
still feel the love of God, but not as I did before.”
Mon. 18.--I preached at Robin Hood's Bay about noon;
at Scarborough in the evening. Wednesday, 20. I rode to
Burlington, and preached on the quay, to many plain and
many genteel people. I preached at Hull in the evening;
and the next at Beverley. Friday, 22. I went on to York,
402 REv. J. wesDEY’s [June, 1770.
where there is now more life among the people than has been
for several years. We found much of the presence of God
this evening, and much more the next. One young man was
in a violent agony, and could not refrain from crying aloud.
Several continued with him in prayer till ten o’clock. He
was then filled with joy unspeakable.
Sun. 24.--I met the select society at six, and had the
pleasure to find that some who had lost the great blessing for
months or years, had recovered it with large increase. At
eight I preached to a people ready prepared for the Lord.
At nine I met the children. At five, by taking out the
benches, we made room for the greatest part of the congre
gation. Afterwards I spent an hour with the society, and so
concluded the busy, happy day.
Mon. 25.--I preached in Tadcaster at noon, and at Pateley
Bridge in the evening. It rained, as usual, all the time; but
the congregation stood as still as the trees; and God did
satisfy the hungry with good things, many of whom have
given him all their heart.
Tues. 26.--It rained all the time I was preaching at Otley,
to a numerous congregation; and they drank in the words
of life, just as the thirsting earth the showers. The next
evening I preached in the House at Yeadon, the rain not
suffering us to stand abroad.
Thur. 28.--I rode to Mr. Sutcliffe's at Hoohole; a lovely
valley, encompassed with high mountains. I stood on the
smooth grass before his house, (which stands on a gently
rising ground,) and all the people on the slope before me. It
was a glorious opportunity. I trust many “came boldly to
the throne,” and found “grace to help in time of need.”
I can hardly believe that I am this day entered into the
sixty-eighth year of my age. How marvellous are the ways
of God! How has he kept me even from a child ! From
ten to thirteen or fourteen, I had little but bread to eat, and
not great plenty of that. I believe this was so far from
hurting me, that it laid the foundation of lasting health.
When I grew up, in consequence of reading Dr. Cheyne, I
chose to eat sparingly, and drink water. This was another
great means of continuing my health, till I was about seven
and-twenty. I then began spitting of blood, which continued
several years. A warm climate cured this. I was afterwards
brought to the brink of death by a fever; but it left me
July, 1770.] JOURNAL. 403
healthier than before. Eleven years after, I was in the third
stage of a consumption; in three months it pleased God to
remove this also. Since that time I have known neither pain
nor sickness, and am now healthier than I was forty years
ago. This hath God wrought !
On Friday and Saturday I preached at Heptonstall,
Colne, and Keighley. Sunday, JULY 1. Being much
concerned for the poor parishioners of Haworth, who hear
and hear, and are no more affected than stones, I spoke to
them in the most cutting manner I could. May God apply
it to their hearts |
On Monday and Tuesday I preached at Bingley and
Bradford; and Wednesday, 4, rode to Halifax. Here I had
an opportunity of inquiring thoroughly into a very extraordi
nary case. On January 26, 1760, a young woman of two
and-twenty, felt, in the evening, an uncommon coldness at
her feet. Presently after she was seized with convulsions.
The disorder from that time attended her, more or less, every
day, in spite of all the medicines which were administered by
the most skilful Physicians. One of her fits began a little
before we went in. At first she fell back in her chair,
seemingly senseless, and wrought (like one strangled) in her
breast and throat. In two or three minutes she sprung up,
turned round many times, then dropped down, and began
beating her head against the stone floor. Quickly she started
up, leaped right upwards many times; then ran to and fro
with an hundred odd gesticulations. She beat herself on
the head, tore her hair, and attempted to run into the fire.
Being put into a chair, she spoke a good deal, but not
articulately. She was convulsed again from head to foot;
and afterwards said wildly, “Where am I? Who are these?
I want my father. I will go to my father.” In about an
hour she came to her senses.
I should have imagined the Physicians would have sup
posed all this to be counterfeit. But it seems one and all
thought that could not be, as she could have no motive to
feign, since she gained nothing thereby, living upon the fruit
of her own and her father’s labour. And many of the
circumstances could not be accounted for, upon that suppo
sition. Such were her tears, her foaming at the mouth, her
tearing her hair, striking herself, and beating her head against
the stones; her strong convulsions; and what none can well
404 REv. J. wesDEY’s [July, 1770.
conceive unless he saw it, the change of her countenance,
which was horrid and dreadful, yea, diabolical, as long as the
fits were upon her, but was remarkably pretty and agreeable,
as soon as she came to herself.
When old Dr. A r was asked, what her disorder was,
he answered, “It is what formerly they would have called
being bewitched.” And why should they not call it so now?
Because the infidels have hooted witchcraft out of the
world; and the complaisant Christians, in large numbers,
have joined with them in the cry. I do not so much wonder
at this,--that many of these should herein talk like infidels.
But I have sometimes been inclined to wonder at the pert,
saucy, indecent manner wherein some of those trample upon
men far wiser than themselves; at their speaking so dogma
tically against what not only the whole world, heathen and
Christian, believed in past ages, but thousands, learned as
well as unlearned, firmly believe at this day. I instance in
Dr. Smollett and Mr. Guthrie, whose manner of speaking
concerning witchcraft must be extremely offensive to every
sensible man, who cannot give up his Bible.
Thur. 5.--I preached at six at Daw-Green, near Dewsbury.
All things contributed to make it a refreshing season; the
gently-declining sun, the stillness of the evening, the beauty
of the meadows and fields, through which
The smooth clear “river drew its sinuous train; ”
the opposite hills and woods, and the earnestness of the
people, covering the top of the hill on which we stood; and,
above all, the day-spring from on high, the consolation of the
Holy One! Sat. 7-I rode to Miss Bosanquet's. Her family is still
a pattern, and a general blessing to the country. Sunday, 8.
I preached at Whitechapel, Birstal, and Leeds, at each to as
many as my voice could reach. Monday, 9. About noon I
preached at Woodhouse, a village near Leeds, where a flame
is suddenly broke out. Few days pass without fresh displays
of the grace of God, converting sinners to himself; and a
spirit of childlike, simple love runs through the whole body
of the people. Tuesday, 10. I rode to Harewood, and
preached to a large congregation of the same spirit with that
at Woodhouse. Here, too, the word of God runs swiftly:
many are convinced, and many converted to God. -, *
July, 1770.] JOURNAL, 405
Wed. 11.--I rode to Doncaster, and preached at noon in
the new House, one of the neatest in England. It was
sufficiently crowded, and (what is more strange) with serious
and attentive hearers. What was more unlikely, some years
since, than that such an House or such a congregation should
be seen here ! In the evening I preached at Finningley.
The church was filled; but I fear few felt the word.
Thur. 12.--I preached at Epworth. Friday, 13. We rode
through heavy rain to Newton-upon-Trent. The weather
clearing up, I preached before the House to an earnest congre
gation. A people more loving, more artless, or more athirst
for God, I have seldom seen. Taking horse about eleven, we
rode, broiling in the sun, through Lincoln to Horncastle.
Our brethren desiring me to preach in the market-place,
I cried to an unbroken multitude, “What is a man profited,
if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?”
The power of God was upon them, and they all calmly
attended, till I commended them to God.
This was the first day that I have been weary (the violent
heat drinking up my spirits) since I set out from London.
Saturday, 14. In another sultry day we rode to Louth,
formerly another den of lions. At first great part of the
congregation seemed to “care for mone of these things.” But
God made them care; the Lord looked down from heaven,
and “his arrows went abroad.” I have seldom seen persons
more sensibly struck. They gathered closer and closer
together, till there was not one inattentive hearer, and hardly
one unaffected. In riding hence the heat was as intense as
ever; so that I was again tired before we reached Grimsby.
But I soon recovered, and preached to a congregation of
good old Methodists, on, Daniel in the Den of Lions.
Sun. 15.--I preached at eight, and again at two, and then
hastened away to Barrow. The people here much resembled
those at Horncastle. So I would not take them out of their
depth, but explained and enforced these solemn words, “It is
appointed unto men once to die.” Monday, 16. At nine I
preached in Awkborough, to a people of quite another kind.
So I spoke to them directly of “Christ Crucified,” and the
salvation which is through him. About noon I preached to a
people of the same spirit at Amcoats. In the evening, the
House at Swinfleet not being able to contain a third of the
congregation, I preached on a smooth, green place, sheltered
from the wind, on Heb. vii. 25. Many rejoiced to hear of
being “saved to the uttermost,” the very thing which their
souls longed after.
Tues. 17.--I preached in the market-place at Thorne: All
were quiet, and tolerably attentive.
Wed. 18.--About moon I preached at Crowle. This is
the place, the former Rector of which, contemporary with
my father, ordered those words to be inscribed upon his
tomb-stone:
#ert Iits the 3300p
or"
FoRTY YEARS RECTOR OF THIS PARISH.
“All the day long have I stretched out my hands
Unto a disobedient and gainsaying people.
So I gave them up unto their own hearts' lusts,
And let them follow their own imaginations.”
They did follow them for many years; but at length God
hath visited them.
Friday and Saturday I spent at Epworth. Sunday, 22.
About eight I preached at Misterton; at one about half a mile
from Haxey church; and at five on Epworth Cross, to the
largest congregation in Lincolnshire, on, “I am not ashamed
of the Gospel of Christ.”
Mon. 23.--I preached at Doncaster and Rotherham; on
Tuesday and Wednesday at Sheffield. On Wednesday
evening my heart was so enlarged, that I knew not how to
leave off. Do some say, “I preach longer than usual when
I am barren?” It is quite the contrary with me. I never
exceed, but when I am full of matter; and still I consider
it may not be with my audience as with me. So that it is
strange if I exceed my time above a quarter of an hour.
On Thursday and Friday I preached at Creitch, Derby,
Burton-upon-Trent, and Ashby. Saturday, 28. I rode to
Castle-Donnington; but hay-making had emptied the town,
till a violent shower brought all the hay-makers home, who
received the good word with gladness.
At seven I preached in Nottingham; Sunday, 29, at
Sanjaker, where God was eminently present. At five in the
evening I went to the market-place in Nottingham. Thou
sands upon thousands flocked together; and all were still as
Aug. 1770.] JOURNAL, 407
night, while I opened and applied, “I am not ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ.” We closed the day with a love-feast,
during which four mourners found peace with God; two of
them could not avoid declaring it in the presence of all their
brethren.
Mon. 30.--I preached at Bingham, ten miles from Notting
ham. I really admired the exquisite stupidity of the people.
They gaped and stared while I was speaking of death and
judgment, as if they had never heard of such things before.
And they were not helped by two surly, ill-mannered Clergy
men, who seemed to be just as wise as themselves. The
congregation at Houghton in the evening was more noble,
behaving with the utmost decency.
Tues. 31.--At nine I preached in the market-place at
Loughborough, to almost as large a congregation as at
Nottingham, and equally attentive. Thence I rode to Mark
field. Notwithstanding the harvest, the church was quickly
filled. And great was our rejoicing in our great High
Priest, through whom we “came boldly to the throne of
grace.” In the evening I preached in the Castle-yard at
Leicester, to a multitude of awakened and unawakened. One
feeble attempt was made to disturb them; a man was sent to
cry fresh salmon at a little distance; but he might as well
have spared the pains, for none took the least notice of him.
Wed. AUGUST 1.--I rode to Northampton. It being still
extremely hot, I determined not to be cooped up, but took
my stand on the side of the Common, and cried aloud to a
large multitude of rich and poor, “Acquaint thyself now
with him, and be at peace.”
Thur. 2.--Some friends from London met us at St. Alban’s.
Before dinner we took a walk in the Abbey, one of the most
ancient buildings in the kingdom, near a thousand years old;
and one of the largest, being five hundred and sixty feet in
length, (considerably more than Westminster Abbey,) and
broad and high in proportion. Near the east end is the
tomb and vault of good Duke Humphrey. Some now living
remember since his body was entire. But after the coffin
was opened, so many were curious to taste the liquor in
which it was preserved, that in a little time the corpse was
left bare, and then soon mouldered away. A few bones are
now all that remain. How little is the spirit concerned at
this !
Sunday, 5, and for five or six days this week, the heat was
as great as I remember in Georgia. Tuesday, 7. Our
Conference began, and ended on Friday, 10. On Sunday
evening I set out in the machine, and the next evening
preached at Bristol. Saturday, 18. I gave a solemn warning
to a large congregation on Redcliff-Hill, from those awful
words, “The time is come that judgment must begin at the
house of God.” Surely it will; unless a general repentance
prevent a general visitation.
Mon. 20.-Irode to Charlton. The violent heat continuing,
I preached in the evening under a tree to a congregation who
were all attention. Tuesday, 21. I rode on to Tiverton, and
thence through Launceston, Camelford, Port-Isaac, Cubert,
St. Agnes, and Redruth, to St. Ives. Here God has made
all our enemies to be at peace with us, so that I might have
preached in any part of the town. But I rather chose a
meadow, where such as would might sit down, either on
the grass or on the hedges,--so the Cornish term their broad
stone walls, which are usually covered with grass. Here I
enforced, “Fear God, and keep his commandments; for this
is the whole of man.”
Sun. 26.--Being desired to preach in the town, for the
sake of some who could not come up the hill, I began near
the market-place, at eight, on, “Without holiness no man
shall see the Lord.” We had an useful sermon at church,
and another in the afternoon, delivered in a strong and earnest
manner. At five I preached again. Well nigh all the town
were present, and thousands from all parts of the country; to
whom I explained, “The Son of God was manifested to
destroy the works of the devil.”
Mon. 27.--I was surprised to find, that the select society
had been wholly neglected. I got a few of them together;
but did not find so much as one, who had not given up his
confidence. At nine I renewed the meeting of the children,
which had also been given up for a long season. But so dead
a company have I seldom seen. I found scarce one spark
of even the fear of God among them.
In the evening I preached before the House at St. Just,
on, “I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God.” It
was a glorious hour. The same spirit breathed upon us, at
the meeting of the society. At such a season, who does not
feel that nothing is too hard for God?
Aug. 1770.] JOURNAL. 409
On Tuesday and Wednesday I preached at Newlyn, Gold
sithney and St. John's. Thursday, 30. I rode to Falmouth;
and preached at two in the afternoon near the church, to a
greater number of people than I ever saw there before,
except the mob, five-and-twenty years ago. I preached at
Penryn in the evening; Friday noon in Crowan; in the
evening at Treworgey, near Redruth.
Here I met with an ingenious book, the late Lord Lyttleton's
“Dialogues of the Dead.” A great part of it I could heartily
subscribe to, though not to every word. I believe Madam Guion
was in several mistakes, speculative and practical too: Yet I
would no more dare to call her, than her friend, Archbishop
Fenelon, “a distracted enthusiast.” She was undoubtedly a
woman of a very uncommon understanding, and of excellent
piety. Nor was she any more “a lunatic,” than she was an
heretic.
Another of this lively writer's assertions is, “Martin has
spawned a strange brood of fellows, called Methodists,
Moravians, Hutchinsonians, who are madder than Jack was in
his worst days.” I would ask any one who knows what good
breeding means, is this language for a nobleman or a porter?
But let the language be as it may, is the sentiment just?
To say nothing of the Methodists, (although some of them
too are not quite out of their senses,) could his Lordship show
me in England many more sensible men than Mr. Gambold
and Mr. Okely? And yet both of these were called
Moravians. Or could he point out many men of stronger and
deeper understanding than Dr. Horne and Mr. William
Jones? (if he could pardon them for believing the Trinity 1)
And yet both of those are Hutchinsonians. What pity is it,
that so ingenious a man, like many others gone before him,
should pass so peremptory a sentence in a cause which he
does not understand Indeed, how could he understand it?
How much has he read upon the question? What sensible
Methodist, Moravian, or Hutchinsonian did he ever calmly
converse with? What does he know of them, but from the
caricaturas drawn by Bishop Lavington, or Bishop Warbur
ton? And did he ever give himself the trouble of reading
the answers to those warm, lively men? Why should a
good-natured and a thinking man thus condemn whole bodies
of men by the lump? In this I can neither read the
gentleman, the scholar, nor the Christian.
Since the writing of this, Lord Lyttleton is no more; he
is mingled with common dust. But as his book survives,
there still needs an answer to the unjust reflections contained
therein.
Sat. SEPTEMBER 1.--I took a walk to the top of that
celebrated hill, Carn-Brae. Here are many monuments of
remote antiquity, scarce to be found in any other part of
Europe: Druid altars of enormous size, being only huge
rocks, strangely suspended one upon the other; and rock
basins, hollowed on the surface of the rock, it is supposed, to
contain the holy water. It is probable these are at least
co-eval with Pompey's Theatre, if not with the Pyramids of
Egypt. And what are they the better for this? Of what
consequence is it either to the dead or the living, whether they
have withstood the wastes of time for three thousand, or
three hundred years?
Sun. SEPTEMBER 2.--At five in the evening I preached in
the natural amphitheatre at Gwennap. The people covered a
circle of near fourscore yards’ diameter, and could not be
fewer than twenty thousand. Yet, upon inquiry, I found
they could all hear distinctly, it being a calm, still evening.
Mon. 3.--Between eight and nine, while I was preaching
at Truro, we had only a few light showers; although, a few
miles off, there was impetuous rain, with violent thunder and
lightning. About noon I preached at Mevagissey, in a
vacant space near the middle of the town, and strongly applied
those words, “Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways; for
why will ye die, O house of Israel?” At six I stood at the
head of the street, in St. Austle, and enforced, on a large and
quiet congregation, “Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shalt thou serve,”
After visiting Medros, Plymouth, and Collumpton, I came
on Friday, 7, to Taunton. Presently after preaching, I took
horse. The rain obliged us to make haste; but in a while
the saddle came over his neck, and then turned under his belly
I had then only to throw myself off, or I must have fallen
under him. I was a little bruised, but soon mounted again,
and rode to Lympsham, and the next day to Bristol.
Sun. 9.--My voice was weak when I preached at Princes
Street in the morning. It was stronger at two in the after
moon, while I was preaching under the sycamore-tree in
Kingswood; and strongest of all at five in the evening, when
we assembled near King's Square in Bristol.
Tues. 11.--In the evening I preached at Frome; but
not abroad, as I designed, because of the rain. The next
evening I preached in the adjoining meadow, to as quiet a
congregation as that in the House.
Sun. 16.--The appointed Preacher not coming in time, I
preached myself at five; at eight in Princes-Street, at two in
Kingswood, and near King’s Square at five in the evening,
Saturday, 15.
It was the day before, that I first observed a very uncom
mon concern in the children at Kingswood School, while I was
explaining, and enforcing upon them, the first principles of
religion.
Tues. 18.--Most of them went to see the body of Francis
Evans, one of our neighbours, who died two or three days
before. About seven Mr. Hindmarsh met them all in the
school, and gave an exhortation suited to the occasion. He
then gave out that hymn,
And am I born to die,
To lay this body down P
And must my trembling spirit fly
Into a world unknown P
This increased their concern; so that it was with great diffi
culty they contained themselves till he began to pray. Then
Al r M r, and R--d N--e, cried aloud for
mercy; and quickly another and another, till all but two or
three were constrained to do the same; and as long as he
continued to pray, they continued the same loud and bitter
cry. One of the maids, Elizabeth Nutt, was as deeply
convinced as any of them. After prayer, Mr. H. said,
“Those of you who are resolved to serve God may go and
pray together.” Fifteen of them did so, and continued
wrestling with God, with strong cries and tears, till about
nine o’clock.
Wed. 19.--At the morning prayer many of them cried out
again, though not so violently. From this time their whole
spirit and behaviour were changed: They were all serious and
loving to each other. The same seriousness and mildness
continued on Thursday; and they walked together, talking
only of the things of God. On Friday evening their concern
greatly increased, and caused them to break out again into
strong cries. Saturday, 22. They seemed to lose none of
their concern, and spent all their spare time in prayer.
Sun. 23.--Fifteen of them gave me their names; being
resolved, they said, to serve God. In the afternoon I gave
them a strong exhortation, and afterward Mr. Rankin. Their
very countenances were entirely changed. They drank in
every word.
Tues. 25.-During the time of prayer in the evening, they
Sept. 1770.] JOURNAL, 415
were affected just as the Tuesday before. The two other
maids were then present, and were both cut to the heart.
Wed. 26.--“I rode,” says Mr. Rankin, “in the afternoon
to Kingswood, and went up stairs, in order to retire a little.
But when I came up, I heard one of the boys at prayer,
in an adjoining room. I listened a while, and was exceedingly
struck with many of his expressions. When he ceased I went
in, and found two others with him. Just then three more
came in. I went to prayer. The Lord seemed to rest upon
them all, and pierced their hearts with deep conviction. The
next morning I spent some time with all the children, and
then desired those who were resolved to save their souls, to
come up stairs with me. I went up, and nine of the children
followed me, who said they were determined to ‘flee from
the wrath to come.’ I exhorted them never to rest till they
found peace with God; and then sung and prayed. The
power of God came down in so wonderful a manner, that
my voice was drowned by their cries. When I concluded,
one of them broke out into prayer, in a manner that quite
astonished me; and, during the whole day, a peculiar spirit
of seriousness rested on all the children.
“After spending some time in the school on Friday, I
desired those I had spoke to the day before, to follow me;
which they did, and one more. I pressed each of them
severally, not to rest till he had a clear sense of the pardoning
love of God. I then prayed, and the Lord poured out his
Spirit as the day before; so that, in a few minutes, my voice
could not be heard amidst their cries and groans.”
“On Friday, 28,” says Mr. Hindmarsh, “when I came out
into the ground, ten of the children quickly gathered round
about me, earnestly asking, what they must do to be saved:
Nor could I disengage myself from them, till the bell rang
for dinner. All this time we observed, the children who were
most affected learned faster and better than any of the rest.
“In the evening, I explained to all the children the nature
of the Lord's Supper. I then met twelve of them apart,
and spoke to each particularly. When I asked one of them,
Simon Lloyd, ‘What do you want to make you happy?’
after a little pause, he answered, ‘God.” We went to prayer.
Presently a cry arose from one and another, till it ran
through all, vehemently calling upon God, and refusing to
be comforted without the knowledge and the love of God.
“About half-hour after eight, I bade them good night,
and sent them up to bed. But Lloyd, Brown, and Robert
Hindmarsh slipped aside, when the rest went up, being
resolved they would not sleep, nor rest, till God revealed him
self to them. When they began to pray, some of the others
heard them, and one and another stole down, some half
dressed, some almost naked. They continued praying by
turns near three quarters of an hour, in which time, first one,
then a second, and before they concluded, two more found
peace with God. I then went to them, and asked Bobby
Hindmarsh, “Why did you slip aside?” He said, ‘Simon
Lloyd, and Jacky Brown, and I had agreed together, that
we would not sleep till the Lord set us at liberty. After I
had prayed with them, and praised God till about half-hour
past nine, I desired them to go to bed. They did so; all
but those three, who slipped away, and stayed with Richard
Piercy, who was in deep agony of soul, and would by no means
be persuaded to rise from his knees. The children above,
hearing them pray, in a few minutes ran down again. They
continued wrestling, with still increasing cries and tears, till
three more found peace with God. About a quarter past ten,
I went to them again, and observing some of them quite hoarse,
insisted upon their going to bed, which all of them then did.
But quickly one, and then another, stole out of bed, till, in a
quarter of an hour, they were all at prayer again. And the
concern among them was deeper than ever, as well as more
general; there being but four of our five-and-twenty children,
that did not appear to be cut to the heart. However, fearing
they might hurt themselves, I sent one of our maids to per
suade them to go up. But Jacky Brown catching hold of her,
said, “O Betty, seek the salvation of your soul! Seek it in
earnest ! It is not too late: And it is not too soon.” Inume
diately she fell upon her knees, and burst out into tears and
strong cries. The two other maids hearing this, ran in, and
were presently seized as violently as her. Jacky Brown then
began praying for Betty, and continued in prayer near three
quarters of an hour. By that time there was a general cry
from all the maids, as well as the boys. This continued till
past eleven. My wife, and I, and Mr. Keard, then went in,
and fearing some of them might be hurt, with difficulty
prevailed upon them to go to bed, and went up with them.
“The maids continued below in much distress. We talked
Sept. 1770.] JOURNAL, 4.17
with them a little, and left them praying. But it was not
above a quarter of an hour, before Betty broke out into
thanksgiving. Going in, I asked her, ‘Now is the love of
God free?” She answered, “Free as air: Blessed be God,
that ever I came under this roof!” The other two remained
on their knees, praying as in an agony. I desired them to go
into their own room, and they did: Yet would not go to bed,
but continued in prayer.
“Saturday, 29, I was waked between four and five by
the children vehemently crying to God. The maids went to
them at five: And first one of the boys, then another, then
one and another of the maids, earnestly poured out their
souls before God, both for themselves and for the rest.
They continued weeping and praying till mine o’clock, not
thinking about meat or drink: Nay, Richard Piercy took no
food all the day, but remained, in words or groans, calling
upon God.
“About nine, Diana went into her own room, and prayed,
partly alone, partly with Betty. About ten, (as Betty was
praying,) her strength was quite spent; and she sunk down as
dead. She lay so for some minutes, while the other prayed
on ; but then suddenly started up, praising God with all her
might, and rejoicing with joy unspeakable.
“Mary hearing her voice, broke off her work, and ran in to
her in haste. They all remained praying by turns till twelve,
when she lay like one at the point to die. But there was not
yet any answer to prayer, nor any deliverance.
“About one, all the maids, and three of the boys, went up
stairs, and began praying again. And now they found the
Lord’s hand was not shortened. Between two and three,
Mary likewise rejoiced with joy unspeakable. They all con
tinued together till after four, praising the God of their
salvation. Indeed they seemed to have forgotten all things
here below, and to think of nothing but God and heaven.
“In the evening, all the maids, and many of the boys, not
having been used to so long and violent speaking, were worn
out, as to bodily strength, and so hoarse that they were scarce
able to speak: But they were strong in the spirit, full of
love, and of joy and peace in believing. Sunday, 30. Eight
of the children, and the three maids, received the Lord's
Supper for the first time. And hitherto, they are all rejoicing
in God, and walking worthy of the Gospel.”
4.18 REv. J. wesDEY’s [Oct. 1770.
All this time it was observed, that there was an uncommon
revival of the work of God, in all the societies round about.
That in Kingswood, within a few months, increased from an
hundred and eighteen, to above three hundred members;
and every day more and more were convinced of sin, and
more and more enabled to rejoice in God their Saviour.
Mon. OcToBER 1, and the following days, I preached at
many of the towns round Bristol, and found the congrega
tions increasing in every place. Sunday, 7. My brother and
I complied with the desire of many of our friends, and
agreed to administer the Lord's Supper every other Sunday
at Bristol. We judged it best to have the entire Service, and
so began at nine o’clock. After it was ended, I rode to
Kingswood, gave an exhortation to the children, and preached
to as many as the House would contain. A little before
five, I began at the Square, and found no want of strength.
At the conclusion of the Morning Service I was weak and
weary, hardly able to speak. After preaching at Kingswood,
I was better; and at night quite fresh and well.
Mon. 8.--I preached at Pensford and Shepton-Mallet in
my way to Wincanton, one of the dullest places in all the
county. I preached on Death in the evening, and Hell in
the morning. Tuesday, 9. It seemed, these were the very
subjects they wanted. I never saw this careless people so
much affected before.
I preached in Shaftesbury at noon, in Salisbury at night.
Wednesday, 10. I preached at Fordingbridge, to a serious,
well-behaved congregation: Only two young gentlewomen
were at first inclined to mirth. But in the evening, two young
women at Salisbury retained their mirth to the end; being
greatly diverted with hearing of “the dead, small and great,
standing before God!” Now what understanding have
these pretty things? Have they as much as many children
six years old?
Thur. 11.--About eleven I preached at Winchester, to a
genteel and yet serious congregation. I was a little tired
before I came to Portsmouth, but the congregation soon
made me forget my weariness. Indeed the people in general
here are more noble than most in the south of England.
They receive the word of God “with all readiness of mind,”
and show civility, at least, to all that preach it.
Fri. 12.--I walked round the Dock, much larger than any
Oct. 1770.] JOURNAL. 419
other in England. The late fire began in a place where no
one comes, just at low water, and at a time when all were fast
asleep. So that none can doubt its being done by design.
It spread with such amazing violence, among tow, and cordage,
and dry wood, that none could come near without the utmost
danger. Nor was anything expected, but that the whole
Dock would be consumed, if not the town also. But this God
would not permit. It stopped on one side, close to the
Commissioner's house; and just as it was seizing the town
on the other side, the wind changed and drove it back.
Afterwards the fury of it was checked, by water, by sand,
and by pulling down some buildings. And yet it was full five
weeks before it was wholly put out. Saturday, 13. I set out
at two, and in the afternoon came to the Foundery.
Mon. 15.--I set out for Oxfordshire, and was throughly
wet in my way to Wallingford. The congregation was large,
and deeply serious. Tuesday, 16. I preached at Witney, in
the new House, and again on Thursday morning. After
service, many crowding with me into the House, I spent some
time with them in prayer. It was a happy opportunity; and
many praised God for the consolation they received.
We had afterwards a fair and pleasant ride to High
Wycomb. For many years we had little prospect of doing
good here; but now the seed which had been so long dead,
springs up into a plentiful harvest. Friday, 19. I conversed
particularly with several, who believe God has saved them
from sin; and their lives, I find, are suitable thereto, and do
in no wise dishonour their profession.
Sat. 20.--I returned to London. So rainy a week I have
seldom seen; yet we have not had one shower while we were
abroad, except on Monday morning. Poor reasoners! who
think any instance of Providence too small to be observed or
acknowledged !
Mon. 22.--I took horse a little before five, in an exceeding
thick fog; but it was gone by noon. The rain, which was
suspended all day, began again when we came to Whittle
bury; where, notwithstanding the rain and boisterous wind,
the Room was filled, both in the evening and morning. On
Tuesday noon I preached at Tomcaster, and in the evening
at Weedom. Here I heard a remarkable account:-An
eminently profane man, two or three days ago, was swearing
to his companions, that he should outlive forty of them.
Instantly he began vomiting blood; and in ten minutes was
stone-dead.
... Wed. 24.--I preached at Weedom at five, and about nine
at Kislingbury, where I was obliged, by the largeness of the
congregation, to stand in the open air. At first the sun on
the side was full warm, as it was about noon at Horlston.
Thence I rode to Northampton, where we had now a more
commodious place to preach in, formerly used by the Presby
terians. The people heard with great attention; and many of
them came at five in the morning. Thursday, 25. About
ten I began at Brighton, where, likewise, the multitude of
people constrained me to preach abroad. About two I preached
at Haddon, to a far greater multitude, in a delightful meadow.
Nor did I find any want of strength when I concluded the
day by preaching and meeting the society at Northampton.
On Friday I preached at Bedford; on Saturday noon at
Hertford; and in the afternoon went on to London.
AMon. 29.--I rode to Colchester; and on Tuesday to
Norwich. Wednesday, 31. In applying those solemn
words, “As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, there
is but a step between me and death,” my heart was enlarged,
and my mouth opened both to convince and comfort. Surely,
in spite of the marvellous ignorance which prevails among
the generality of people in this city, and the uncommon
stumbling-blocks which have been thrown in their way, the
work of God will not only continue, but increase.
Thur. NoveMBER 1.--I rode to Yarmouth,--a dull, cold
place: Yet this evening we had a remarkable blessing, as
also the next evening. Lord, thy thoughts are not as our
thoughts | Thou wilt work; and who shall hinder?
Sun. 4.--At seven I met the society at Norwich, and
administered the Lord's Supper to about an hundred and
fourscore persons. Monday, 5. I met the Leaders, and
inquired into the state of the society. In all England I find
no people like those of Norwich. They are eminently
“unstable as water.” Out of two hundred, whom I left here
last year, sixty-nine are gone already ! What a blessing
is knowledge when it is sanctified ! What stability can be
expected without it? For let their affections be ever so
lively for the present, yet what hold can you have upon a
people who neither know books, nor men; neither themselves,
nor the Bible; neither matural nor spiritual things?
Nov. 1770.] JOURNAL.- 421
Wed. 7.--I read and abridged an old treatise, on “the
Origin of the Soul.” I never before saw anything on the
subject so satisfactory. I think he proves to a demonstration,
that God has enabled man, as all other creatures, to propagate
his whole species, consisting of soul and body.
Thur. 8.--I set out for London. It rained almost all the
day; and in the afternoon so impetuously, (the rain being
driven upon us by a furious wind,) that it was with difficulty
we reached Lakenheath. Here we found Mr. Evans just
worn out, a picture of human nature in disgrace. He had
not only no more strength than a little child, but no more
understanding ! Friday, 9. About ten I preached at Bury,
and at Braintree in the evening. Finding I was among
stocks, I was obliged to strike with all my might; and I trust
God did strike some of the flinty hearts.
Sat.10.--I returned to London, and had the melancholy
news of Mr. Whitefield’s death confirmed by his executors,
who desired me to preach his funeral sermon on Sunday,
the 18th. In order to write this, I retired to Lewisham on
Monday; and on Sunday following, went to the chapel in
Tottenham-Court-Road. An immense multitude was gathered
together from all corners of the town. I was at first afraid
that a great part of the congregation would not be able to
hear; but it pleased God so to strengthen my voice, that
even those at the door heard distinctly. It was an awful
season: All were still as night: Most appeared to be deeply
affected; and an impression was made on many, which one
would hope will not speedily be effaced.
The time appointed for my beginning at the Tabernacle
was half-hour after five: But it was quite filled at three; so
I began at four. At first the noise was exceeding great; but
it ceased when I began to speak; and my voice was again so
strengthened that all who were within could hear, unless an
accidental noise hindered here or there for a few moments. O
that all may hear the voice of Him with whom are the issues
of life and death; and who so loudly, by this unexpected
stroke, calls all his children to love one another!
Fri. 23.--Being desired by the Trustees of the Tabernacle
at Greenwich to preach Mr. Whitefield’s funeral sermon there,
I went over to-day for that purpose; but neither would this
House contain the congregation. Those who could not get in
made some noise at first; but in a little while all were silent.
Here, likewise, I trust God has given a blow to that bigotry
which had prevailed for many years.
Mon. DECEMBER 3.--I took a little journey into Kent.
In the evening I preached at Chatham, in the new House,
which was sufficiently crowded with attentive hearers. Tues
day, 4. I preached at Canterbury. Wednesday, 5. We went
to Dover, where, with some difficulty, we climbed to the top
of Shakspeare’s Cliff. It is exceeding high, and commands
a vast prospect both by sea and land; but it is nothing so
terrible in itself as it is in his description. I preached to a
very serious congregation in the evening as well as in the
morning. The same, likewise, we observed at Canterbury;
so that I hope to see good days here also. Friday, 7. I
preached in Feversham at nine, and in the evening at
Chatham. So we go through water and fire! And all is
well, so we are doing or suffering the will of our Lord!
Wed. 19.--About noon I preached at Dorking. The
hearers were many, and seemed all attention. About an
hundred attended at Ryegate in the evening, and between
twenty and thirty in the morning: Dull indeed as stones.
But cannot God “out of these stones raise up children unto
Abraham ?”
Tues. 25.--This was a day full of work; but, blessed be
God, not tiresome work. I began in the Foundery at four:
The Service at West-Street began at nine. In the after
noon I met the children at three, preached at five, and then
had a comfortable season with the society.
Mon. 31.--We concluded the year, at the chapel, with the
voice of praise and thanksgiving. How many blessings has
God poured upon us this year! May the next be as this,
and much more abundant :
Tues. JANUARY 1, 1771.--A large congregation met at
Spitalfields in the evening, in order to renew, with one heart
and one voice, their covenant with God. This was not in
vain; the Spirit of glory, and of God, as usual, rested upon
them. Wednesday, 2. I preached in the evening, at Dept
ford, a kind of funeral sermon for Mr. Whitefield. In every
place I wish to show all possible respect to the memory of
that great and good man.
Thur. 3.-I spent an hour and a half in beating the air,
in reasoning with an infidel of the lowest class. He told
me roundly, “I believe God is powerful, and the Creator of
Feb. 1771.] JOU1tft.A1/. 423
all things. But I am nothing obliged to him for creating
me, since he did it only for his own pleasure. Neither can I
believe that he is good; since he can remove all the evil in
the world if he will: And, therefore, it is God’s fault, and
no one's else, that there is any evil in the universe.” I am
afraid we could not deny this, if we allowed that God had
“from all eternity, unchangeably determined everything,
great and small, which comes to pass in time.”
Mon. 7.--I had an hour's conversation with that amiable
young man, Mr. de C , whose opinion has not yet spoiled
his temper. But how long will he hold out against its baleful
tendency? I fear, not to the end of the year.
Tues. 15.--I dined at Mr. M 's, an upright man,
willing to know and to live the Gospel. I cannot but think
he would be an eminent Christian if he were not rich.
Sun. 20.--While I was opening and applying, at West
Street chapel, those comfortable words, “He knoweth whereof
we are made; he remembereth that we are but dust,” it
pleased God to speak to many hearts, and to fill them with
strong consolation. Now let them “walk as children of the
light,” and they shall no more come into darkness.
Wed. 23.--For what cause I know not to this day,
set out for Newcastle, purposing “never to return.” Non
eam reliqui: Non dimisi: Non revocabo.”
Fri. 25.--I revised and transcribed my Will, declaring as
simply, as plainly, and as briefly as I could, nothing more
nor nothing else, but “what I would have done with the
worldly goods which I leave behind me.”
Sun. 27.--I buried the remains of Joan Turner, who
spent all her last hours in rejoicing and praising God, and
died full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, at three years and
an half old.
Thur. FEBRUARY 7.--I met with that ingenious tract,
“A Dialogue between Moses and Lord Bolingbroke.” It
contains many striking and beautiful thoughts; yet some
things in it are not quite clear. It is not clear, that Moses
includes in his account neither more nor less than the solar
system. Probably he speaks, either solely of the creation of
the Earth, and of other bodies as related thereto: Or of the
Universe, the fixed stars, (mentioned Gen. i. 16,) including
* I did not desert her: I did not send her away: I will never recall her.
their satellites also. But be this as it may, is it well thus to
run down all that differ from us? Dr. Pye is an ingenious
man; but so is Dr. Robinson also. So are twenty more,
although they understand Moses in a quite different manner.
Thur. 14.--I went through both the upper and lower rooms
of the London Workhouse. It contains about an hundred
children, who are in as good order as any private family. And
the whole house is as clean, from top to bottom, as any
gentleman's needs be. And why is not every workhouse
in London, yea, through the kingdom, in the same order?
Purely for want either of sense, or of honesty and activity,
in them that superintend it.
Tues. 19.--I preached once more at Welling, to a larger
congregation than I have seen there for many years. And
many seemed to be uncommonly affected: Particularly one
young gentlewoman, who had never heard any preaching of
this kind before this evening. After struggling some time,
she cried out aloud, and could not be comforted; although
her mother told her how good she was; nay, and had been
all her life.
Wed. 20.--We never, that I remember, before had such a
congregation at Wapping, either of hearers or communicants;
and very seldom such an outpouring of the Spirit. Saturday,
23. We had the greatest number of communicants at Snows
fields, that we have had since the chapel was built. It seems
as if God were about throughly to heal the wound which we
received here in the house of our friends.
Mon. 25.--I showed a friend, coming out of the country,
the tombs in Westminster Abbey. The two with which I
still think none of the others worthy to be compared, are that
of Mrs. Nightingale, and that of the Admiral rising out of
his tomb at the resurrection. But the vile flattery inscribed
on many of them reminded me of that just reflection,--
If on the sculptur'd marble you rely,
Pity that worth like his should ever die.
If credit to the real life you give,
Pity a wretch like him should ever live :
Sun. MARCH 3.--After preaching at the chapel morning
and afternoon, in the evening I preached at Brentford, the
next evening at Newbury, and on Tuesday at Bristol. Friday,
8. I went over to Kingswood, and found several of the boys
still alive to God.
March, 1771.] JOURNAL. 425
Mon. 11.--I set out with John Pritchard, in a severe frost,
and about two came to Stroud. Being desired to preach a
funeral sermon for good old Mr. Arundel, I willingly complied,
and enlarged on, “These are they which came out of great
tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb.”
Tues. 12.--The frost changed into rain. About noon I
preached at Tewkesbury; and at Worcester in the evening.
Wednesday, 13. I had the pleasure of spending an hour at
Kidderminster, with that good man, Mr. Fawcett. I reached
Shrewsbury but a few minutes before the time of preaching.
The mob were quieter than usual, as they were likewise the
next night. Friday, 15. Being desired to give them a
sermon at Wem, and finding no house would hold the congre
gation, I stood in Mr. Henshaw's yard, where I opened and
strongly applied those words, “The disciples were called
Christians first at Antioch.” We were more at a loss what
to do with the congregation at Whitchurch in the evening.
At length we desired all that could, to squeeze into the
House; the rest stood quietly without; and none, I believe,
repented their labour; for God was eminently present.
Sat. 16.--Between nine and ten, I began at Cardinmarsh.
I have not seen the bulk of a congregation so melted down since
I left London. In the evening we had a Sunday congregation
at Chester; and many were filled with consolation.
Both on Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday, all our congre
gations were uncommonly large; otherwise I should have
regretted staying so long, while the weather was pleasant
and the wind fair. Wednesday, 20. Having agreed with a
Captain, who promised to sail immediately, we went down to
Park-Gate; but, the wind turning, I preached in the evening
to most of the Gentry of the town. I preached likewise,
morning and evening, on Thursday. Friday, 22. I
embarked on board the Kildare; abundantly the best and
cleanest ship which I have sailed in for many years. But the
wind failing, we could not cross the bar till about noon.
Saturday, 23. About one, the wind being high, and the sea
rough, I judged it was my best way to lie down and go to
sleep. Meantime the ship went forty leagues in about twelve
hours, and reached Dublin early on Sunday morning.
Landing at the quay, I walked straight to the new Room,
very well, (blessed be God,) and very hungry.
I immediately set myself to inquire into the state of the
society in Dublin. It was plain there had been a continual
jar, for at least two years last past, which had stumbled the
people, weakened the hands of the Preachers, and greatly
hindered [the work of God]. I wanted to know the ground
of this; and, that I might do nothing rashly, determined to
hear the parties, separately first, and then face to face.
Having already talked with the Preachers, I talked this
evening with the Leaders at large; and from the spirit which
appeared in all, I had a good hope that all hinderances
would be removed. On Wednesday evening I met the
Leaders again, and gave them an opportunity of explaining
themselves further; and on Friday I appointed an extra
ordinary meeting, at which some spoke with much warmth.
But I tempered them on each side, so that they parted in
peace.
Sat. 30.--I preached at the new preaching-house, near the
barracks, about six in the evening. Many attended here who
cannot, and many who will not, come to the other end of the
town. So that I am persuaded the preaching here twice or
thrice a week, will be much for the glory of God.
Sun. 31.--The Leaders, Stewards, and Preachers, spoke
their minds freely to each other. I now saw the whole evil
might be removed, all parties being desirous of peace.
On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I visited the
classes, and found a general faintness had run through the
society. Yet for several days God has given a general
blessing, and strengthened many of the feeble-minded. On
Tuesday I preached again at the new House, and many were
greatly comforted.
On Wednesday evening I read over to the Leaders the
following paper:
1. That it may be more easily discerned whether the
members of our societies are working out their own salvation,
they are divided into little companies, called classes. One
person in each of these is styled the Leader: It is his busi
ness, 1. To see each person in his class once a week; to
inquire how their souls prosper; to advise, reprove, comfort,
or exhort them: 2. To receive what they are willing to give
toward the expenses of the society: And, 3. To meet the
Assistant and the Stewards once a week.
April, 1771.] JOURNAL, 427
2. This is the whole and sole business of a Leader, or any
number of Leaders. But it is common for the Assistant in
any place when several Leaders are met together, to ask their
advice, as to anything that concerns either the temporal or
spiritual welfare of the society. This he may, or he may
not do, as he sees best. I frequently do it in the larger
societies; and on many occasions I have found, that in a
multitude of counsellors there is safety.
3. From this short view of the original design of Leaders,
it is easy to answer the following questions:--
Q. 1. What authority has a single Leader?
He has authority to meet his class, to receive their
contributions, and to visit the sick in his class.
Q. 2. What authority have all the Leaders of a society
met together?
They have authority to show their class-papers to the
Assistant; to deliver the money they have received to the
Stewards, and to bring in the names of the sick.
Q. 3. But have they not authority to restrain the Assistant,
if they think he acts improperly?
No more than any member of the society has. After mildly
speaking to him, they are to refer the thing to Mr. W.
Q. 4. Have they not authority to hinder a person from
preaching?
None but the Assistant has this authority.
Q. 5. Have they not authority to displace a particular
Leader?
No more than the door-keeper has. To place and to
displace Leaders belongs to the Assistant alone.
Q. 6. Have they not authority to expel a particular member
of the ciety?
No: The Assistant only can do this.
Q. 7. But have they not authority to regulate the temporal
and spiritual affairs of the society?
Neither the one nor the other. Temporal affairs belong to
the Stewards; spiritual to the Assistant.
Q. 8. Have they authority to make any collection of a
public nature?
No: The Assistant only can do this.
Q. 9. Have they authority to receive the yearly
subscription?-
No: This also belongs to the Assistant.
4. Considering these things, can we wonder at the confusion
which has been here for some years?
If one wheel of a machine gets out of its place, what disorder
must ensue !
In the Methodist discipline, the wheels regularly stand
thus: The Assistant, the Preachers, the Stewards, the
Leaders, the people.
But here the Leaders, who are the lowest wheel but one,
were got quite out of their place. They were got at the top
of all, above the Stewards, the Preachers, yea, and above
the Assistant himself.
5. To this, chiefly, I impute the gradual decay of the work
of God in Dublin.
There has been a jar throughout the whole machine. Most
of the wheels were hindered in their motion. The Stewards,
the Preachers, the Assistant, all moved heavily. They felt
all was not right. But if they saw where the fault lay, they
had not strength to remedy it.
But it may be effectually remedied now. Without rehearsing
former grievances, (which may all die and be forgotten,) for the
time to come, let each wheel keep its own place. Let the
Assistant, the Preachers, the Stewards, the Leaders, know and
execute their several offices. Let none encroach upon another,
but all move together in harmony and love. So shall the work
of God flourish among you, perhaps as it never did before;
while you all hold the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
Dublin, March 29, 1771.
Sat. 6.--I gave the sacrament at the Widows’ House, to
four or five and twenty that are widows indeed; all poor
enough, several sick or infirm, three bed-rid, one on the brink
of eternity. But almost all know in whom they have believed,
and walk worthy of their profession.
Sun. 7.--I was agreeably surprised to see the largest
congregation to-day which I have seen since I landed. The
congregations used to be large for three or four days, and
ithen gradually to decline; but they have now continually
increased from first to last. This also is a token for good.
Mon. 8.--As the weather continued extremely cold, I
judged it best to visit the inland counties and the south of
Ireland first. So to-day I rode to Edinderry; but was
constrained by the keen north wind to preach within. The
April, 1771.] JOURNAL. 429
case was the same at Tyrrel’s Pass, on Tuesday, 9, where I
preached in the shell of the new House. Wednesday, 10. I
preached in the Court-House at Molingar, to a serious and
decent congregation. But they seemed quite unconcerned.
Those who met in the Court-House at Longford in the
evening were of quite another spirit. They drank in every
word, while I explained, “Lord, are there few that be
saved?” Who can despair of doing good in any place?
None in this kingdom seemed so barren as Longford; and
that for many years. After near twenty years’ labour, we
sought fruit, but found none. But on a sudden, the seed so
long hid, is sprung up, and promises a plentiful harvest.
Thur. 11.--I preached at Loughan and Athlone; Friday,
12, at Aghrim. Saturday, 13. I rode back to Athlone, where
there is now no opposition either from rich or poor. The
consequence of this is, there is no zeal, while the people
“dwell at ease.” O what state upon earth is exempt from
danger! When persecution arises, how many are offended !
When it does not arise, how many grow cold and leave their
“first love l’” Some perish by the storm, but far more by
the calm. “Lord, save, or we perish !”
Sun. 14.--I designed to preach abroad; but the storm
drove us into the House. This House was built and given,
with the ground on which it stands, by a single gentleman. In
Cork, one person, Mr. Thomas James, gave between three and
four hundred pounds toward the preaching-house. Towards
that in Dublin, Mr. Lunel gave four hundred. I know no
such benefactors among the Methodists in England.
Mon. 15.--I rode to Birr, through much hail and snow,
driven in our face by a furious wind. So was the hail the
next day, as we rode to Tullamore. Here, likewise, I
lamented the want of zeal. So the society here also is no
larger than it was two years ago.
On the following days I preached at Coolylough, Mount
Mellick, and Portarlington. Monday, 22. I rode to Kilkenny.
The new preaching-house was just finished,--a meat and com
modious building. But before we came to it in the evening,
it was filled from end to end. So it was the next evening.
On Wednesday, 24, I cheerfully commended them to the
grace of God.
In the evening I knew not where to preach at Enniscorthy,
the wind being very high and very cold. But I was in some
measure sheltered by the side of an house; and the people
standing close together, sheltered one another. Only a few
careless ones were blown away.
Thur. 25.--Two of our brethren from Wexford earnestly
entreated me to go thither. I preached in the market-house
at ten o’clock. The congregation was very large, and very
genteel; and yet as remarkably well-behaved as any I have
seen in the kingdom.
By hard riding we reached Waterford before six, where the
House tolerably well contained the congregation: So it
generally does the first night I am here.
Fri. 26.--I laboured to calm the minds of some that had
separated from their brethren; but it was labour lost. After
two or three hours spent in fruitless altercation, I was
throughly convinced that they would not, and ought not to
be re-united to them.
Sun. 28.--At eleven, and again in the afternoon, I went to
the cathedral, where a young gentleman most valiantly encoun
tered the “grievous wolves,” as he termed the Methodists. I
never heard a man strike more wide of the mark. However,
the shallow discourse did good; for it sent abundance of people,
rich and poor, to hear and judge for themselves. So that the
court, at the top of which I stood, was filled from end to end.
Mon. 29.-In the evening I preached in the market-place
at Clonmell, to a listening multitude. Some seemed inclined
to disturb; but the serious, well-behaved Troopers kept them
all in awe.
Tues. 30.--I rode to Cork; and on Wednesday, MAY 1, to
Bandon: But the north-east wind forbade my preaching in
the street. I was the less concerned at this, because my
business now lay chiefly with the society. Those who had
been scattered I laboured to gather up; those who were
drowsy, to awaken; those that were dead, to quicken; and
to unite all together in following after peace and holiness.
Sun. 5.--I returned to Cork, and would fain have preached
abroad; but the violent wind would not suffer it. Monday, 6.
I spake severally to the members of the society. Two years
ago they were reduced to about an hundred and ninety. They
are now only an hundred and seventy; and yet the work of God
deepens in those that remain. I found many growing in grace;
many rejoicing in the pure love of God; and many more, who
were earnestly panting after the whole mind that was in Christ.
May, 1771.] JOURNAL. 431
Sun. 12.--I assisted at the funeral of Susanna Pilson.
She was one of the first members of this society, and con
tinued firm in the hottest of the persecution. Upwards of
twenty years she adorned the Gospel, steadily and uniformly
walking with God. For great part of the time she was a
living witness, that “the blood of Christ cleanseth from all
sin.” After a lingering illness, she calmly resigned her soul
into the hands of her faithful Creator.
Mon. 13.--We had an agreeable ride to Kilfinnan. I
designed to preach under the Court-House; but was offered
the use of the room above, where the Church Service has
been for these two years, as the church lies in ruins. In a
very short time we had a large and attentive congregation. If
the parish Ministers were zealous for God, the Protestants
in Ireland would soon out-number the Papists.
Tues. 14.--I rode on to Limerick, and told the congrega
tion plainly, “If, as is your manner, you attend three days,
and then fall off, I can bestow my time better elsewhere. But
if you continue to come, I will stay with you longer.” They
took me at my word; and continued to increase both morning
and evening, as long as I stayed in the city.
Wed. 15.--A gentleman desired me to visit his daughter. I
found a lovely, sensible woman, in the bloom of youth, scarce
one-and-twenty, in the last stage of a consumption. From
that time I visited her every day. In two or three days she
was considerably better. But, as I expected, when the hot
weather came on, the sweet flower withered away.
Sat. 18.--I dined at Mr. 's. Such another family I
have not seen in the kingdom. He and Mrs. are in
person, in understanding, and in temper, made for each other.
And their ten children are in such order as I have not seen
for many years; indeed, never since I left my father's house.
May they never depart from the good way !
MAY 19. (Being Whitsunday.) The ground in the island
being wet, I preached in the evening, near the new Custom
House, on, “If any man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink.” I was not a little refreshed, observing so many who
seemed to thirst for the living water. I preached there again
the following evening, to nearly the same number of hearers.
I should have thought it well worth while to have come to
Limerick, were it only for these two evenings.
Wed, 22.--After preaching at Balligarane, I rode to Ash
kayton. There are no ruins, I believe, in the kingdom of
Ireland to be compared to these. The old Earl of Desmond’s
castle is very large, and has been exceeding strong. Not far
from this, and formerly communicating with it by a gallery, is
his great hall or banqueting-room. The walls are still firm and
entire; and these with the fine carvings of the window-frames,
(all of polished marble,) give some idea of what it was once. Its
last master lived like a Prince for many years, and rebelled over
and over against Queen Elizabeth. After his last rebellion, his
army being totally routed, he fled into the woods with two or
three hundred men. But the pursuit was so hot, that these
were soon scattered from him, and he crept alone into a small
cabin. He was sitting there, when a soldier came in and
struck him. He rose and said, “I am the Earl of Desmond.”
The wretch, rejoicing that he had found so great a prize, cut
off his head at once. Queen Elizabeth and King James
allowed a pension to his relict for many years. I have seen
a striking picture of her, in her widow’s weeds, said to be
taken when she was an hundred and forty years old.
At a small distance from the castle stands the old Abbey,
the finest ruin of the kind in the kingdom. Not only the
walls of the church, and many of the apartments, but the
whole cloisters, are entire. They are built of black marble
exquisitely polished, and vaulted over with the same. So that
they are as firm now as when they were built, perhaps seven
or eight hundred years ago; and if not purposely destroyed,
(as most of the ancient buildings in Ireland have been,) may
last these thousand years. But add these to the years they
have stood already, and what is it to etermity? A moment!
Fri. 24.--I spoke severally to the members of the society
in Limerick. I have found no society in Ireland, number
for number, so rooted and grounded in love. We observed
this as a day of fasting and prayer, and were much comforted
together.
Sun. 26.--The rain obliged me to preach within, at five in
the evening. It was a season of solemn joy and sorrow. I
took horse immediately after preaching, and rode through
continued rain to Snugborough, about fourteen Irish miles
from Limerick.
Mon. 27.--We pushed on through violent wind and rain, and
reached Galway in the afternoon. About six I preached in the
Court-House, by far the neatest which I have seen in the king
June, 1771.] JOURNAL. 433
dom. Abundance of the soldiers, who were to march for
Dublin the next day, willingly attended: And not a few of
the townsfolk; but (what is rarely seen in Ireland) five or
six men to one woman. I was enabled to speak exceeding
close; and many were stunned, if not wounded. The next
evening, the number of townsmen was doubled; among whom
were the Mayor, and several other people of fashion. Again
I spoke with the utmost plainness, and could not but hope
there will be a work of God even in Galway.
Wed. 29.--Heavy rain, with furious wind, accompanied us
all day. However, I reached Ballinrobe between twelve and
one, and preached in the Court-House to forty or fifty
hearers. Five miles short of Castlebar we took shelter for a
while in a little cabin. The poor man brought us the best
thing he had, a glass of rum. We talked a little with him
and his wife, sung a hymn, and went to prayer; and then,
the rain abating, rode cheerfully on to Castlebar.
Thur. 30.--I preached about noon at Cappavica, four miles
from Castlebar. It is a lone house; but the people soon
flocked together. Every one seemed to be exceeding serious:
Six-and-twenty appeared resolved to work out their own
salvation, and help each other therein.
Fri. 31.--Observing many fashionable people in the Court
House at Castlebar, I spoke with such closeness and
pungency, as I cannot do but at some peculiar seasons. It
is indeed the gift of God, and cannot be attained by all the
efforts of nature and art united.
Sat. JUNE 1.--This is the twelfth day that we have had
continued rain, together with March winds. I dined at Rabin,
near Castlebar, one of the pleasantest seats in Connaught.
It was an old castle, standing between two loughs, with a
river behind, and a wood before. And the inhabitants
Did like the scene appear;
Serenely pleasant, calmly fair :
Soft fell their words, as flew the air.
O that the God of love may add to these amiable qualities,
all “the mind which was in Christ Jesus !”
Sun. 2.--In the evening I expounded the Gospel for the
day; the story of Dives and Lazarus. And now God opened
both my mouth and the hearts of the hearers. His word
seemed to take fast hold of them, even of the gay and rich,
many of whom had wandered in among us.
Mon. 3.--I rode to Sligo, and preached in our own Room,
to an exceeding serious congregation, such as I have not seen
here for many years. But the next evening, a young Officer,
with several pretty gay things, behaved so ill, that I was
obliged to reprove them. They took it well; but we could
not recover the fervour which was before swiftly spreading
through the people.
Wed. 5.--I rode to Ballyshannon, and preached in the
Assembly Room. I was acquainted with some of the chief
persons in the town; but they were ashamed to own me. Only
some of them sent their compliments to me, properly so called.
Hence, I rode to Manorhamilton, and in the evening
preached in a pleasant meadow, to a very large congregation.
But I found little life in the society. Thursday, 6. We
came to Swadlingbar, and seemed to be got into another
world. The people were all alive, full of faith and love, and
panting after the whole image of God. The congregation in
the evening refreshed me much, by their spirit, as well as
their number: They made
The hills and the dales
With praises resound;
singing with the spirit and with the understanding also. I
have heard no such voices since we left Cork, nor seen so
earnest a people since we left Limerick.
Fri. 7.--About noon I preached at Tonnylommon, four
miles short of Enniskillen, to just such another congregation,
deeply athirst for the full salvation of God. In the afternoon
we rode to Mr. A ’s at Sidare. Some time since, one of
his neighbours, being angry that his sister resolved to save
her soul, by the advice, as he supposed, of Nancy A5
came one Sunday in the afternoon while they were at prayers,
burst into the room, struck a woman in the face who would
have stopped him, and with his loaded whip struck Nancy
A on the temple; so that she lay as dead for several
hours. He designed, it seems, to make an end of her at
once And indeed she never has been well since.
Here a tent was set up on agreen, grassy place, amidst abun
dance of people ripe for the Gospel. So I cried, in our Lord's
words, “If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink.”
And it is not easy to express the thirst, the vehement desire,
which appeared in a great part of the congregation.
June, 1771.] JOURNAL, 435
Sat. 8.--We set out for Ruskey, a little town near
Macquire's Bridge. But before we had gone nine miles, we
found a congregation waiting in the street at Lismolaw,
where I know not who had given notice that I was to preach.
I at first thought of riding on; but fearing it might hurt
the poor people, I alighted, and preached immediately.
They were all attention while I explained, “Ye are saved
through faith.” About noon I preached at Ruskey.
In the evening we came to Augher. For several days we
have been among some of the warmest Christians in the
kingdom. All at once we came to a people cold as ice.
Here was a lively people! But they have long grieved the
Holy Spirit of God, and he seems to be departed from them.
Knowing few would come to the House, I stood abroad, and
had forty or fifty hearers, but unconcerned enough. Sunday,
9. About eight I had a few more, and about an hundred in
the evening. I went to church at Clogher: The Dean is one
of the best readers I have heard, and one of the most easy,
natural Preachers: And the congregation was not only large,
but remarkably well-behaved.
I seldom look at the old castle at Augher, without thinking
of the famous Sir Phelim O’Neale. In the beginning of the
Irish Rebellion, he called one night at Mr. Kennedy's, an
intimate acquaintance and foster-brother, (a very sacred
relation among the Irish,) and said, “Rise, come away with
me, that I may protect you, for fear some of my straggling
parties should hurt you.” Mrs. Kennedy, being very near
her time, said, “Nay, gossip, consider my condition, and
do not take my husband from me.” He replied, “You
fool, it is for his own good.” But soon after they were
gone, Mrs. K. said, “My heart misgives me; whatever
comes of it, I must follow them.” So, as well as she could,
she walked between her man-servant and her maid, an Irish
girl. About sunrise they came near Augher castle, where
Sir Phelim was standing with his men. Just by him was
her husband, hanged on a tree. Sir Phelim, seeing her,
sent and ordered the man and maid to stand from her. The
man did so: The maid replied, “No; I will die with my
mistress.” On this he ordered his men to fire. She fell, and
two infants fell out of her. Such was the mercy of the Irish
at that time ! Such the spirit which their good Priests
infused into them |
Mon. 10.--I was surprised at the improvements made in
this county within a few years. For above thirty miles, it is
now cultivated like England, and sprinkled up and down with
little new-built houses. A gentleman of Dermauin, desiring
me to preach there, I began without delay, at the end of his
house. It being the fair-day, there was a numerous congre
gation; but not so numerous as that at Mallilough, where I
preached about noon. Between six and seven, after riding
more than fifty Irish miles, I reached Derry, and preached
on, “There hath no temptation taken you, but such as is
common to men.” God spake by his word to many tempted
souls, and comforted them over all their troubles.
Every morning and evening, on the following days, the
congregations were larger than I ever remember; and several
Clergymen were present every evening. Thursday, 13. I
spoke severally to the members of the society. I found far
more life among them than I expected. Near one half of the
sixty (that was the number of those that remained) I judged
to be real believers. What a mischievous injustice it is to
represent all this people as dead! It has weakened the
hands of the Preachers much, and has greatly discouraged
the people. The continually telling people they are dead, is
the ready way to make them so.
Fri. 14.--I looked over a volume of Mr. Skelton’s Works.
He is a surprising writer. When there is occasion, he shows
all the wit of Dr. Swift, joined with ten times his judgment;
and with (what is far more) a deep fear of God, and a tender
love to mankind. About noon I preached at the New
Buildings, two miles from Londonderry. The people, some
time past, bore a near resemblance to the colliers of Kings
wood. They were equally without God in the world, and
eminent for all manner of wickedness: But old things are
passed away, and they are eminent now for the fear of God,
and the love of their neighbour. I preached there again on
Sunday, 16, and administered the Lord’s Supper to the
society. I think they were all in tears; but, with the greatest
part, they were tears of joy and love.
Mon. 17.--I met the singers for the last time. I joined
them together two years ago; but, as the Preachers following
took no care or thought about them, they of course flew
asunder. And no wonder; for nothing will stand in the
Methodist plan, unless the Preacher has his heart and his
June, 1771.] JOURNAL, 437
hand in it. Every Preacher, therefore, should consider it is
mot his business to mind this or that thing only, but every
thing.
Tues. 18.--Cheerfully leaving Londonderry, I rode
through the wild, dreary mountains, to Cookstown. Here
the scene was changed. The house at which I alighted was
filled with whisky-drinkers; and the whole town, it being the
fair-day, was all hurry and confusion. However, about seven
the tent was set up. The people flocked from all quarters;
and, considering many of them were far from sober, behaved
tolerably well.
Wed. 19.--I preached at five and at twelve, to a lifeless
company; and then rode, through a fruitful country, to
Stewart-Town. A large congregation soon assembled in
the Court-House, most of whom behaved with decency;
though very few of them appeared to understand anything
of the matter.
Thur. 20.--We went on to Castle-Calfield. As we were
walking in the afternoon, an horse that was feeding turned
short, and struck me on the small of my back. Had he been
but an inch or two nearer, I should not have travelled any
farther. As it was, I was well again in a few days. In the
evening I preached on the lovely Green, before the castle,
to a serious and large congregation. This was the first
summer day we have had this year; and this was only warm,
not hot.
Fri. 21.--About eleven we had a still larger congregation,
near the castle in Charlemount; whom I exhorted to be “not
slothful in business,” but “fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.”
At seven in the evening I preached at Armagh, in Mr.
Macgough’s avenue. The congregation was in an arbour,
the wide-spread trees quite overshadowing them; while
The setting sun adorned the coast,
His beams entire, his fierceness lost.
Sat. 22.--I rode to Caladon, where, two years ago, Mr.
C was ready to put me in his bosom. But he did not
know me now. So I preached in the street, to an exceeding
quiet congregation; and rode back in the evening. Is it
strange that men, or the moon, should change?
Sun. 23.--In the evening, such a multitude of people
assembled, and stood so close together, that, though we were
in open air, the heat was almost insupportable. Surely God
will have a people in this place | The poor, at least, will
receive the Gospel.
Mon. 24.--I preached, about noon, at a village which takes
its name from the Black Water in which the Irish Papists
drowned so many Protestants, in 1641. In the evening I
preached at Clanmain, to a very dull congregation. It is
well, if the first are not last ! Tuesday, 25. I preached at
Cock-Hill, in a delightful evening, under some shady trees.
Many of the people were alive to God. Wednesday, 26. I
preached at the Grange, to a still livelier and larger congre
gation: But I found the liveliest of all at Derry-Anvil. Six
or seven of this little society still rejoice in the pure love of
God. Thus has God his secret ones, in a little corner of
the land, surrounded with bogs, and out of all road. Friday,
28. I preached in the street at Portadown, to a serious, well
behaved congregation; and in the evening at Kilmararty, to
the largest congregation I have seen since we left Armagh.
This day I entered the sixty-ninth year of my age. I am
still a wonder to myself. My voice and strength are the same
as at nine-and-twenty. This also hath God wrought.
Sat. 29.--I preached at the end of the market-house in
Tanderagee. Sunday, 30. At nine the people flocked from all
parts; but much more at six in the evening, when we had a
London congregation both for number and seriousness.
Mon. JULY 1.--I preached at Killwarlin, where, a few weeks
ago, Thomas Mott died in peace. In the evening I preached
in the Linen-Hall, at Lisburn, to a numerous congregation.
Tuesday, 2. I preached on the Green at Newtown; but the
people had not the spirit of those at Lisburn. Wednesday,
3. At ten I preached to a small congregation, a mile from
Belfast, and in the market-place there at twelve. I never saw
so large a congregation there before, nor one so remarkably
stupid and ill-mannered: Yet a few should be excepted,
even gentlemen, who seemed to know sense from nonsense.
I have found as sensible men at Dublin as at Belfast; but
men so self-sufficient I have not found.
I preached at Carrickfergus in the evening; and Thursday,
4, went on to Lurn, and preached at nine in the main street, to
a very attentive congregation. Thence I rode to Glenarm.
The preaching began here in an uncommon manner:--Some
months since, John Smith, now with God, was pressed in spirit
July, 1771.] JOURNAL. 439
to go and preach there, though he knew no one in the town.
Near it he overtook a young lady riding behind a servant;
and on her saying it was a very wicked place, he asked, “Are
there no good men there?” She said, “Yes; there is one,
William Hunter.” He rode into the town, and inquired for
William Hunter's house. When he came to the door, a young
woman was sweeping the house. He asked her name, and,
being answered “Betty Hunter,” alighted, and said, “Betty,
take my horse to an inn, and tell every one you meet, “A
gentleman at our house has good news to tell you, at seven
o'clock.’” At seven the house was well filled. John preached
to them twice a day for nine days; but when he took his
leave, he had only three pence: However, he asked the
landlady, “What is to pay for my horse?” “Nothing,
Sir,” said the woman: “A gentleman has paid all; and will
do, if you stay a month.”
I preached near the market-house about noon, to a large
number of decent hearers; but to a much larger, in the market
house at Ballymena, in the evening. Friday, 5. I rode to
Ballinderry, and found an earnest, simple-hearted people. A
great multitude here “received the word with all readiness of
mind.” A specimen of the society, consisting of about fifty
members, I had in the house where I dined; wherein a father
and mother, with a son and five daughters, were all walking in
the light of God’s countenance. Afterwards I prayed with an
ancient woman; while a little girl, her grandchild, kneeling
behind me, was all in tears, and said, “O grandmamma, have
you no sins to cry for, as well as me?”
Sat. 6.--After spending two hours very agreeably at Mayra,
I rode to Drumbanahar, and preached to a serious congrega
tion. That at Newry in the evening was much larger: At nine
in the morning it was larger still ; but nothing to that in the
evening: Yet I think all heard, and most of them seemed
much affected. Monday, 8. I cheerfully left Newry, and in
the evening preached at Dublin.
Having rested a day, on Wednesday, 10, I went to Carlow,
and preached in the Sessions-House, to a large, wild congrega
tion. In the morning, I once more composed the differences
of the poor, shattered society. About noon I preached in
the street at Baltinglass; in the evening, to a lovely congre
gation at Donard. Friday, 12. I returned to Dublin, well
satisfied with my little excursion.
On Monday and Tuesday I revised the classes. The
number of members in the society is shrunk from upwards of
five hundred to beneath four hundred, in two years; but
I trust they will now increase, as the offences are removed,
and brotherly love restored.
On Thursday and Friday we had our little Conference; a
solemn and useful meeting. Sunday, 21. At the meeting of
the society many were comforted; and all seemed determined
to set out anew, and take the kingdom of heaven by violence.
Monday, 22. In the evening I embarked on board the Non
pareil, for Parkgate, with a small, fair wind, so that the sea was
smooth as a looking-glass. Tuesday, 23. As we went slowly
on, the gentlemen (of whom we had many on board) desired me
to give them a sermon. This I willingly did; and all were
seriously attentive. We landed about seven on Wednesday,
24, and took chaise for Liverpool. Thursday, 25. I rode
across the country to Whitchurch, and spent an agreeable
evening with that lovely family. Friday, 26. I went on to
Shrewsbury, where Mr. Fletcher met me. Sunday, 28. I
preached at Madeley, morning and afternoon. The church
could not near contain the congregation; but, the window
near the pulpit being open, those without could hear as well
as those within. Monday, 29. I went on to Worcester. Our
brethren had chosen a place for me, in a broad street, not far
from the cathedral, where there was room for thousands of
people; and we soon had company enough, part serious,
part like the wild ass’s colt; but in a while the serious part
prevailed, and silenced, or drove away, the rabble, till we
had a tolerable degree of quietness, and concluded in peace.
Thur. AUGUST 1.--I rode to Cheltenham, and preached
near the market-place, to a large and quiet congregation.
Friday, 2. I went on to Kingswood. Sunday, 4. We had
above six hundred and fifty communicants at Bristol. In
the afternoon I preached in St. James's, Barton, to an huge
multitude; and all were still as night.
Tues. 6.--We had more Preachers than usual at the Con
ference, in consequence of Mr. Shirley’s Circular Letter. At
ten on Thursday morning he came, with nine or ten of his
friends. We conversed freely for about two hours; and I
believe they were satisfied that we were not so “dreadful
heretics” as they imagined, but were tolerably sound in
the faith.
Aug. 1771.] JOURNAL. 441
Mon. 12.--I set out for Wales, and after preaching, at
Chepstow and Brecknock, on Wednesday, 14, came to the
Hay. Here I met with Dr. Maclaine's Translation of
“Mosheim’s Ecclesiastical History,” Certainly he is a very
sensible translator of a very sensible writer; but I dare not
affirm that either one or the other was acquainted with inward
religion. The translator mentions, without any blame, Mr.
Shinstra’s “Letter against Fanaticism;” which, if the
reasoning were just, would fix the charge of fanaticism on
our Lord himself, and all his Apostles. In truth, I cannot
but fear, Mr. Shinstra is in the same class with Dr. Conyers
Middleton; and aims every blow, though he seems to look
another way, at the fanatics who wrote the Bible.
The very thing which Mr. Shinstra calls fanaticism, is no
other than heart-religion; in other words, “righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.” These must be felt, or
they have no being. All, therefore, who condemn inward
feelings in the gross, leave no place either for joy, peace, or
love in religion; and consequently reduce it to a dry, dead
Cal'CaSS.
In the evening, I preached in the new, neat preaching-house,
to many more than it would contain. The next evening I was
constrained to preach abroad. Friday, 16. I returned to
Brecknock; and, after spending two comfortable days there,
on Monday, 19, rode to Carmarthen. The rain obliged me
to preach within. Tuesday, 20. I rode to Haverfordwest;
and, in the evening, preached in St. Martin’s church-yard, to
a numerous and deeply-attentive congregation. The next
evening I strongly applied the story of Dives and Lazarus;
and many were almost persuaded to be Christians.
I rode, on Thursday, 22, to Dala, a little village at the
mouth of Milford-Haven. It seemed to me that our Preachers
had bestowed here much pains to little purpose. The people,
one and all, seemed as dead as stones,--perfectly quiet, and
perfectly unconcerned. I told them just what I thought.
It went as a sword to their hearts. They felt the truth, and
wept bitterly. I know not where we have found more of the
presence of God. Shall we at last have fruit here also ?
Fri. 23.--I preached at noon, to a lovely congregation of
plain, artless people, at Houghton; and in the Town-Hall at
Pembroke, in the evening, to many rich and elegant hearers.
Sunday, 25. At ten I began the Service at St. Daniel’s. The
church, as usual, would ill contain the congregation. In the
afternoon I preached in Monk-Town church, (one of the three
belonging to Pembroke,) a large, old, ruinous building. I
suppose it has scarce had such a congregation in it during
this century. Many of them were gay, genteel people: So I
spake on the first elements of the Gospel. But I was still
out of their depth. O how hard it is to be shallow enough for
a polite audience |
Mon. 26.--I rode to Llanelly, and at six read Prayers, and
preached in another large church, almost as ruinous as that
at Pembroke. The congregation was numerous; yet most of
them seemed to understand what they heard. Tuesday, 27.
We crept through a right Welsh road, and reached Oxwych
between twelve and one. The congregation had waited for
some time; so I began without delay. The road to Swansea
was a little better; so I reached the town in time; and at
six preached in the yard, as our Room would contain hardly
a third of the people. Wednesday, 28. I called at Neath,
on one of our friends; but, before I could sit down, was
informed a congregation was waiting for me. This I had
no thought of: However, I gave them a short sermon, and
hastened on to Coy church, near Bridge-End. I preached as
deliberately as possible, as great part of the audience were
Welsh: And I believe, by this means, all of them could
understand at least the substance of the discourse. About
six I preached in the Town-Hall, at Cowbridge, to high
and low, rich and poor; and the two next evenings in the
Court-House at Cardiff, to a still larger congregation. After
wards we had a comfortable love-feast, which brought to our
mind former days, when we praised God with Ann Jenkins,
Arthur Price, and Thomas Glascott, before Thomas Prosser
sowed the deadly tares among them.
Sat. 31.--I returned to Bristol, and in part of the following
week visited some of the neighbouring societies. Friday,
SEPTEMBER 6. I spent an hour among our children at
Kingswood. It is strange | How long shall we be con
strained to weave Penelope's web 7 What is become of the
wonderful work of grace which God wrought in them last
September? It is gone ! It is lost ! It is vanished away !
There is scarce any trace of it remaining ! Then we must
begin again; and in due time we shall reap, if we faint not.
Mon. 9.--I read over Dr. Cadogan's ingenious treatise on
Oct. 1771.] JOURNAL. 443
Chronical Distempers. It is certainly true that “very few
of them are properly hereditary;” that most of them spring
either from indolenee, or intemperance, or irregular passions.
But why should he condemn wine toto genere, which is one
of the noblest cordials in nature? Yet stranger, why should
he condemn bread? Great whims belong to great men.
Tues. 10.--I preached at Bath; Wednesday, 11, at
Frome; Thursday, 12, at Keynsham. Here, too, the seed,
which seemed lost for so many years, at length begins to spring
up. After seeing so many instances of this kind, how can we
despair of any people? Saturday, 14. I preached abroad
at Bedminster. Many horsemen stopped, and had strange
things brought to their ears: Perhaps some of whom, we
may hear, by and by, were found of Him they sought not.
Sun. 15.--At eight I preached on the quay; at five in
St. James’s, Barton. Many strangers stopped at both places.
Surely this is casting our bread upon the waters! This week
I visited the rest of the neighbouring societies, and found them
increasing both in grace and number. Thursday, 26. I
preached once more at Bath, to an elegant congregation, on,
“Knowledge puffeth up.” But, I trust, many of them can
witness that “love edifieth ;” builds us up both in holiness
and happiness.
Mon. 30.--I took leave of Bristol for the present; and,
having preached at Pensford and Shepton-Mallet in the way,
came to Shaftesbury; and preached to a numerous congre
gation, but wonderfully unconcerned. I scarce know a town
in England where so much preaching has been to so very
little purpose.
Tues. OCTOBER 1.--I went on to Salisbury. Wednesday,
2. I preached at Whitchurch; Thursday, 3, at Winchester.
I now found time to take a view of the cathedral. Here the
sight of that bad Cardinal’s tomb, whom the sculptor has
placed in a posture of prayer, brought to my mind those fine
lines of Shakspeare, which he put into the mouth of King
Henry the Sixth :
Lord Cardinal,
If thou hast any hope of Heaven's grace,
Give us a sign. He dies, and makes no sign.
On Thursday and Friday evening I preached at Ports
mouth Common. Saturday, 5. I set out at two. About
ten some of our London friends met me at Cobham, with
whom I took a walk in the neighbouring gardens, inexpress
ibly pleasant, through the variety of hills and dales; and the
admirable contrivance of the whole. And now, after spending
his life in bringing it to perfection, the grey-headed owner
advertises it to be sold ! Is there anything under the sun
that can satisfy a spirit made for God?
On Monday and Tuesday I preached at Whittlebury,
Towcester, and Weedon; on Wednesday, at Kislingbury,
Harlston, and Northampton. Thursday, 10. I preached at
Holmby-House, where poor King Charles was formerly
lodged. It has been a noble pile of buildings, finely situated
on an hill; but little is left except the kitchens, which, how
ever, give a strong idea of its ancient grandeur. Friday, 11.
In the evening I preached at Bedford; and on Saturday
returned to London.
Mon. 14.--In my way to Wallingford I read Dr. Hodge's
“Elihu.” It contains abundance of fine remarks worthy of a
scholar, and of a Christian; but none of them prove his main
proposition, that Elihu was the second person in the blessed
Trinity. I preached at Wallingford in the evening, and at
five in the morning. Many were moved; but who will
endure to the end?
Tues. 15.--I went on to Witney. I am surprised at the
plainness and artlessness of this people. Who would imagine
that they lived within ten, yea, or fifty miles of Oxford?
Wednesday, 16. I preached at South-Lye. Here it was
that I preached my first sermon, six-and-forty years ago.
One man was in my present audience who heard it. Most
of the rest are gone to their long home. After preaching at
Witney in the evening, I met the believers apart, and was
greatly refreshed among them. So simple a people I scarce
ever saw. They did “open the window in their breast;”
and it was easy to discern that God was there, filling them
“with joy and peace in believing.”
Thur, 17.--About ten I preached at Oxford, in a Room
well filled with deeply attentive hearers, on part of the Sermon
on the Mount, the noblest compendium of religion which is
to be found even in the oracles of God. In the evening I
preached at High-Wycomb; the next at Chesham, where,
our own Room being too small, that friendly man, Mr.
Spooner, willingly gave me the use of his meeting-house. I
found the little society much alive; many knowing in whom
Oct. 1771.] JOURNAL. 445
they had believed; several enjoying, and others thirsting
after, the whole image of God. On Saturday I had a
pleasant journey to London.
Mon. 21.--As I drove to Chatham, I read Mr. Hoole's fine
translation of Tasso’s “Jerusalem Delivered; ” allowed, I
suppose, by most judges of poetry, to be not much inferior to
the AEneid. But I wonder Mr. Hoole was so imprudently
faithful, as to present Protestants with all Tasso's Popish
fooleries. Those excrescences might have been pared off,
without the least injury to the work. In the evening I
preached to a crowded audience, ripe for all the promises of
God. How good is it for fallen man to earn his food by the
sweat of his brow ! Every where we find the labouring part
of mankind the readiest to receive the Gospel.
Tues. 22.--I went down to Sheerness, and preached in the
new Room. But it would not near contain the congregation.
I believe all that could hear found that God was there.
Both morning and evening I warned them against being
sick of opinions and strife of words; which has been the main
hinderance of the work of God here from the beginning.
Thur. 24.--I returned to Chatham, and on Friday to
London. Saturday, 26. Mr. N gave me a melancholy
account of his dismission from the Tabernacle. Surely
affairs will not stand thus at the Foundery when my head is
laid ' If I thought they would, I would do just as I do
now,-all the good I can while I live.
Mon. 28.--I rode to Staplehurst, to Mr. Ch ’s, a
pattern of love and patience. One eye is quite lost by his
late illness. His reflection upon it was, “I bless God that I
had one eye to give him; and if he calls for it, I am ready
to give him the other.” I preached at six to a willing people,
simply desiring to save their souls; and the next evening at
Rye, to a far more numerous but not more earnest congrega
tion. Wednesday, 30. I walked over to Winchelsea, said to
have been once a large city, with abundance of trade and of
inhabitants, the sea washing the foot of the hill on which it
stands. The situation is exceeding bold, the hill being high
and steep on all sides. But the town is shrunk almost into
nothing, and the seven churches into half an one. I preached
at eleven in the new Square, to a considerable number of
serious people; and at Rye in the evening, where were many
that are “not far from the kingdom of God.” Thursday, 31.
I preached at Robertsbridge. As yet the whole town is
willing to hear: And we may hope, after the stony and the
thorny ground hearers are deducted, some will “bring forth
fruit with patience.”
Sat. NoveMBER 2.--I returned to London. Monday, 4.
I went in the stage-coach to Colchester, in which I met with
two agreeable companions, whose hearts were quite open to
instruction. Tuesday, 5. In our way to Bury we called
at Felsham, near which is the seat of the late Mr. Reynolds.
The house is, I think, the best contrived and the most
beautiful I ever saw. It has four fronts, and five rooms on a
floor, elegantly, though not sumptuously, furnished. At a
small distance stands a delightful grove. On every side of
this, the poor, rich man, who had no hope beyond the grave,
placed seats, to enjoy life as long as he could. But being
resolved none of his family should be “put into the ground,”
he built a structure in the midst of the grove, vaulted above
and beneath, with niches for coffins, strong enough to stand
for ages. In one of these he had soon the satisfaction of
laying the remains of his only child; and, two years after,
those of his wife. After two years more, in the year 1759,
having eat, and drank, and forgotten God, for eighty-four
years, he went himself to give an account of his stewardship.
In the evening I preached at Bury; and on Wednesday, 6,
rode on, through heavy rain, to Lynn. The people “received
the word with joy;” though few, as yet, had any “root in
themselves.” Thursday, 7. I was desired by the prisoners
to give them a word of exhortation. They received it with
the utmost eagerness. Who knows but one or two may retain
it? In the evening, those who could not get in were noisy
at first; but in a while they went quietly away.
Here I received a particular account of a poor, desolate one,
--Betty Fairbridge, formerly Hewerdine, of Whitby. For
some time after she came to Lynn, she was cold and weary,
quite choked with the cares of this world. But this time
twelvemonth, when she saw me, though she was in a deep
consumption, her spirit revived. She began again earnestly to
seek God; and he healed her backsliding. But her bodily
weakness increased: So much the more did her faith and
love increase; till prayer was swallowed up in praise, and she
went away with triumphant joy.
Lynn seems to be considerably larger than Yarmouth: I
Nov. 1771.] JOURNAL, 447
believe it stands on double the ground; and the houses in
general are better built: Some of them are little palaces.
The market-place is a spacious and noble square, more
beautiful than either that at Yarmouth or Norwich; and the
people are quite of another turn, affable and humane. They
have the openness and frankness common throughout the
county; and they add to it good-nature and courtesy.
Sat. 9.--I rode to Norwich. Sunday, 10. Our House
was far too small in the evening. I suppose many hundreds
went away. To as many as could hear, I described the “strait
gate:” I believe God applied it to their hearts.
Every day I found more and more reason to hope, that we
shall at length reap the fruit of that labour which we have
bestowed on this people for so many years, as it seemed, almost
in vain. In this hope I left them on Thursday, 14, and
preached at Lakenheath in the evening with an uncommon
blessing. Among them that attended at five in the morning,
was poor A R ; the man who first invited me to this
town, but has for a long time forgotten everything of the kind,
seldom deigning even to hear the preaching. However, he felt
it to-day, being in tears all the time that I was enforcing our
Lord’s words, “He who setteth his hand to the plough, and
looketh back, is not fit for the kingdom of God.”
I came to Mr. Smitheman’s, at Braintree, just as he had
buried his daughter. So on this occasion we had (what I never
saw before) the House filled from end to end: I preached
on, “The grass withereth; the flower fadeth; but the word
of the Lord shall stand for ever.”
Sun. 17.--I preached, both morning and afternoon, on the
education of children. But, O! how few had ears to hear!
Perhaps not ten mothers in the whole congregation.
Fri. 22.--I went over to Barnet, and paid my last debt
to that excellent man, Mr. John Shewell, by preaching his
funeral sermon, from, “It is appointed unto men once to die.”
All the time that I knew him, he was a pattern of seriousness,
piety, patience, and beneficence.-
Thur. 28.--I went to Staines, where an House is just fitted
up for preaching. But it would not contain one half of the
people who flocked together from every side. Those that could
not get in were noisy enough; those that could, were still as
might.
Fri. 29.--We viewed the improvements of that active and
useful man, the late Duke of Cumberland. The most
remarkable work is the triangular tower which he built on
the edge of Windsor-Park. It is surrounded with shrub
beries and woods, having some straight, some serpentine,
walks in them, and commands a beautiful prospect all three
ways: A very extensive one to the south-west. In the lower
part is an alcove, which must be extremely pleasant in a
summer evening. There is a little circular projection at
each corner, one of which is filled by a geometrical staircase:
The other two contain little apartments, one of which is a
study. I was agreeably surprised to find many of the books
not only religious, but admirably well chosen. Perhaps the
great man spent many hours here, with only Him that seeth
in secret; and who can say how deep that change went,
which was so discernible in the latter part of his life?
Hence we went to Mr. Bateman’s house, the oddest I ever
saw with my eyes. Every thing breathes antiquity; scarce a
bedstead is to be seen that is not an hundred and fifty years
old; and everything is quite out of the common way: He
scorns to have any thing like his neighbours. For six hours,
I suppose, these elegant oddities would much delight a
curious man; but after six months they would probably give
him no more pleasure than a collection of feathers.
Mon. DECEMBER 2.--I went down with several of our
friends to Gravesend, where a building, designed for an
assembly-room, was employed for a better purpose. It was
quite crowded; yet abundance could not get in. After read
ing Prayers, I preached on part of the Second Lesson, Heb.
viii. 9, 10, 11. The Room was pretty well filled at five in the
morning. Fair blossoms' But what fruit will there be?
Tues. 3.--I preached at Canterbury. Wednesday, 4. I
rode to Ashford, one of the pleasantest towns in Kent. The
preaching-house, newly fitted up, was well filled with attentive
hearers. Hence we hastened to Dover, where the house was
quickly filled with serious, well-behaved people. Here I found
L H ’s Preachers had gleaned up most of those whom
we had discarded. They call them “My Lady’s society,”
and have my free leave to do them all the good they can.
Thur. 5.--I preached at Sandwich about eleven, and at
Canterbury in the evening. Friday, 6. Having preached to a
small, but much-affected, company at Sittingbourne, I went on
to Chatham. The huge congregation here devoured the word;
Dec. 1771.] JOURNAL, 449
yet I hope they digested it too. We were strangely kept from
this place for many years: At length there is an open door.
Sat. 7.--In my way home I finished the first volume of
Mr. Hooke's “Roman History.” On this I remark, 1. That
it is immeasurably too long, containing a thousand passages
not worth relating: 2. That he relates abundance of contra
dictory accounts, often without telling us which is best:
3. That he recites at large the senseless tales of Clelia
swimming in the Tyber, Mucius Scaevola, and twenty
more; and afterwards knocks them all on the head. What
need then of reciting them? We want history; not romance,
though compiled by Livy himself. Yet, 4. I admire him for
doing justice to many great men, who have been generally
misrepresented; Manlius Capitolinus, in particular, as well
as the two Gracchi. So that, upon the whole, this is far the
best history of Rome that I have seen.
I read to-day a circumstantial account of the late inundations
in the north of England, occasioned by the sudden and violent
overflowing of three rivers, the Tees, the Wear, and the Tyne.
All these have their rise within a few miles of each other, in a
mountain at the head of Teesdale and Weardale; on which
there was nothing more than a little mizzling rain, till the very
hour when the rivers rose, and poured down such an amazing
quantity of water as utterly astonished the people of Sunder
land, at the mouth of the Wear, overflowed all the lower part
of Newcastle-upon-the-Tyne, and filled the main street of
Yarm, upon the Tees, with water nine or ten feet deep.
Such an overflowing of these rivers none ever saw before, nor
have we an account of any such in history.
Rain was not the cause of this; for there was next to none
at the head of these rivers. What was the cause we may
learn from a letter wrote at this time, by a Clergyman in
Carlisle:--“Nothing is so surprising as what lately happened
at Solway-Moss, about ten miles north from Carlisle. About
four hundred acres of this Moss arose to such a height above
the adjacent level, that at last it rolled forward like a torrent,
and continued its course above a mile, sweeping along with it
houses and trees, and every other thing in its way. It divided
itself into islands of different extent, from one to ten feet in
thickness. It is remarkable, that no river or brook runs
either through or near the Moss.”
To what cause then can any thinking man impute this, but
450 REv. J. wesDEY’s [Dec. 1771.
to an earthquake? And the same doubtless it was, which,
about the same time, wrought in the bowels of that great
mountain, whence those rivers, rise, and discharged from
thence that astonishing quantity of water.
Sun. 8.--I read a little more of that strange book, Baron
Swedenborg's Theologia Caelestis. It surely contains many
excellent things. Yet I cannot but think the fever he had
twenty years ago, when he supposes he was “introduced into
the society of angels,” really introduced him into the society
of lunatics; but still there is something noble, even in his
ravings:
His mind has not yet lost
All its original brightness, but appears
Majestic, though in ruin.
Mon. 16.--I rode to Dorking, where were many people;
but none were cut to the heart. Tuesday, 17. I went on to
Ryegate-Place. In King Henry the Fourth’s time, this was
an eminent monastery. At the dissolution of monasteries,
it fell into the hands of the great spoiler, Henry the Eighth.
Queen Elizabeth, pleased with the situation, chose it for one
of her palaces. The gentleman who possesses it now has
entirely changed the form of it; pulling down whole piles of
ancient building, and greatly altering what remains. Yet,
after all that is taken away, it still looks more like a palace
than a private house. The stair-case is of the same model
with that at Hampton-Court: One would scarce know
which is the original. The chimney-piece in the hall is
probably one of the most curious pieces of wood-work now
in the kingdom. But how long? How many of its once
bustling inhabitants are already under the earth ! And how
little a time will it be before the house itself, yea, the earth,
shall be burned up !
I preached in the evening to a small company, on, “It is
appointed unto men once to die.” All seemed moved for the
present. They saw that life is a dream: But how soon will
they sleep again? Wednesday, 18. I preached to another
kind of congregation at Shoreham. Here we are not ploughing
upon the sand. Many have “received the seed upon good
ground,” and do “bring forth fruit with patience.”
Sat. 21.--I met an old friend, James Hutton, whom I had
not seen for five-and-twenty years. I felt this made no differ.
Jan. 1772.] JOURNAL. 451
ence; my heart was quite open; his seemed to be the same;
and we conversed just as we did in 1738, when we met in
Fetter-Lane.
Monday, 23, and so all the following days, when I was not
particularly engaged, I spent an hour in the morning with
our Preachers, as I used to do with my pupils at Oxford.
Wednesday, 25. I preached early at the Foundery; morning
and afternoon, at the chapel. In returning thence at night,
a coach ran full against my chaise, and broke one of the shafts
and the traces in pieces. I was thankful that this was all;
that neither man nor beast received the least hurt.
Mon. 30.--At my brother's request, I sat again for my
picture. This melancholy employment always reminds me of
that natural reflection,--
Behold, what frailty we in man may see :
His shadow is less given to change than he.
Wed. JANUARY 1, 1772.--We met, as usual, in the evening,
in order solemnly and explicitly to renew our covenant with
God. Sunday, 5. I buried the remains of Elizabeth Hart
land, an Israelite indeed! I know not that in thirty years
she has ever dishonoured her profession, either by word or deed.
Some of her last words were, “I have fought the good fight;
I have finished my course; I have kept the faith.”
Tues. 14.--I spent an agreeable hour with Dr. S , the
oldest acquaintance I now have. He is the greatest genius in
little things, that ever fell under my notice. Almost every
thing about him is of his own invention, either in whole or in
part. Even his fire-screen, his lamps of various sorts, his
ink-horn, his very save-all. I really believe, were he seriously
to set about it, he could invent the best mouse-trap that ever
was in the world.
Thur. 16.--I set out for Luton. The snow lay so deep on
the road, that it was not without much difficulty, and some
danger, we at last reached the town. I was offered the use
of the church: The frost was exceeding sharp, and the glass
was taken out of the windows. However, for the sake of the
people, I accepted the offer, though I might just as well have
preached in the open air. I suppose four times as many
people were present, as would have been at the Room: And
about an hundred in the morning. So I did not repent of
my journey through the snow.
Fri. 17.--The usual road being blocked up with snow, we
were obliged to take a by-road to Hertford. I found the poor
children whom Mr. A. kept at school, were increased to about
thirty boys, and thirty girls. I went in immediately to the
girls. As soon as I began to speak, some of them burst into
tears, and their emotion rose higher and higher; but it was
kept within bounds till I began to pray. A cry then arose,
which spread from one to another, till almost all cried aloud
for mercy, and would not be comforted.
But how was the scene changed, when I went to the boys!
They seemed as dead as stones, and scarce appeared to mind
any thing that was said: Nay, some of them could hardly
refrain from laughter. However, I spoke on, and set before
them the terrors of the Lord. Presently one was cut to the
heart; soon after, another and another: And in ten minutes,
the far greater part of them were little less affected than the
girls had been. Except at Kingswood, I have seen no such
work of God upon children for above thirty years. I spoke
exceeding plain in the evening, on the narrow way that leadeth
to life. But the men were widely different from the children:
They were affected just as much as so many horses.
Sat. FEBRUARY 1.--I found an increase of the work of
God even in Southwark. Those who so furiously opposed us
some years ago, as though they would have swallowed us up
quick, are now crumbled into nothing. Only the old chapel
subsists, as a dull, useless, dissenting meeting-house.
Fri. 7.--I called on a friend at Hampton-Court, who went
with me through the house. It struck me more than any
thing of the kind I have seen in England; more than Blenheim
House itself. One great difference is, every thing there
appears designedly grand and splendid; here every thing is
quite, as it were, natural, and one thinks it cannot be other
wise. If the expression may be allowed, there is a kind of
stiffness runs through the one, and an easiness through the
other. Of pictures I do not pretend to be a judge; but there
is one, by Paul Rubens, which particularly struck me, both
with the design and the execution of it. It is Zacharias and
Elizabeth, with John the Baptist, two or three years old,
coming to visit Mary, and our Lord sitting upon her knee.
The passions are surprisingly expressed, even in the children;
but I could not see either the decency or common sense of
painting them stark naked: Nothing can defend or excuse
Feb. 1772.] JOURNAL. 453
this: It is shockingly absurd, even an Indian being the judge.
I allow, a man who paints thus may have a good hand, but
certainly cerebrum non habet.*
Sun. 9.--I buried the remains of Heller Tanner. About
thirty years he has adorned the Gospel: Diligent, patient,
loving to every man, and zealous of good works.
Mon. 10.-Ingoing to Dorking, I read Mr. Jones’s ingenious
tract, upon Clean and Unclean Beasts. He really seems to
prove his point, to make it reasonably plain, that there is a
deeper design in that part of the Levitical Law, than is
commonly understood: That God had a view throughout,
to the moral, rather than natural, qualities of the creatures
which he pronounced unclean; and intended it as a standing
warning to his people, against the fierceness, greediness, and
other ill properties, which so eminently belonged to those
beasts or birds that they were forbidden to eat or touch.
Tues. 11.--I casually took a volume of what is called,
“A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy.”
Sentimental / what is that? It is not English: He might
as well say, Continental. It is not sense. It conveys no
determinate idea; yet one fool makes many. And this
nonsensical word (who would believe it?) is become a
fashionable one ! However, the book agrees full well with
the title; for one is as queer as the other. For oddity,
uncouthness, and unlikeness to all the world beside, I suppose,
the writer is without a rival.
Wed. 12.--In returning, I read a very different book,
published by an homest Quaker, on that execrable sum of all
villanies, commonly called the Slave Trade. I read of nothing
like it in the heathen world, whether ancient or modern: And
it infinitely exceeds, in every instance of barbarity, whatever
Christian slaves suffer in Mahometan countries.
Fri. 14.--I began to execute a design, which had long
been in my thoughts, to print as accurate an edition of my
Works, as a bookseller would do. Surely I ought to be as
exact for God’s sake, as he would be for money.
Mon. 17.--One gave me a very remarkable relation:--A
gay young woman lately came up to London. Curiosity led
her to hear a sermon, which cut her to the heart. One
standing by, observed how she was affected, and took occasion
to talk with her. She lamented that she should hear no
* He has no brains.-EDIT.
more such sermons, as she was to go into the country the next
day; but begged her new acquaintance to write to her there,
which she promised to do. In the country her convictions
so increased, that she resolved to put an end to her own life.
With this design she was going up stairs, when her father
called her, and gave her a letter from London. It was from
her new acquaintance, who told her, “Christ is just ready to
receive you: Now is the day of salvation.” She cried out,
“It is, it is! Christ is mine !” and was filled with joy
unspeakable. She begged her father to give her pen, ink,
and paper, that she might answer her friend immediately.
She told her what God had done for her soul, and added,
“We have no time to lose ! The Lord is at hand | Now,
even now, we are stepping into eternity.” She directed her
letter, dropped down, and died.
Fri. 21.--I met several of my friends, who had begun a
subscription to prevent my riding on horseback; which I
cannot do quite so well, since a hurt which I got some months
ago. If they continue it, well; if not, I shall have strength
according to my need.
Tues. 25.--I had an interview with T. M-, who seemed
much to desire a reunion. But he only seemed; for when we
explained upon the head, I found he meant just nothing.
Wed. 26.--I took my leave of that amiable woman, Mrs.
Bl--, I doubt whether we shall meet again upon earth; but
it is enough if we meet in Abraham's bosom.
Fri. 28.--I opened the new preaching-house in Poplar:
One might say, consecrated it. For the English law (notwith
standing the vulgar error) does not require, nay, does not
allow, any other consecration of churches, than by performing
public service therein.
Sun. MARCH 1.--After the Evening Service, I went to
Brentford. Monday, 2. I preached at Newbury; Tuesday,
3, about noon, at the Devizes. The furious prejudice which
long reigned in this town is now vanished away; the perse
cutors, almost to a man, being gone to their account. In the
evening I preached at Bristol; and, after having spent a few
comfortable days there, on Monday, 9, set out for the north.
In the evening I preached at Stroud. Here I had much con
versation with one that, fifteen months ago, was clearly sawed
from sin; and immediately Satan was permitted to sift her as
wheat. From that moment she was buffeted day and night,
March, 1772.] JOURNAL. 455
so that, through the agony of her mind, sleep wholly departed
from her eyes, and it was supposed she must soon lose her
senses. But, in the height of her distress, God spoke, and
there was a great calm. All was peace and love; and, from
that time, she has been unspeakably happy.
Wed, 11.--About noon I preached, at Tewkesbury, a
funeral sermon, for one who had been a pattern of all holi
ness, till she was snatched away in the bloom of youth. In
the evening I preached in the new chapel at Worcester. It
was throughly filled. For a time, the work of God was
hindered here by a riotous mob: But the Mayor cut them
short; and, ever since, we have been in perfect peace.
Sat. 14.--I left Worcester. The frost was exceeding sharp,
as it was last year, just at this time. I preached in Benge
worth, near Evesham, at eleven, and then took horse for
Broadmarston. The north-east wind, uncommonly sharp,
was exactly in our face: But what is the pleasure or pain of
this life?--A moment, and it is gone !
Sun. 15.--At six in the morning, and five in the evening, I
preached in our own chapel; at eleven, in Quinton church;
and between two and three, at Honeybourn. Monday, 16.
As much snow had fallen in the night, it was with difficulty
we reached Alcester, where I took chaise for Birmingham.
Here our brethren “walk in the fear of God,” and “the
comfort of the Holy Ghost;” and God has at length made
even the beasts of the people to be at peace with them. All
were quiet in the evening; and at five in the morning,
although so much snow had fallen, that it lay mid-leg deep
in all the streets, yet the House was nearly filled.
Tues. 17.--Partly in a chaise, partly on horseback, I made
a shift to get to Bilbrook; and, after preaching, to Wolver
hampton. Thursday, 19. I preached at Burton-upon-Trent;
at Ashby-de-la-Zouch in the afternoon; and in the evening,
to a lovely congregation, in the new House at Loughborough.
Here is a fair prospect: The last society in the circuit is
likely to be one of the first. They increase continually, and
are athirst to be, not almost, but altogether, Christians.
Fri. 20.--I rode to Markfield, through violent rain. The
church, notwithstanding the severity of the weather, was pretty
well filled; not with curious hearers, but with earnest people,
who sought only to save their souls. Some such we found at
Leicester also, in the evening, together with many who had
456 REv. J. wesDEY’s [March, 1772.
little thought about it; to whom, therefore, I spoke in a quite
different manner, exhorting them to “awake out of sleep.”
I believe God applied his word; for the House, large as it
is, was nearly filled at five in the morning; and all seemed
willing to receive that important truth, “Without holiness no
man shall see the Lord.”
Sat. 21.--About noon I preached at Hoton; in the
evening at Nottingham. Sunday, 22. While we were
crossing Sawley-Ferry, it rained in good earnest; but it was
quite fair all the time I was preaching at Donnington. In the
evening I preached at Derby. Both the Room and the yard
were crowded enough, and yet abundance went away. After
preaching, the people hung at the doors, and could not be
persuaded to go away. So at length I suffered them to come
in with the society, and strongly exhorted them to worship
God in spirit and in truth.
Mon. 23.--An huge congregation was present at five, to
whom I spoke with all possible plainness. About mine I
reached Ashbourn, in the Peak; but the House would not
hold a quarter of the people. So I stood in the market-place,
and cried aloud, “Seek ye the Lord, while he may be
found.” One or two walked to and fro, quite unconcerned;
but none offered the least rudeness, and the bulk of the
congregation drank in every word. While I was dining at
Leak, some gentlemen of the town sent to desire I would give
them a sermon. As it seemed to be a providential call, I did
not think it right to refuse. A large congregation quickly
ran together, and were deeply attentive. We had a solemn
congregation at Macclesfield in the evening, to whom I
preached longer than usual. But I felt no more weariness
when I had done, than I did at six in the morning.
Wed. 25.--We went on to Congleton, where all is now peace
and love. None is now left to speak against the Methodists,
except Mr. Sambach, the Curate. He earnestly labours to
drive them from the church; but they will not leave it yet.
They both love her Liturgy and her doctrine, and know not
where to find better.
Fri. 27.--I preached at Nantwich about noon, and then
dragged through a miserable road, till, within two or three
miles of Whitchurch, the chaise stuck fast, and all our
strength could not get it a yard farther. So I took horse, and
rode to the town. Saturday, 28. I rode on to Chester.
April, 1772.] JOURNAL, 457
Sun. 29.--There were about forty persons in St. John's
church at the Morning Service. Our Room was pretty well
filled in the morning, and crowded in the evening. Monday,
30. At one I preached in Warrington. I believe all the
young gentlemen of the academy were there; to whom I
stated and proved the use of reason, from those words of St.
Paul, “In wickedness be ye children, but in understanding
be ye men.”
I had very large and very serious congregations at Liver
pool, morning and evening, on Monday, Tuesday, Wednes
day, and Thursday. Friday, APRIL 3. I set out for Wigan;
but before we came to Ashton, I was glad to use my own
feet, and leave the poor horses to drag the chaise as they
could. I preached at Wigan about twelve, and in the
evening at Bolton. How wonderfully has God wrought in
this place ! John Bennet, some years ago, reduced this
society from sevenscore to twelve; and they are now risen to
an hundred and seventy.
Sun. 5.--I preached at eight to as many as the House
would contain; but at noon I was obliged to stand in the
street, and explain the one thing needful. I preached at
Manchester in the evening; but the House was far too
small: Crowds were obliged to go away. The speculative
knowledge of the truth has ascended here from the least to
the greatest. But how far short is this of experimental
knowledge | Yet it is a step toward it not to be despised.
Mon. 6.-In the afternoon I drank tea at Am. O. But
how was I shocked ! The children that used to cling about
me, and drink in every word, had been at a boarding-school.
There they had unlearned all religion, and even seriousness;
and had learned pride, vanity, affectation, and whatever
could guard them against the knowledge and love of God.
Methodist parents, who would send your girls headlong to
hell, send them to a fashionable boarding-school |
Tues. 7.--I went to New-Mills. Notwithstanding all the
rain, the House was well filled; for nothing can hinder this
lively, earnest people. Wednesday, 8. I returned to Man
chester, and, in the evening, fully delivered my own soul.
Thursday, 9. Mr. Bruce offering to accompany me into
Scotland, I took him and Mr. E. too: And it was well I did;
for Mr. E.'s horse quickly fell, and so disabled himself that I
was obliged to leave him behind. God grant that he may not
be left behind for ever! Friday, 10. Having sent my chaise
before, I rode to Ambleside. Thence, on Saturday, we went
on comfortably, in hired chaises, to Whitehaven.
Sun. 12.--At eight we had our usual congregation of plain,
earnest people. But at five (who would imagine it?) we had
well nigh all the Gentry of the town; and “the power of the
Lord was present to heal them;” so that few, I believe, were
unaffected. The same power was present at the meeting of
the children. I never, in all my life, was so affected with
any part of Solomon’s Song, as while one of the girls was
repeating it.
Mon. 13.--At five in the evening we had all the Gentry
again, with several Clergymen; and again the Spirit applied
the word. For the present even the rich seemed to be
moved. As soon as I had delivered my message, I set out
for Cockermouth.
Tues. 14.--I set out for Carlisle. A great part of the
road was miserably bad. However, we reached it in the
afternoon, and found a small company of plain, loving people.
The place where they had appointed me to preach was out
of the gate; yet it was tolerably filled with attentive hearers.
Afterwards, inquiring for the Glasgow road, I found it was
not much round to go by Edinburgh; so I chose that road,
and went five miles forward this evening, to one of our
friends’ houses. Here we had an hearty welcome sub lare
parvulo,” with sweet and quiet rest.
Wed. 15.--Though it was a lone house, we had a large
congregation at five in the morning. Afterwards we rode
for upwards of twenty miles, through a most delightful
country; the fruitful mountains rising on either hand, and the
clear stream running beneath. In the afternoon we had a
furious storm of rain and snow: However, we reached
Selkirk safe. Here I observed a little piece of stateliness
which was quite new to me: The maid came in, and said,
“Sir, the lord of the stable waits to know if he should feed
your horses.” We call him ostler in England. After supper
all the family seemed glad to join with us in prayer.
Thur. 16.--We went on through the mountains, covered
with snow, to Edinburgh. APRIL 17. (Being Good-Friday.)
I went to the Episcopal chapel, and was agreeably surprised:
* Under a lowly roof.-EDIT.
April, 1772.] JOURNAL. 459
Not only the Prayers were read well, seriously, and distinctly,
but the sermon, upon the sufferings of Christ, was sound and
unexceptionable. Above all, the behaviour of the whole
congregation, rich and poor, was solemn and serious.
Sat. 18.--I set out for Glasgow. One would rather have
imagined it was the middle of January than the middle of
April. The snow covered the mountains on either hand, and
the frost was exceeding sharp; so I preached within, both this
evening and on Sunday morning. But in the evening the
multitude constrained me to stand in the street. My text
was, “What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common.”
Hence I took occasion to fall upon their miserable bigotry
for opinions and modes of worship. Many seemed to be
not a little convinced; but how long will the impression
continue?
Mon. 20.--I went on to Greenock, a sea-port town, twenty
miles west of Glasgow. It is built very much like Plymouth
Dock, and has a safe and spacious harbour. The trade and
inhabitants, and consequently the houses, are increasing
swiftly; and so is cursing, swearing, drunkenness, sabbath
breaking, and all manner of wickedness. Our Room is about
thrice as large as that at Glasgow; but it would not near
contain the congregation. I spoke exceeding plain, and not
without hope that we may see some fruit, even among this
hard-hearted generation.
Tues. 21.--The House was very full in the morning; and
they showed an excellent spirit; for after I had spoke a few
words on the head, every one stood up at the singing. In
the afternoon I preached at Port-Glasgow, a large town, two
miles east of Greenock. Many gay people were there,
careless enough; but the greater part seemed to hear with
understanding. In the evening I preached at Greenock;
and God gave them a loud call, whether they will hear or
whether they will forbear.
Wed. 22.--About eight I preached once more in the Masons’
Lodge, at Port-Glasgow. The House was crowded greatly;
and I suppose all the Gentry of the town were a part of the
congregation. Resolving not to shoot over their heads, as I
had done the day before, I spoke strongly of death and judg
ment, heaven and hell. This they seemed to comprehend;
and there was no more laughing among them, or talking with
each other; but all were quietly and deeply attentive.
In the evening, when I began at Glasgow, the congre
gation being but small, I chose a subject fit for experienced
Christians; but soon after, a heap of fine gay people came
in: Yet I could not decently break off what I was about,
though they gaped and stared abundantly. I could only give
a short exhortation in the close, more suited to their capacity.
Thursday, 23, was the fast before the Lord’s Supper. It
was kept as a Sunday; no shops open, or business done.
Three Ministers came to assist Mr. Gillies, with whom I
had much conversation. They all seemed to be pious as
well as sensible men. As it rained in the evening, I
preached in the Grammar School,--a large, commodious
room. I know not that ever I spoke more plain, nor perhaps
with more effect.
Fri. 24.--We had a large congregation at five; and many
of the rich and gay among them. I was aware of them now;
and they seemed to comprehend perfectly well what it is to be
“ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.” I set out at seven; in
the evening I preached at Edinburgh, on, “My son, give
me thy heart;” and after preaching in the morning, on
Saturday, 25, set out for the north.
I reached Perth in the evening, and sent to the Provost to
desire the use of the Guildhall; in which I preached, Sunday,
26, in the morning, and (it being very cold) in the evening.
Afterwards I accepted of the Provost's invitation to lodge at
his house; and spent an agreeable evening with him and
three Ministers, concluded with solemn prayer.
Mon. 27.--I spent three or four hours in conversation
with Dr. Oswald and Mr. Fraser, two as pious and sensible
Ministers as any I know in Scotland. From Methuen we
went on to Dunkeld, once the capital of the Caledonian
kingdom; now a small town, standing on the bank of the
Tay, and at the foot of several rough, high mountains. The
air was sharp, yet the multitude of people constrained me to
preach abroad; and, I trust, not in vain; for great was the
power of God in the midst of them.
Tues. 28.--We walked through the Duke of Athol’s
gardens, in which was one thing I never saw before,--a
summer-house in the middle of a green-house, by means of
which one might in the depth of winter enjoy the warmth of
May, and sit surrounded with greens and flowers on every
side.
May, 1772.] JOURNAL. 461
In the evening I preached once more at Perth, to a large
and serious congregation. Afterwards they did me an
honour I never thought of,--presented me with the freedom
of the city. The diploma ran thus:--
MAGISTRATUUM illustris ordo et honorandus senatorum
catus inclytae civitatis Perthensis, in debiti amoris et
affectuum tesseram erga Johannem W: y, immunitatibus
Apraefatae civitatis, societatis etiam et fraternitatis aedilitiae
privilegiis donarunt.
Aprilis die 289 anno Sal. 1772°.*
I question whether any diploma from the city of London be
more pompous, or expressed in better Latin.
In my way to Perth, I read over the first volume of Dr.
Robertson’s “History of Charles the Fifth.” I know not
when I have been so disappointed. It might as well be
called the History of Alexander the Great. Here is a
quarto volume of eight or ten shillings’ price, containing dry,
verbose dissertations on feudal government, the substance of
all which might be comprised in half a sheet of paper ! But
“Charles the Fifth !” Where is Charles the Fifth ?
Leave off thy reflections, and give us thy tale !
Wed. 29.--I went on to Brechin, and preached in the
Town-Hall to a congregation of all sorts, Seceders, Glassites,
Non-jurors, and what not? O what excuse have Ministers
in Scotland for not declaring the whole counsel of God,
where the bulk of the people not only endure, but love, plain
dealing?
Friday and Saturday. I rested at Aberdeen. Sunday,
MAY 3. I went in the morning to the English Church. Here,
likewise, I could not but admire the exemplary decency of the
congregation. This was the more remarkable, because so
miserable a reader I never heard before. Listening with all
attention, I understood but one single word, Balak, in the
First Lesson; and one more, begat, was all I could possibly
distinguish in the Second. Is there no man of spirit belonging
to this congregation? Why is such a burlesque upon
* “The illustrious order of Magistrates, and honourable Court [senatorum] of
Aldermen, of the famous city of Perth, as a proof of their well-merited esteem and
affection for John Wesley, have invested him with the immunities of the above
mentioned city, and with the privileges of the fellowship and brotherhood of a
Burgess: This 28th day of April, in the year of our salvation 1772.”--EDIT.
462 REv. J. wesDEY’s [May, 1772.
public worship suffered? Would it not be far better to pay
this gentleman for doing nothing, than for doing mischief;
for bringing a scandal upon religion?
About three I preached at the College kirk in the Old
Town, to a large congregation, rich and poor; at six in our
own House, on the narrow way. I spoke exceeding plain,
both this evening and the next; yet none were offended.
What encouragement has every Preacher in this country,
“by manifestation of the truth,” to “commend” himself “to
every man's conscience in the sight of God!”
Tues. 5.--I read over in my journey Dr. Beattie’s ingenious
“Inquiry after Truth.” He is a writer quite equal to his
subject, and far above the match of all the minute philo
sophers, David Hume in particular; the most insolent
despiser of truth and virtue that ever appeared in the world.
And yet it seems some complain of this Doctor’s using
him with too great severity I cannot understand how
that can be, unless he treated him with rudeness, (which he
does not,) since he is an avowed enemy to God and man,
and to all that is sacred and valuable upon earth.
In the evening I preached in the new House at Arbroath
(properly Aberbrotheck). In this town there is a change
indeed! It was wicked to a proverb; remarkable for
sabbath-breaking, cursing, swearing, drunkenness, and a
general contempt of religion. But it is not so now. Open
wickedness disappears; no oaths are heard, no drunkenness
seen in the streets. And many have not only ceased from
evil, and learned to do well, but are witnesses of the inward
kingdom of God, “righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost.”
Wed, 6.--The Magistrates here also did me the honour
of presenting me with the freedom of their corporation. I
value it as a token of their respect, though I shall hardly
make any further use of it.
Thur. 7.--I took Thomas Cherry away with me; but it
was too late; he will hardly recover. Let all observe, (that no
more Preachers may murder themselves,) here is another
martyr to screaming !
We had an huge congregation in the evening at Dundee,
it being the fast-day before the sacrament. Never in my life
did I speak more plain or close: Let God apply it as
pleaseth him.
- .
May, 1772.] JOURNAL. 463
Fri. 8.--I laboured to reconcile those who (according to
the custom of the place) where vehemently contending about
nothing. Saturday, 9. I went to Edinburgh.
Sun. 10.--I attended the Church of England Service in
the morning, and that of the Kirk in the afternoon. Truly
“no man having drunk old wine, straightway desireth new.”
How dull and dry did the latter appear to me, who had
been accustomed to the former ! In the evening I
endeavoured to reach the hearts of a large congregation, by
applying part of the Sermon on the Mount: And I am
persuaded God applied it with power to many consciences.
Mon. 11.--I spoke severally to the members of the society
as closely as I could. Out of ninety (now united,) I scarce
found ten of the original society; so indefatigable have the
good Ministers been to root out the seed God had sown in
their hearts.
Tues. 12.--I preached at Ormiston, ten miles south of
Edinburgh, to a large and deeply serious congregation. I
dined at the Minister's, a sensible man, who heartily bid us
God-speed. But he soon changed his mind: Lord H--n
informed him that he had received a letter from Lady
H , assuring him that we were “dreadful heretics, to
whom no countenance should be given.” It is pity! Should
not the children of God leave the devil to do his own work?
Wed. 13.--I preached at Leith, in the most horrid, dreary
Room I have seen in the kingdom. But the next day I found
another kind of Room; airy, cheerful, and lightsome; which
Mr. Parker undertook to fit up for the purpose, without any
delay.
Sun. 17.--I had appointed to preach at noon in the Lady’s
Walk, at Leith; but being offered the use of the Episcopal
chapel, I willingly accepted it, and both read Prayers and
preached. Here also the behaviour of the congregation did
honour to our Church.
Mon. 18.--Dr. Hamilton brought with him Dr. Monro and
Dr. Gregory. They satisfied me what my disorder was; and
told me there was but one method of cure. Perhaps but one
matural one; but I think God has more than one method of
healing either the soul or the body.
In the evening (the weather being still severe) I preached in
the new House at Leith, to a lovely audience, on, “Narrow is
the way that leadeth unto life.” Many were present again at
five in the morning. How long have we toiled here almost
in vain ' Yet I cannot but hope God will at length have a
people even in this place.
Wed. 20.--I took my leave of Edinburgh in the morning, by
strongly enforcing the Apostle's exhortation, “Be careful for
nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God.”
I had designed to preach (as usual) at Provost Dixon's,
in Haddington, in the way to Dunbar. But the Provost, too,
had received light from the “Circular Letter,” and durst not
receive those heretics. So we went round by the Marquis of
Tweedale’s seat, completely finished within and without. But
he that took so much delight in it is gone to his long home,
and has left it to one that has no taste or regard for it. So
rolls the world away !
In the evening I preached at Dunbar. Thursday, 21. I
went to the Bass, seven miles from it, which, in the horrid reign
of Charles the Second, was the prison of those venerable men
who suffered the loss of all things for a good conscience. It
is a high rock surrounded by the sea, two or three miles in
circumference, and about two miles from the shore. The
strong east wind made the water so rough, that the boat
could hardly live: And when we came to the only landing
place, (the other sides being quite perpendicular,) it was with
much difficulty that we got up, climbing on our hands and
knees. The castle, as one may judge by what remains, was
utterly inaccessible. The walls of the chapel, and of the
Governor’s house, are tolerably entire. The garden-walls are
still seen near the top of the rock, with the well in the midst
of it. And round the walls there are spots of grass, that
feed eighteen or twenty sheep. But the proper natives of the
island are Solund-geese, a bird about the size of a Muscovy
duck, which breed by thousands, from generation to genera
tion, on the sides of the rock. It is peculiar to these, that they
lay but one egg, which they do not sit upon at all, but keep
it under one foot, (as we saw with our eyes,) till it is hatched.
How many prayers did the holy men confined here offer up,
in that evil day! And how many thanksgivings should we
return, for all the liberty, civil and religious, which we enjoy!
At our return, we walked over the ruins of Tantallon Castle,
once the seat of the great Earls of Douglas. The front walls
(it was four square) are still standing, and by their vast height
June, 1772.] JOURNAL. 465
and huge thickness, give us a little idea of what it once was.
Such is human greatness!
Fri. 22.--We took a view of the famous Roman camp,
lying on a mountain, two or three miles from the town. It is
encompassed with two broad and deep ditches, and is not
easy of approach on any side. Here lay General Lesley with
his army, while Cromwell was starving below. He had no
way to escape; but the enthusiastic fury of the Scots
delivered him. When they marched into the valley to
swallow him up, he mowed them down like grass.
Sat. 23.--I went on to Alnwick, and preached in the
Town-Hall. What a difference between an English and a
Scotch congregation : These judge themselves rather than
the Preacher; and their aim is, not only to know, but to love
and obey.
Mon. 25.--I preached in Morpeth at noon, and in the
evening at Newcastle. Wednesday, 27. I went on to
Sunderland, and was surprised to find the society smaller than
I left it. It is true, many are removed to other places, and
many are removed to Abraham’s bosom . But still there must
be want of zeal in those that remain, or this loss would have
been more than supplied, out of the multitude of serious
people who constantly attend the preaching.
Sat. 30.--I met a company of the most lively children
that I have seen for several years. One of them repeated her
hymn with such propriety, that I did not observe one accent
misplaced. Fair blossoms ! And if they be duly attended,
there may be good fruit !
Sun. 31.--At eight I preached near the Market-place, to
an immense congregation. That in Gateshead-Fell, at two,
was still more numerous, but more attentive they could not
be. About five, I preached in the Castle-garth at Newcastle,
to the largest congregation of all, but not the most serious;
there being not a few casual or curious hearers among them.
Mon. JUNE 1.--I began a little tour through the Dales.
About nine, I preached at Kiphill; at one, at Wolsingham.
Here we began to trace the revival of the work of God;
and here began the horrid mountains we had to climb over.
However, before six, we reached Barnard-Castle. I preached
at the end of the preaching-house, to a large congregation of
established Christians. At five in the morning, the House was
near full of persons ripe for the height and depth of the Gospel.
Tuesday, 2. We rode to New Orygan, in Teesdale. The
people were deeply attentive; but, I think, not deeply affected.
From the top of the next enormous mountain, we had a view
of Weardale. It is a lovely prospect. The green gently-rising
meadows and fields, on both sides of the little river, clear as
crystal, were sprinkled over with innumerable little houses;
three in four of which (if not mine in ten) are sprung up since
the Mcthodists came hither. Since that time, the beasts are
turned into men, and the wilderness into a fruitful field.
It being very cold, I judged it best to preach in the House,
though many of the people could not get in. Just as I began
to pray, a man began to scream, and that so loud, that my
voice was quite drowned. I desired he would contain himself
as far as he could; and he did so tolerably well. I then
applied the account of the Woman of Canaan. The people
devoured every word.
Il ed. 3.--I desired to speak with those who believed God
had saved them from inward sin. I closely examined them,
twenty in all, ten men, eight women, and two children. Of
one man, and one or two women, I stood in doubt. The
experience of the rest was clear; particularly that of the
children, Margaret Spenser, aged fourteen, and Sally
Blackburn, a year younger. But what a contrast was there
between them ! Sally Blackburn was all calmness; her look,
her speech, her whole carriage was as sedate, as if she had
lived threescore years. On the contrary, Peggy was all fire;
her cyc sparkled; her very features spoke; her whole face
was all alive; and she looked as if she was just ready to take
wing for heaven | Lord, let neither of these live to dishonour
thee! Rather take them unspotted to thyself!
In the evening, I preached on, “Open thy mouth wide, and
I will fill it.” And indeed God confirmed his word. There
was a cry on every side, but not like that last night. This
did not damp, but quicken, the rest, especially that of the
children; many of whom mourned for God, but none rejoiced
with joy unspeakable. About twenty of them, steady and
consistent, both in their testimony and behaviour, desired to
join with their elder brethren, in the great sacrifice of thanks
giving. A few were then also constrained to cry out; but
the greater part enjoyed “the silent heaven of love.”
Thur. 4.--At five I took my leave of this blessed people.
I was a little surprised, in looking attentively upon them, to
June, 1772.] JOURNAL, 467
observe so many beautiful faces as I never saw before in one
congregation; many of the children in particular, twelve or
fourteen of whom (chiefly boys) sat full in my view. But I
allow, much more might be owing to grace than nature, to the
heaven within, that shone outward.
Before I give a more particular account of this work of God,
it may be well to look back to the very beginning of it. In
this part of Weardale, the people in general are employed in
the lead-mines. In the year 1749, Mr. Hopper and John
Brown came and preached among them. But it made no
impression; none opposed, and none asked them to eat or
drink. Mr. H., nevertheless, made them several visits in the
ensuing spring and summer. Towards autumn four found
peace with God, and agreed to meet together. At Christmas
two of the Exhorters in Allandale determined to visit Wear
dale. Before they entered it, they kneeled down on the snow,
and earnestly besought the Lord that he would incline some
person, who was worthy, to receive them into his house. At
the first house where they called, they were bid welcome, and
they stayed there four days. Their word was with power, so
that many were convinced, and some converted to God. One
of these Exhorters was Jacob Rowell. They continued their
visits, at intervals, all winter. In the beginning of summer,
about twenty lively, steady people were joined together.
From that time they gradually increased to thirty-five, and
continued about that number for ten years. There was then a
remarkable revival among them, by means of Samuel Meggot;
so that they increased to eighty; but, four years since, they
were reduced to sixty-three. From that time they increased
again, and were, in August, an hundred and twenty.
In two respects, this society has always been peculiarly
remarkable: The one, they have been the most liberal in pro
viding everything needful for the Preachers: The other, they
have been particularly careful with regard to marriage. They
have in general married with each other; and that not for the
sake of money, but virtue. Hence, having been yoke-fellows
in grace before, they more easily bear the yoke of marriage,
and assist each other in training up their children; and God
has eminently blessed them therein. For in most of their
families, the greatest part of the children above ten years old
are converted to God. So that to several among them one
may say, as St. Paul to Timothy, “The faith which dwelt
first in thy grandmother, and thy mother, I am persuaded is
in thee also.” It was observable too, that their Leaders were
upright men, alive to God, and having an uncommon gift in
prayer. This was increased by their continual exercise of it.
The Preachers were there but once a fortnight. But though
they had neither Preacher nor Exhorter, they met every
night for singing and prayer.
Last summer the work of God revived, and gradually increased
till the end of November. Then God began to make bare his
arm in an extraordinary manner. Those who were strangers to
God felt, as it were, a sword in their bones, constraining them
to roar aloud. Those who knew God were filled with joy
unspeakable, and were almost equally loud in praise and thanks
giving. The convictions that seized the unawakened were
generally exceeding deep; so that their cries drowned every
other voice, and no other means could be used than the speak
ing to the distressed, one by one, and encouraging them to lay
hold on Christ. And this has not been in vain. Many that
were either on their knees, or prostrate on the ground, have
suddenly started up, and their very countenance showed that
the Comforter was come. Immediately these began to go about
from one to another of them that were still in distress, praising
God, and exhorting them without delay to come to so gracious
a Saviour. Many, who to that hour appeared quite unconcerned,
were thereby cut to the heart, and suddenly filled with such
anguish of soul as extorted loud and bitter cries. By such a
succession of persons mourning and rejoicing, they have been
frequently detained, so that they could not part till ten or eleven
at night, nay, sometimes, not till four in the morning.
A farther account was drawn up by the Leaders:--
“On Sunday afternoon, December 1, as William Hunter was
preaching, the power of God fell on the congregation in a won
derful manner. Many, being cut to the heart, cried aloud for
mercy, and ten were added to the society. On Tuesday evening
we met again at six; but could not part till ten. In this time
four found peace with God, and ran from one to another, exhort
ing them to believe in Christ. On Wednesday night many
were deeply distressed, but none set at liberty. While we were
meeting on Thursday, two were enabled to rejoice in God their
Saviour. On Saturday night we met at six, and three of us
sung and prayed. But before the third had done, his voice
could not be heard for the cries of the people. Seven of these
June, 1772.] JOURNAL. 469
soon arose, blessing and praising God, and went about
encouraging others. Many hardened sinners were much
affected thereby, and began to cry as loud as they had done;
so that we had nothing to do, but to stand and see the wonder
ful work of God. And O how dreadful, yet pleasing, was the
sight! All this time many were crying for mercy. Among
these were four young men who remained on their knees five
hours together. We endeavoured to break up the meeting
at ten, but the people would not go; so that we were con
strained to continue till twelve: Near this time one was asked,
what he thought of this. He answered, ‘I wish it be all real.”
He then turned to go home; but, after taking a few steps,
began to cry aloud for mercy. He cried till his strength was
quite gone, and then lay as one dead till about four o’clock
in the morning; then God revealed his Son in his heart.
During this meeting eleven persons found peace with God.
“On Sunday morning we met at the common hour, and
three of us sung and prayed as usual, till our voice was
drowned by the thanksgivings of the new converts, and the
cries of convinced sinners. Among the rest an ancient woman
was so struck, that she vehemently cried out, ‘Mercy!
Mercy! O what a sinner am I? I was the first that received
them into my house in Weardale, and have heard them
almost these thirty years. O, pray for me ! Mercy, mercy!”
It was not long before she found mercy, and mightily rejoiced
in God her Saviour. And about the same time another
mourner passed from death unto life.
“We met again at two, and abundance of people came
from various parts, being alarmed by some confused reports.
We sung and prayed; and the power of God descended. A
young man who had been deeply wounded in the morning,
now found One mighty to heal. We then concluded; but
many of the people came in again, and others stayed at the
door. Among those who came in, was one who had been
remarkably profligate. He cried for mercy with all his might;
several crowded about to see him: And before we parted, not
only he, but five more were rejoicing and praising God
together. We met again on Monday, Tuesday, and
Wednesday, and by that time nine more found peace.
“Mr. Rowell came on Thursday, stayed three days, and
joined many new members. Three-and-thirty of these had
found peace with God, as did five more in the week following.
When Mr. Watson came, he joined many more, eleven of whom
were justified. At our meeting on Tuesday, eleven more were
filled with the peace of God. Yet one young man seemed quite
unconcerned. But suddenly the power of God fell upon him;
he cried for two hours with all his might, and then the Lord set
his soul at liberty. On Saturday a few met at Mr. Hunter's
room, who were athirst for full sanctification. For this they
wrestled with God, till a young man found the blessing, as
several others have done since. We have ever since continued
our meetings, and God has continued his loving-kindness
toward us. So that above an hundred and twenty are added
to the society, above an hundred of whom are believers.”
I left John Fenwick on Friday, 5, to examine the society
one by one. This he did on Friday and Saturday. The
account of what ensued he gave in the following words:--
“On Saturday evening God was present through the whole
service, but especially toward the conclusion. Then one and
another dropped down, till six lay on the ground together,
roaring for the disquietude of their hearts. Observing many
to be quite amazed at this, I besought them to stand still and
see the salvation of God. But the cry of the distressed soon
drowned my voice; so I dismissed the congregation. About
half of them went away. I continued praying with the rest
when my voice could be heard; when it could not, I prayed
without a voice, till after ten o’clock. In this time, four of
those poor mourners were clothed with the robes of praise.
“The society now consists of an hundred and sixty-five
members; of whom there are but twenty that have not found
peace with God. Surely such a work of God has not been
seen before in any part of the three kingdoms.”
Such a work, it is true, in many respects, was that at
Everton some years since; yet not in all, as will fully appear,
if we consider a few more circumstances of this:--
“Forty-three of these are children, thirty of whom are
rejoicing in the love of God. The chief instrument God has
used among these is Jane Salkeld, a schoolmistress, a young
woman that is a pattern to all that believe. A few of her
children are, Phebe Teatherstone, nine years and an half old,
a child of uncommon understanding; Hannah Watson, ten
years old, full of faith and love; Aaron Ridson, not eleven
years old, but wise and stayed as a man; Sarah Smith, eight
years and an half old, but as serious as a woman of fifty: Sarah
June, 1772.] JOURNAL, 471
Morris, fourteen years of age, is as a mother among them,
always serious, always watching over the rest, and building
them up in love.
“Mention was made of four young men, who were affected
on the second Wednesday in December. These, hearing of
the roaring of the people, came out of mere curiosity. That
evening six were wounded and fell to the ground, crying
aloud for mercy. One of them, hearing the cry, rushcd through
the crowd to see what was the matter. He was no sooner got
to the place, than he dropped down himself, and cried as loud
as any. The other three pressing on, one after another, were
struck just in the same manner. And indeed all of them were
in such agonies, that many feared they were struck with death.
But all the ten were fully delivered before the meeting
concluded, which indeed was not till four in the morning.
“Jane Collins had been an hearer for twenty years, but
was not awakened, till at a prayer-meeting last winter she was
cut to the heart. It being Sunday, the meeting should have
ended at nine; but through her distress it continued till near
twelve. She was then hardly persuaded to go home. In
the evening she returned, but was dead as a stone. So she
continued all night; but, the next day, God revealed his Son
in her heart.
“Edward Farles had been an hearer for many years, but
was never convinced of sin. Hearing there was much roaring
and crying at the prayer-meetings, he came to hear and see
for himself. That evening many cried to God for mercy.
He said he wished it was all real; and went away more
prejudiced than before, especially against the roarers and
criers, as he called them. But soon after he got home, he
was struck to the ground, so distressed that he was convulsed
all over. His family fearing that he would die, sent for some
of the praying people. For some hours he seemed to be every
moment on the point of expiring, in deep agony both of body
and mind. He then lay as quite breathless; but, about four
in the morning, God in a moment healed both soul and body.
Ever since he has adorned the Gospel.
“The rise of the late work was this:--William Hunter and
John Watson, men not of large gifts, but zealous for Christian
Perfection, by their warm conversation on the head, kindled a
flame in some of the Leaders. These pressed others to seek after
it; and for this end appointed meetings for prayer. The fire
then spread wider and wider, till the whole society was in a
flame.” Thus far John Fenwick.
It was observed above, that this work greatly resembled
that at Everton. It did in many respects, but not in all: To
instance in some particulars:--
It resembled that work, 1. In its unexpected beginning.
No such work had ever been seen before either at Everton or
in Weardale, when it broke out in so astonishing a manner,
equally unlooked for by the instruments and by the subjects of
it. The latter resembled the former work, 2. In the swift
ness of its progress, I mean in the persons affected; many
of whom were in one day, or even two or three hours, both
convinced of sin, (without any previous awakening,) and
converted to God. 3. In the number of persons both
convinced and converted; which was greater in a few months,
than it had been in Weardale from the first preaching
there, or in Everton for a century. The work in Weardale
resembled that at Everton, 4. In the outward symptoms
which have attended it. In both, the sudden and violent
emotions of mind, whether of fear or sorrow, of desire or
joy, affected the whole bodily frame; insomuch that many
trembled exceedingly, many fell to the ground, many were
violently convulsed, perhaps all over, and many seemed to be
in the agonies of death. And the far greater part, however
otherwise affected, cried with a loud and bitter cry. To
name but one circumstance more, there was a great resem
blance, 5. In most of the instruments whom God employed.
These were plain, artless men, simple of heart, but without
any remarkable gifts; men who (almost literally) knew
“nothing save Jesus Christ, and him crucified.”
In these respects, the work of God in Weardale nearly
resembled that at Everton; but in other respects they were
widely different: For, 1. That was the first work of God, of
the kind, which had ever been in those parts in the memory
of man. This was only the revival of a work, which had
continued for many years. Now these circumstances are
common at the dawn of a work, but afterwards very uncommon.
I do not remember to have seen the like anywhere in the three
kingdoms, unless at the beginning of a work. 2. Although
the former work was swift, the latter was far swifter. In
general, persons were both awakened and justified in a far
shorter time. 3. A far greater number were converted to
June, 1772.] JOURNAL. 473
God in Weardale, than about Everton; although the number
of hearers, round about Everton, was abundantly greater
than in Weardale. 4. Although the outward symptoms were
the same, yet in Weardale there were none of the dreams,
visions, and revelations, which abounded at Everton; and
which, though at first they undoubtedly were from God, yet
were afterwards fatally counterfeited by the devil, to the great
discredit of the work of God. 5. There was a great difference
in the instruments, whom God employed in one and in the
other work. Not one of those in or near Everton had any
experience in the guiding of souls. None of them were more
than “babes in Christ,” if any of them so much. Whereas
in Weardale, not only the three Preachers were, I believe,
renewed in love, but most of the Leaders were deeply expe
rienced in the work of God, accustomed to train up souls in
his way, and not ignorant of Satan's devices. And hence we
may easily account for the grand difference between the former
and the latter work; namely, that the one was so shallow,
there scarce being any subjects rising above an infant state of
grace; the other so deep, many, both men, women, and chil
dren, being what St. John terms “young men” in Christ.
Yea, many children here have had far deeper experience, and
more constant fellowship with God, than the oldest man or
woman at Everton which I have seen or heard of. So that,
upon the whole, we may affirm, such a work of God as this
has not been seen before in the three kingdoms.
Fri. 5.--Upon examination, I found the society at New
castle, also, smaller than it was two years since. This I can
impute to nothing but the want of visiting from house to
house; without which the people will hardly increase, either
in number or grace.
In the following week, I preached in many towns round
Newcastle, and on Saturday went again to Sunderland.
In the evening we mightily wrestled with God for an enlarge
ment of his work. As we were concluding, an eminent
backslider came strongly into my mind; and I broke out
abruptly, “Lord, is Saul also among the Prophets? Is
James Watson here? If he be, show thy power !” Down
dropped James Watson like a stone, and began crying aloud
for mercy.-
Here, Lord, let all his wand'rings end,
And all his steps to thee-ward tend 1
Mon. 15.--I left Newcastle. About noon I preached at
Durham; in the evening, at Stockton; on Tuesday, at Yarm;
Wednesday, at Thirsk; on Thursday, at Osmotherley, and
Hutton-Rudby. Friday, 19. I preached in Stokesley at eight,
and then crept over the Moors to Castleton. The congregation
was gathered from many miles round, and was indeed swift
to hcar. It was with much difficulty that we got from hence
to Whitby, between six and seven.
Here I found a lively society indeed: The chief reason of
their liveliness was this:--Those who were renewed in love,
(about forty in number,) continuing fervent in spirit, and
zealous for God, quickened the rest, and were a blessing to
all around them.
Sat. 20.--It being a fair, mild evening, I preached on the
smooth, green top of the hill, a little above the church. As
soon as I began to preach, some poor men began ringing the
bells: But it was lost labour; for all the people could hear,
to the very skirts of the congregation.
Sun. 21.--About noon I preached in the little Square, at
Robin Hood's Bay, to most of the inhabitants of the town;
and in the evening at Scarborough, in the shell of the new
House. Monday, 22. I went on to Bridlington. The Room
being far too small, I was desired to preach in the church
yard. On the ringing of the bells, I removed thence to the
market-house, where we had more than double the congrega
tion, the snow-ball gathering all the way we went.
Tues. 23.--About cleven I preached at Drifficld. The
sun was extremely hot; but I was tolerably screened by a
shady tree. In the evening I preached at Beverley, and on
Wednesday, 24, in the new House at Hull, extremely well
finished, and, upon the whole, one of the prettiest preaching
houses in England. The next evening we were crowded
enough. Being informed that many Antinomians were
present, I preached on, “God sent his own Son,-that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, walking
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.”
Fri. 26.--I went on to York. The next day I read over
Mr. Else’s ingenious “Treatise on the Hydrocele.” He
supposes the best cure is by a seton or a caustic; but I am
not inclined to try either of them. I know a Physician that
has a shorter cure than either one or the other.
Mon. 29.--I preached, about ten, at Tadcaster, and in the
July, 1772.] JOURNAL. 475
evening at Pateley-Bridge. Tuesday, 30. Calling at a little
inn on the Moors, I spoke a few words to an old man there,
as my wife did to the woman of the house. They both
appeared to be deeply affected. Perhaps Providence sent us
to this house for the sake of these two poor souls. In the
evening I preached in the new House at Otley, as neat as
that at Hull; and the people appeared to be much alive; so
that I was greatly comforted among them.
Sat. JULY 4.--I rode to the Ewood, to S. Lockwood’s,
formerly the wife of young Mr. Grimshaw, afterward married
to Mr. Lockwood, and now again a young widow. Her sister
was with her, the relict of Mr. Sutcliffe, whose case was very
uncommon. He had for some time used the cold bath for a
nervous disorder, and was advised to try the warm. Imme
diately he was seized with racking pains all over, and in two
hours expired.
At one I preached at Heptonstall, to some thousands of
people, who stood just before the preaching-house, on a lovely
Green, which rises, slope above slope, like artificial terraces.
Hence we climbed up and down wonderful mountains to
Keighley; where many, from various parts, were waiting for
us. Sunday, 5. Not half the congregation at Haworth could
get into the church in the morning, nor a third part in the
afternoon. So I stood on a kind of pulpit, near the side
of the church. Such a congregation was never seen there
before; and I believe all heard distinctly.
Mon. 6.--At noon I preached to a large congregation at
Bingley, and at Bradford in the evening. From this comfort
able place, on Wednesday, 8, I went to Halifax. My old
friend, Titus Knight, offered me the use of his new meeting,
larger than Dr. Taylor’s at Norwich, full as superb, (so he
terms it in his poem,) and finished with the utmost elegance.
But I judged more people would attend in the open air: So
I preached in the cow-market, to an huge multitude. Our
House was well filled at five in the morning. At ten I
preached in the new House at Thong; at two, in the
market-place at Huddersfield, to full as large a congregation
as at Halifax. Such another we had at Dewsbury, in the
evening; and my strength was as my day.
Sat. 11.--I was presented with Mr. Hill's Review, a curio
sity in its kind. But it has nothing to do either with good
nature or good manners; for he is writing to an Arminian.
I almost wonder at his passionate desire to measure swords
with me. This is the third time he has fallen upon me
without fear or wit. Tandem extorquebis ut vapules.*
Sun. 12.--I preached at Morley about nine, Birstal at
one, and Leeds in the evening. Monday, 13. I preached in
Ledstone church, and spoke as plain and close as I could:
But it seemed to be Heathen Greek to the congregation. In
the evening we had such another congregation at Doncaster.
Tuesday, 14. I preached at Sheffield; Thursday, 16, at
Hathenham; and Friday, 17, at Hatfield. Here, some
time since, a Justice levied a fine on a Local Preacher, on
pretence of the Conventicle Act. So did a Justice in Kent,
three or four years ago; but it cost him some hundred
pounds for his pains.
The next day I rested at Epworth. Monday, 20. About
eight I preached at Brigg; a noisy, turbulent town, in which
no Methodist had preached before. So it was supposed there
would be much tumult; but there was none at all; for the
fear of God fell upon the whole congregation. I preached in
Tealby at one, and Horncastle in the evening; on Tuesday
and Wednesday, at Trusthorpe, Louth, and Grimsby. Here
I was informed of a good man, Thomas Capiter, dying in
the full triumph of faith. He was, between twenty and
thirty years, a pillar and an ornament of the society;--a loss,
one would think, not soon to be repaired: But what is too
hard for God?
Thur. 23.--I preached at Barrow, and at five on Friday;
about nine, at Awkborough; and at two, for the first time, in
Messingham, under a wide-spread tree. One or two poor
men, not very sober, made some noise for a time; but they
soon walked away, and left me a numerous and attentive
congregation. In the evening I preached at Owston; and,
after a busy day, lay down and slept in peace.
In this journey I read a volume of the “Medical Essays,”
lately published at London. I have read a thousand strange
things, but none stranger than the account which is here
given of three persons who were entirely cured of a confirmed
dropsy; one, by drinking six quarts a day of cold water; the
second, by drinking two or three gallons of new cider; the
third, by drinking a gallon or two of small beer, and the
* You will at length extort from me a severe castigation.-EDIT.
Aug. 1772.] JOURNAL, 477
same quantity of butter-milk. Why, then, what are we doing,
in keeping dropsical persons from small drink? The same
as in keeping persons in the small-pox from air.
Mon. 27.--I read Mr. Adams's ingenious Comment on the
former part of the Epistle to the Romans. I was surprised
and grieved. How are the mighty fallen I It is the very
quintessence of Antinomianism. I did wonder much, but I
do not wonder now, that his rod does not blossom.
Wed. 29.--I crossed over to Pomfret, (properly Pontefract,)
and, about noon, opened the new preaching-house there. The
congregation was large, and still as night: Perhaps this is a
token for good. Being straitened for time, I was obliged to
ride hard to Swinfleet; and I had strength enough, though
none to spare.
Thur. 30.--I preached in the new House, at Thorne;
Friday, 31, about nine at Doncaster. It was the first time
I have observed any impression made upon this elegant
people. After preaching at Horbury, Wakefield, and Birstal,
on Sunday evening I preached at Leeds. On Tuesday,
AUGUST 4, our Conference began. Generally, during the
time of Conference, as I was talking from morning to night,
I had used to desire one of our brethren to preach in the
morning. But having many things to say, I resolved, with
God’s help, to preach, mornings as well as evenings. And I
found no difference at all: I was no more tired than with
my usual labour; that is, no more than if I had been sitting
still in my study, from morning to night.
Fri. 7.--We had a remarkable instance of God’s hearing
prayer:--Last Friday, a poor mourner after Christ, standing
by the grave, at the burial of her husband, sunk down into
her brother's arms, having no strength left in her. He
thought it was with grief; but it was indeed with joy; for
just then God wrote pardon on her heart. To-day she sunk
again, as one dead, and continued so for some time. When
she opened her eyes, she said, “Is not this heaven? Sure I
cannot be upon earth still.” She was in heaven, though on
earth. She was all love, having given God all her heart. I
saw her, in the evening, witnessing that “the blood of
Christ cleanseth from all sin.”
Sun. 9.--I preached at Rothwell, in Thorner church, and
at Leeds; Monday, 10, at Cudworth and at Sheffield.
Tuesday, 11. About eight I preached at Grindleford-Bridge.
478 REv. J. wesDEY’s [Aug. 1772.
Before two we reached Longner. After we had dimed, a poor
woman came in, and another, and another, till we had seven
teen or eighteen men and women, with whom we spent a little
time very comfortably in prayer and praise. At the end
of the town the chaise broke down. We had two-and-twenty
miles to Burslem; so I took horse, and, making haste, came
thither a little before preaching time. Wednesday, 12. I
preached at Salop, and spake strong words, to the amazement
of many notional believers. Thursday, 13. I preached at the
Hay. Friday, 14. About noon, at the request of my old
friend Howell Harris, I preached at Trevecka, on the strait
gate; and we found our hearts knit together as at the
beginning. He said, “I have borne with those pert, ignorant
young men, vulgarly called students, till I cannot in con
science bear any longer. They preach bare-faced Reprobation,
and so broad Antinomianism, that I have been constrained
to oppose them to the face, even in the public congregation.”
It is no wonder they should preach thus. What better can
be expected from raw lads of little understanding, little
learning, and no experience?
After spending a day or two very comfortably at Brecknock,
on Monday, 17, I preached in the Castle at Carmarthen; and
on Tuesday, 18, in the new House at Haverfordwest, far the
neatest in Wales. There is a considerable increase in this
society, and not in number only. After preaching on Wednes
day evening, we had such a meeting as I have seldom known.
Almost every one spoke, as well as they could for tears, and
with the utmost simplicity; and many of them appeared to
know “the great salvation,” to love God with all their heart.
Thur. 20.--I rode over to Mr. Bowen’s, at Llanguire; an
agreeable place, and an agreeable family. Here I rejoiced
to meet with Mr. Pugh, whose living is within a mile of
Llanguire. In the evening he read Prayers at Newport, and
preached to a deeply serious congregation. I trust his lot is
cast for good among a people both desirous and capable of
instruction. Friday, 21. I preached again about eight, and
then rode back to Harford. After dinner we hasted to the
Passage; but the watermen were not in haste to fetch us
over; so I sat down on a convenient stone, and finished the
little tract I had in hand. However, I got to Pembroke in
time, and preached in the Town-Hall, where we had a
solemn and comfortable opportunity.
Sept. 1772.] JOURNAL, 479
Sun. 23.--The violent rain considerably lessened our
congregation at St. Daniel’s. Afterwards, the wind was so
extremely high, that I doubted if we could cross the passage;
but it stood exactly in the right point, and we got to Harford
just before the thunder-storm began. In the evening I took
my leave of this loving people, and the next reached Llanelly.
Tues. 25.--I went on to Swansea, and preached in the
evening to a numerous congregation. I preached in Oldcastle
church, mear Bridge-End, about noon, on Wednesday, 26;
and in the evening in the Assembly-room at Cowbridge, to an
unusually serious congregation. Thursday, 27. I preached
at Cardiff, in the Town-Hall, as also the following evening;
about noon, in the little church at Carphilly. Saturday, 29.
I went on to Bristol.
Wed. SEPTEMBER 2.--I preached at Bath. Our Room,
though considerably enlarged, will not yet contain the congre
gation, which is still continually increasing.
Fri. 4.--I went over to Kingswood, and spake largely to
the children, as also on Saturday and Sunday. I found
there had been a fresh revival of the work of God among
them some months ago: But it was soon at an end, which I
impute chiefly to their total neglect of private prayer. With
out this, all the other means which they enjoyed could profit
them nothing.
Sun. 6.--I preached on the quay, at Kingswood, and near
King's Square. To this day field-preaching is a cross to
me. But I know my commission, and see no other way of
“preaching the Gospel to every creature.”
In the following week I preached at Bath, Frome, Corsley,
Bradford, and Keynsham; on Tuesday, 15, at Pensford.
Thence I went to Publow, which is now what Leytonstone
was once. Here is a family indeed. Such mistresses, and
such a company of children, as, I believe, all England cannot
parallel ! Wednesday, 16. I spent an hour with them in
exhortation and prayer, and was much comforted among
them. I preached in Pensford at eight; Paulton about
one; and Coleford in the evening.
Fri. 18.--I preached very quietly at the Devizes. Scarce
one of the old persecutors is alive. Very few of them lived
out half their days: Many were snatched away in an hour
when they looked not for it.
Fri. 25.--I went over to Kingswood again, and had much
satisfaction with the children. On Sunday I talked with the
elder children one by one, advising them as each had need;
and it was easy to perceive that God is again working in many
of their hearts.
Wed. 30.--I began visiting the society from house to house,
taking them from west to east. This will undoubtedly be
an heavy cross, no way pleasing to flesh and blood. But I
already saw how unspeakably useful it will be to many souls.
Mon. OcToBER 5.--I left Bristol, and going round by
Shaftesbury, Salisbury, Winchester, and Portsmouth, on
Saturday, 10, reached London.
Mon. 12.--I began my little tour through Northampton
shire. Wednesday, 14. A book was given me to write on,
“The works of Mr. Thomson,” of whose poetical abilities
I had always had a very low opinion: But, looking into one
of his tragedies, “Edward and Eleonora,” I was agreeably
surprised. The sentiments are just and noble; the diction
strong, smooth, and elegant; and the plot conducted with the
utmost art, and wrought off in a most surprising manner. It
is quite his masterpiece, and I really think might vic with
any modern performance of the kind.
Fri. 16.--I went round to Bedford. I was sorry to hear
from Alderman Parker, that his son-in-law, who succeeded him
in the Mayoralty, had broke through all the regulations which
he had made, tolerating all the tippling, sabbath-breaking, &c.,
which Mr. P. had totally suppressed ! Thus showing to all
the world, that he was not “under the law” either of God or
man |
Mon. 19.--I began my tour through Oxfordshire. Tues
day, 20. In the evening I preached at Witney, to a crowded
congregation, and, at present, one of the liveliest in the
kingdom. Afterwards I met the society, much alive to God,
and growing both in grace and number.
Wed. 21.--I conversed freely with some of the most amiable
Christians I know. In the morning I met the select society,
one-and-twenty in number, all, (it seemed,) or all but one,
rejoicing in the pure love of God. It is no wonder, if the
influence of these should extend to the whole society, or
even the whole town.
Thur. 22.--I found another society at High-Wycomb, almost
as earnest as that at Witney. A large congregation was presentat
five in the morning, many of whom were athirst forfull salvation.
Oct. 1772.] JOURNAL. 481
I talked with twelve of them, who seemed to have experienced
it. This is genuine Christianity | Friday, 23. I preached at
Chesham, and on Saturday returned to London.
Mon. 26.--At twelve I set out in the stage coach, and in
the evening came to Norwich. Tuesday, 27. Finding abun
dance of people were out of work, and, consequently, in the
utmost want, (such a general decay of trade having hardly
been known in the memory of man,) I enforced, in the
evening, “Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteous
ness; and all these things shall be added unto you.” For
many years I have not seen so large a congregation here, in
the mornings as well as evenings. One reason of which may
be this: Thousands of people, who, when they had fulness of
bread, never considered whether they had any souls or not,
now they are in want begin to think of God. Thursday, 29.
I took an exact account of the society, considerably increased
within this year. And there is reason to believe that many of
the members are now a little established, and will no longer
be driven to and fro, as reeds shaken with the wind. Friday,
30. I went to Loddon, ten miles from Norwich, where there
has been preaching for a year or two. The preaching-house,
at one, was thoroughly filled with serious and attentive
hearers. So was the House at Norwich in the evening.
From all these blossoms, will there not be some fruit?
Sat. 31.--A young man of good sense, and an unblamable
character, gave me a strange account of what (he said) had
happened to himself, and three other persons in the same
house. As I knew they all feared God, I thought the matter
deserved a farther examination. So in the afternoon I
talked largely with them all. The sum of their account was
this:--
“Near two years ago, Martin S and William Jsaw, in a dream, two or three times repeated to each of them,
a person who told them there was a large treasure hid in such
a spot, three miles from Norwich, consisting of money and
plate, buried in a chest, between six and eight feet deep. They
did not much regard this, till each of them, when they were
broad awake, saw an elderly man and woman standing by their
bedside, who told them the same thing, and bade them go
and dig it up, between eight and twelve at night. Soon after,
they went; but, being afraid, took a third man with them.
They began digging at eight, and after they had dug six feet,
saw the top of a coffer, or chest. But presently it sunk down
into the earth; and there appeared over the place a large
globe of bright fire, which, after some time, rose higher and
higher, till it was quite out of sight. Not long after, the man
and woman appeared again, and said, ‘You spoiled all by
bringing that man with you.’ From this time, both they
and Sarah and Mary J , who live in the same house with
them, have heard, several times in a week, delightful music,
for a quarter of an hour at a time. They often hear it before
those persons appear; often when they do not appear.”
They asked me whether they were good or bad spirits; but I
could not resolve them.
Sun. Nov EMBER 1.--I administered the Lord’s Supper, as
usual, to the society; and had, at least, fifty more communi
cants than this time last year. In the evening many hundreds
went away, not being able to squeeze into the Room. For
those that were within, it was a blessed season: God watered
them with the dew of heaven; and so likewise at five in the
morning. Even to part in this manner is sweet. But how
much sweeter will it be to meet before the throne !
Mon. 2.--No coach setting out hence to-day, I was obliged
to take chaises to Bury. I preached to a little cold com
pany, on the thirteenth chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians. This love is the very thing they want; but
they did not like to be told so. But I could not help that:
I must declare just what I find in the Book.
Tues. 3.--I went on to Colchester. The congregation in
the evening was little smaller than that at Norwich. The
next evening I took an exact account of the society, a little
increased since last November. But most of them were hard
beset with poverty. So indeed they were ever since I knew
them; but they are now in greater want than ever, through
scarcity of business. Few of our societies are rich; but I
know none in the kingdom so deplorably poor as this.
Saturday, 7. I returned in the coach, with very sensible and
agreeable company, to London.
Sun. 8.--In discoursing on Psalm xv. 1, I was led to
speak more strongly and explicitly than I had done for a
long time before, on the universal love of God. Perhaps in
times past, from an earnest desire of living peaceably with all
men, we have not declared, in this respect, the whole counsel
of God. But since Mr. Hill and his allies have cut us off
TNov. 1772.] JOURNAL, 483
from this hope, and proclaimed an inexpiable war, we see it is
our calling to go straight forward, declaring to all mankind
that Christ tasted death for all, to cleanse them from all sin.
Mon. 9.--I began to expound (chiefly in the mornings,
as I did some years ago) that compendium of all the Holy
Scriptures, the first Epistle of St. John.
Fri. 13.--I went to Barnet, and found a large congre
gation, though it was a rainy and dark evening. Saturday,
14. I saw, for the first time, the chapel at Snowsfields full:
A presage, I hope, of a greater work there than has been
since the deadly breach was made.
Tues. 17.--One was relating a remarkable story, which I
thought worthy to be remembered. ‘Two years ago, a gentle
man of large fortune in Kent dreamed that he was walking
through the church-yard, and saw a new monument with the
following inscription:
#ert Iits the 33 obp
w Ho DEPARTED THIS LIFE ON SEPTEMBER -. 1772; AGED -.
He told his friends in the morning, and was much affected:
But the impression soon wore off. But on that day he did
depart; and a stone was erected with that very inscription.
A gentlewoman present added a relation equally surprising,
which she received from the person’s own mouth:--
* Mrs. B , when about fourteen years of age, being at
a boarding-school, a mile or two from her father's, dreamed
she was on the top of the church-steeple, when a man came
up, and threw her down to the roof of the church. Yet she
seemed not much hurt, till he came to her again, and threw
her to the bottom. She thought she looked hard at him,
and said, ‘Now you have hurt me sadly, but I shall hurt you
worse;’ and waked. A week after, she was to go to her
father's. She set out early in the morning. At the entrance
of a little wood, she stopped, and doubted whether she
should not go round, instead of through it. But, knowing
no reason, she went straight through till she came to the other
side. Just as she was going over the style, a man pulled
her back by the hair. She immediately knew it was the
same man whom she had seen in her dream. She fell on her
knees, and begged him, ‘For God’s sake, do not hurt me any
more.’ He put his hands round her neck, and squeezed her
so, that she instantly lost her senses. He then stripped her,
carried her a little way, and threw her into a ditch.
“Meantime, her father's servant coming to the school, and
hearing she was gone without him, walked back. Coming to
the style, he heard several groans, and looking about, saw
many drops of blood. He traced them to the ditch, whence
the groans came. He lifted her up, not knowing her at all,
as her face was covered with blood, carried her to a neigh
bouring house, and, running to the village, quickly brought a
Surgeon. She was just alive; but her throat was much hurt,
so that she could not speak at all.
“Just then a young man of the village was missing. Search
being made, he was apprehended in an alehouse two miles off.
He had all her clothes with him in a bag, which, he said, he
found. It was three months before she was able to go
abroad. He was arraigned at the Assizes. She knew him
perfectly, and swore to the man. He was condemned, and
soon after executed.”
Mon. 23.--I opened the new House at Dorking, and was
much comforted both this and the following evening. In
returning to London, I read over Belisarius. The historical
part is both affecting and instructive. But his tedious detail
of the duties of a King might very well be spared.
Wed. DECEMBER 2.--I preached at the new preaching
house, in the parish of Bromley. In speaking severally to
the members of the society, I was surprised at the openness
and artlessness of the people. Such I should never have
expected to find within ten miles of London.
Mon. 7.--I went to Canterbury, and on Tuesday to Dover.
The raw, pert young men that lately came hither, (vulgarly,
though very improperly, called students,) though they have left
no stone unturned, have not been able to tear away one single
member from our society. I preached here two evenings and
two mornings, to a large and much affected congregation.
Thur. 10.--I preached at Margate about one, and at
Canterbury in the evening. Friday, 11. Passing through
Sittingbourne, I found a congregation ready; so I gave them
a short discourse, and went on to Chatham.
In this journey I read over Sir John Dalrymple’s “Memoirs
of the Revolution.” He appears to be a man of strong under
Dec. 1772.] JOURNAL, 485
standing; and the book is wrote with great accuracy of
language, (allowing for a few Scotticisms,) and intermixed
with very sensible reflections. But I observe, 1. He believes
just as much of the Bible as David Hume did. Hence he
perpetually ascribes to enthusiasm whatever good men did
from a strong conviction of duty. 2. He cordially believes
that idle tale which King James published, concerning Father
Huddleston’s giving King Charles extreme unction. My
eldest brother asked Lady Oglethorpe concerning this. “Sir,”
said she, “I never left the room from the moment the King
was taken ill till the breath went out of his body; and I aver,
that neither Father Huddleston nor any Priest came into the
room till his death.” 3. He much labours to excuse that
monster of cruelty, Graham, of Claverhouse, afterwards, as
a reward for his execrable villanies, created Lord Dundee.
Such wanton barbarities were scarce ever heard of, as he prac
tised toward men, women, and children. Sir John himself
says enough, in telling us his behaviour to his own troops.
“He had but one punishment for all faults,--death : And
for a very moderate fault he would ride up to a young gentle
man, and, without any trial or ceremony, shoot him through
the head.” 4. He is not rightly informed concerning the
manner of his death. I learned in Scotland, that the current
tradition is this:--At the battle of Gallycrankie, being armed
in steel from head to foot, he was brandishing his sword over
his head, and swearing a broad oath, that before the sun went
down, he would not leave an Englishman alive. Just then a
musket-ball struck him under the arm, at the joints of his
armour. Is it enthusiasm to say, Thus the hand of God
rewarded him according to his works?
Mon. 14.--I read Prayers and preached to a crowded
congregation at Gravesend. The stream here spreads wide,
but it is not deep. Many are drawn, but none converted,
or even awakened. Such is the general method of God’s
providence: Where all approve, few profit.
Thur. 17.--In my way to Luton I read Mr. Hutcheson's
“Essay on the Passions.” He is a beautiful writer; but
his scheme cannot stand, unless the Bible falls. I know both
from Scripture, reason, and experience, that his picture of
man is not drawn from the life. It is not true, that no man
is capable of malice, or delight in giving pain; much less,
that every man is virtuous, and remains so as long as he
lives; nor does the Scripture allow that any action is good,
which is done without any design to please God.
Fri. 18.--I preached at Hertford. Last year there was a
fair prospect there. But the servants of God quarrelled
among themselves, till they destroyed the whole work. So
that not only the society is no more, but even the preaching
is discontinued. And hence those who had no religion
before are now more hardened than ever. A more stupid and
senseless mob I never saw, than that which flocked together
in the evening. Yet they softened by degrees, so that at
last all were quiet, and, as it were, attentive.
Mon. 21.--I visited the sick in various parts of the town,
but was surprised that they were so few. I hardly remember
so healthy a winter in London. So wisely does God order
all things that the poor may not utterly be destroyed by
hunger and sickness together.
Sun. 27.--I dined with one who, in the midst of plenty, is
completely miserable, through “the spirit of bondage,” and,
in particular, through the fear of death. This came upon
him not by any outward means, but the immediate touch
of God’s Spirit. It will be well if he does not shake it off
till he receives “the Spirit of adoption.”
Thur. 31.--Being greatly embarrassed by the necessities
of the poor, we spread all our wants before God in solemn
prayer; believing that he would sooner “make windows in
heaven” than suffer his truth to fail.
Fri. JANUARY 1, 1773.--We (as usual) solemnly renewed
our covenant with God. Monday, 4. I began revising my
letters and papers. One of them was wrote above an hundred
and fifty years ago, (in 1619,) I suppose by my grandfather’s
father, to her he was to marry in a few days. Several were
wrote by my brothers and me when at school, many while we
were at the University; abundantly testifying (if it be worth
knowing) what was our aim from our youth up.
Thur. 7.--I called where a child was dying of the small
pox, and rescued her from death and the Doctors, who were
giving her saffron, &c., to drive them out ! Can any one be
so ignorant still?
We observed Friday, the 8th, as a day of fasting and prayer,
on account of the general want of trade and scarcity of pro
visions. The next week I made an end of revising my letters;
and from those I had both wrote and received, I could not but
Feb. 1773.] JOURNAL, 487
make one remark,-that for above these forty years, of all the
friends who were once the most closely united, and afterwards
separated from me, every one had separated himself! He left
me, not I him. And from both mine and their own letters,
the steps whereby they did this are clear and undeniable.
Mon. 18.--In my scraps of time this week, I read over
“An Account of the European Settlements in America.”
But some part of it I cannot receive; I mean, touching the
manners of the native Americans: If it be true, that “they
all nearly resemble each other,” then, from the knowledge
I have of not a few American nations, I must judge a great
part of that account to be pure, absolute, romance; and I
suspect it to have been transcribed from some papers which I
myself read before I embarked for America.
Thur. 28.--I buried the remains of poor E.T., of whom,
ever since she died, her husband speaks as a most excellent
woman, and a most affectionate wife I have known many
such instances: Many couples, who while they lived together
spoke of each other as mere sinners; but as soon as either
was dead, the survivor spake of the deceased as the best
creature in the world.
Tues. FEBRUARY 2.--Captain Webb preached at the
Foundery. I admire the wisdom of God, in still raising up
various Preachers, according to the various tastes of men. The
Captain is all life and fire: Therefore, although he is not deep
or regular, yet many who would not hear a better Preacher
flock together to hear him. And many are convinced under
his preaching; some justified; a few built up in love.
Thur. 4.--I had much conversation with T. M. He said,
his printing that wretched book against me, was owing to the
pressing instances of Mr. Wh. and Lady H. I cannot tell
how to believe it; but if it was, they might have been better
employed.
On Monday, 15, and the following days, I took a little
journey into Surrey. On the road I read Bonavici's history
of the late war in Italy. I think the late revolution at
Genoa, which he recites at large, is altogether as strange as
that of Massaniello at Naples. That an unarmed rabble,
without any head, should drive a disciplined army, under an
experienced General, who were in possession of the arms, the
forts, and the whole city, not only out of the city and forts,
but out of the whole territory of Genoa, is a plain proof that
God rules in all the kingdoms of the earth, and executes his
will by whomsoever it pleaseth him.
Wed. 24.--A very remarkable paragraph was published in
one of the Edinburgh Papers:
“We learn from the Rosses, in the county of Donegal, in
Ireland, that a Danish man-of-war, called the North Crown,
commanded by the Baron D'Ulfeld, arrived off those islands,
from a voyage of discovery towards the Pole. They sailed
from Bornholme, in Norway, the 1st of June, 1769, with stores
for eighteen months, and some able astronomers, landscape
painters, and every apparatus suitable to the design; and
steering N. by E. half E., for thirty-seven days, with a fair
wind and open sea, discovered a large rocky island, which
having doubled, they proceeded W. N. W., till the 17th of
September, when they found themselves in a strong current,
between two high lands, seemingly about ten leagues distant,
which carried them at a prodigious rate for three days, when,
to their great joy, they saw the main land of America, that
lies between the most westerly part of the settlements on
Hudson’s River and California. Here they anchored, in a
fine cove, and found abundance of wild deer and buffaloes,
with which they victualled; and sailing southward, in three
months got into the Pacific Ocean, and returned by the
Straits of Le Maine and the West India Islands. They have
brought many curiosities, particularly a prodigious bird, called
a contor, or contose, above six feet in height, of the eagle kind,
whose wings, expanded, measure twenty-two feet four inches.
After bartering some skins with the country people, for meal,
rum, and other necessaries, they sailed for Bremen, to wait the
thaw, previous to their return to Copenhagen.
“February 24, 1773.”
If this account is true, one would hope not only the King
of Denmark will avail himself of so important a discovery.
Wed. MARCH 3.--I was invited to see Mr. Cox's celebrated
museum. I cannot say, my expectation was disappointed; for
I expected nothing, and I found nothing but a heap of pretty,
glittering trifles, prepared at an immense expense: For what
end? To please the fancy of fine ladies and pretty gentlemen.
Sun, 7.-In the evening I set out for Bristol, and after
spending a few days there, on Monday, 15, went to Stroud,
and on Tuesday, 16, to Worcester. Here I inquired
concerning the “Intelligence sent Mr. Hill from Worcester,”
April, 1773.] JOURNAL, 489
(as he says in his warm book,) “ of the shocking behaviour
of some that professed to be perfect.” It was supposed, that
intelligence came from Mr. Skinner, a dear lover of me and
all connected with me. The truth is, one of the society,
after having left it, behaved extremely ill; but none who
professed to love God with all their heart have done any
thing contrary to that profession.
I came to Liverpool on Saturday, 20. Monday, 22. The
Captain was in haste to get my chaise on board. About
eleven we went on board ourselves: And before one, we ran
on a sandbank. So, the ship being fast, we went ashore again.
Tuesday, 23. We embarked again on board the Freemason,
with six other cabin passengers, four gentlemen, and two
gentlewomen, one of whom was daily afraid of falling in
labour. This gave me several opportunities of talking closely
and of praying with her and her companion. We did not come
abreast of Holyhead till Thursday morning. We had then
a strong gale, and a rolling sea. Most of the passengers
were sick enough, but it did not affect me at all. In the
evening the gentlemen desired I would pray with them; so
we concluded the day in a solemn and comfortable manner.
Fri. 26.--We landed at Dunleary, and hired a coach to
Dublin. Saturday, 27. I buried the remains of Richard
Walsh. For several months, he had been quite disordered;
but for some time before his death, his senses returned, and
he died rejoicing and praising God.
On Monday and Tuesday I examined the society, a little
lessened, but now well united together. I was a little sur
prised to find the Commissioners of the Customs would not
permit my chaise to be landed, because, they said, the
Captain of a packet-boat had no right to bring over goods.
Poor pretence However, I was more obliged to them than
I then knew; for had it come on shore, it would have been
utterly spoiled.
Mon. APRIL 5.--Having hired such a chaise as I could, I
drove to Edinderry. Tuesday, 6. I went on to Tyrrel's Pass.
Thursday, 8. I preached in the Court-House at Molingar in
the morning, and in that at Longford in the evening, and
again at eight in the morning, (being Good-Friday,) and
then went on to Athlone.
I believe all the Officers, with a whole army of soldiers, were
present in the evening: So were most of them the next. I
would fain have preached abroad on Easter-Day, but the rain
would not permit. However, the whole congregation in the
House behaved with so remarkable a seriousness, that it was
good to be there; and I could not be sorry, that we were
driven into it.
Mon. 12.--I preached at Ballinasloe and Aghrim. Tues
day, 13. As I went into Eyre-Court, the street was full of
people, who gave us a loud huzza when we passed through the
market-place. I preached in the open air, to a multitude
of people, all civil, and most of them, serious. A great
awakening has been in this town lately; and many of the
most notorious and profligate sinners are entirely changed,
and are happy witnesses of the gospel salvation.
I preached at Birr in the evening; Wednesday, 14, at
Ferbatin and Coolylough; Thursday, 15, in the church at
Clare, one of the neatest I have seen in the kingdom; in the
evening I preached at Tullamore. I believe all the troopers
were present; none of whom was more affected than one
who had been a sinner far above his fellows. He was present
again at five in the morning, and seemed fully resolved to
forsake all sin.
Fri. 16.--In the evening, and at ten on Saturday, I
preached at Portarlington. On Saturday evening at Mount
Mellick, and on Sunday, 18, at nine, and again at twelve, to
an artless, earnest, serious people. In the afternoon I went
on to Montrath. The rain constrained me to preach in the
House; and God was present, both to wound and to heal.
Mon. 19.--In the evening I preached in the new House at
Kilkenny, to a numerous congregation, almost as genteel and
full as unawakened as that at Portarlington. The next
evening it was considerably larger, and many seemed to be
deeply affected. Even at this fountain-head of wickedness, I
trust, God will always have a seed to serve him.
Wed. 21.--Some applied to the Quakers at Enniscorthy,
for the use of their meeting-house. They refused: So I
stood at Hugh M'Laughlin’s door, and both those within and
without could hear. I was in doubt which way to take from
hence, one of my chaise-horses being much tired; till a gentle
man of Ballyrane, near Wexford, told me, if I would preach
at his house the next evening, I 2 would meet me on the road
with a fresh horse. So I complied, though it was some miles
out of the way. Accordingly, he met us on Thursday, 22,
April, 1773.] JOURNAL• 491
six or seven miles from Enniscorthy. But we found his mare
would not draw at all: So we were forced to go on as we
could. I preached in the evening at Ballyrane, to a deeply
serious congregation. Early in the morning we set out, and,
at two in the afternoon, came to Ballibac-Ferry.
A troop of sailors ran down to the shore, to see the chaise
put into the boat. I was walking at a small distance, when I
heard them cry out, “Avast ! Avast ! The coach is overset
into the river.” I thought, “However, it is well my bags
are on shore; so my papers are not spoiled.” In less than an
hour they fished up the chaise, and got it safe into the boat.
As it would not hold us all, I got in myself, leaving the
horses to come after. At half-hour after three I came to
Passage. Finding no post-chaise could be had, and having
no time to spare, I walked on (six or seven miles) to Water
ford, and began preaching without delay, on, “My yoke is
easy, and my burden is light.”
Sat. 24.--I had much satisfaction, both morning and
evening, in the number and seriousness of the congregation.
Sunday, 25. Word being brought me that the Mayor was
willing I should preach in the Bowling-Green, I went thither
in the evening. An huge multitude was quickly gathered
together. I preached on, “I saw the dead, small and great,
stand before God.” Some attempted to disturb, but without
success; the bulk of the congregation being deeply attentive.
But as I was drawing to a conclusion, some of the Papists
set on their work in earnest. They knocked down John
Christian, with two or three more, who endeavoured to quiet
them; and then began to roar like the waves of the sea: But
hitherto could they come, and no farther. Some gentlemen,
who stood near me, rushed into the midst of them; and, after
bestowing some heavy blows, seized the ringleader, and
delivered him to the Constable; and one of them undertook
to conduct me home. So few received any hurt, but the
rioters themselves; which, I trust, will make them more
peaceable for the time to come.
AMon, 26.--I went on to Cloheen; Tuesday, to Cork;
Wednesday, to Bandon. The wind being boisterous, I
preached in the House, well filled with serious hearers.
Even the fashionable ones, who were not a few, were uncom
monly attentive. So they were the next evening. Such
congregations had not been seen in Bandon for twenty years;
and the society was near doubled within a twelvemonth. So
had God blessed the labours of William Collins!--Another
proof that, at present, a prophet is not without honour, even
in his own country.
Fri. 30.--We had a solemn watch-night at Cork. I believe
the confidence of many was shaken, while I was enforcing,
“Though I had all faith, so as to remove mountains, and
have not love, I am nothing.” An hard saying ! but yet
absolutely necessary to be insisted on, particularly among the
people called Methodists. Otherwise, how many of them will
build on the sand, on an unloving, unholy faith !
Tues. MAY 4.--I left Cork with much satisfaction, having
seen the fruit of my labour. In the afternoon we had a
quick succession of piercing wind, rain, hail, and snow; and
in a short time after, loud thunder, with a few flashes of
lightning. We lodged at Charleville; and on Wednesday, 5,
after an easy ride, dined at Limerick.
Here I found, as in time past, a settled, serious people, but
in danger of sinking into formality. Thursday, 6. I hired
a post-chaise for Balligarane, the man promising to go two
miles and a half an hour: But he could not perform it. In
about five hours he could not drive quite twelve miles. I
then took horse, and, after riding two miles, came just at
the time I had appointed. In the evening I preached at
Newmarket. Papists and Protestants flocked together from
every side; and, for the time, they appeared to be greatly
affected: But who will endure to the end?
Fri. 7.--I returned to Limerick, but could not preach
abroad, because of the severe weather. Monday, 10. After
the morning preaching, I met the select society. All of these
once experienced salvation from sin: Some enjoy it still; but
the greater part are, more or less, shorn of their strength;
yet not without hope of recovering it.
Tues. 11.--The north wind was so high and sharp, that it
was thought best I should preach within. But, had I known
what a congregation was assembled in the barracks, I should
have preached there at all events. I am afraid Satan made
us consult our own ease more than the glory of God.
Wed. 12.--I took my leave of this affectionate people, and
in the evening preached at Clare. What a contrast between
Clare and Limerick l--A little ruinous town; no inn that
could afford us either meat, or drink, or comfortable lodging;
May, 1773.] JOURNAL. 493
no society, and next to no congregation, till the soldiers
came. After preaching, I spent an agreeable hour with the
Commanding Officer; and, having procured a tolerable
lodging in the barracks, slept in peace.
Thur. 13.--We went on, through a most dreary country, to
Galway; where, at the late survey, there were twenty thousand
Papists, and five hundred Protestants. But which of them.
are Christians, have the mind that was in Christ, and walk
as he walked? And without this, how little does it avail,
whether they are called Protestants or Papists' At six I
preached in the Court-House, to a large congregation, who all
behaved well. Friday, 14. In the evening I preached at
Ballinrobe; and on Saturday went on to Castlebar. Enter
ing the town, I was struck with the sight of the Charter
School;--no gate to the court-yard, a large chasm in the wall,
heaps of rubbish before the house-door, broken windows in
abundance; the whole a picture of slothfulness, nastiness,
and desolation | I did not dream there were any inhabitants,
till, the next day, I saw about forty boys and girls walking
from church. As I was just behind them, I could not but
observe, 1. That there was neither Master nor Mistress, though,
it seems, they were both well: 2. That both boys and girls
were completely dirty: 3. That none of them seemed to have
any garters on, their stockings hanging about their heels:
4. That in the heels, even of many of the girls’ stockings, were
holes larger than a crown-piece. I gave a plain account of
these things to the Trustees of the Charter-School in Dublin:
Whether they are altered or no, I cannot tell.
Sun. 16.--I preached in the Grand-Jury room, morning
and evening, to a lovely congregation, whose hearts seemed to
be as melting wax. Monday, 17. I spent a comfortable
afternoon with the amiable family at Rehins. I know not
that I could bear many such days: Strong cordials must not
be taken too often. Tuesday, 18. I went on to Tubber
carragh, and on Wednesday morning to Sligo. Here I
expected little comfort, as having little expectation of doing
any good; and the less, as some strollers were acting a play
over the market-house where I was to preach. At seven I
began in our own Room. Many of the soldiers, with some
Officers, were present; and the whole congregation, rich and
poor, were so remarkably serious, that I had a faint hope we
shall see some fruit, even in cold, barren Sligo.
Thur. 20.--We had a large congregation of soldiers, as
well as townsmen, at five in the morning. In the evening I
preached in the market-house to such a congregation as has
not been seen here for many years. Surely God is giving yet
another call to the poor, stupid sinners of Sligo.
Fri. 21.--I went on to Manorhamilton, and preached to a
large and serious congregation. Saturday, 22. In our way
to Swadlingbar, the hinder axle-tree of the chaise broke in
two. I borrowed an horse, and rode on till we overtook one
of our friends who was a coachmaker. By his help the
damage was repaired, and things made, at least, as good as
they were before.
In the evening we had a large congregation of (mostly)
experienced Christians, and a larger at eight in the morning
on Sunday; but the grand concourse was in the evening;
when the hearts of the people were as wax melting before the
fire, and I trust many received the stamp of love.
Mon. 24.--About noon I preached to just such another
congregation at Tonnylommon. Afterwards I talked with
four men and eight women, who believe they are saved from
sin. Their words were in wisdom as well as in power: I
think none who heard them could doubt of their testimony.
One of my horses having a shoe loose, I borrowed Mr.
Watson’s horse, and left him with the chaise. When we
came near Enniskillen, I desired two only to ride with me,
and the rest of our friends to keep at a distance. Some masons
were at work on the first bridge, who gave us some coarse
words. We had abundance more as we rode through the
town; but many soldiers being in the street, and taking know
ledge of me in a respectful manner, the mob shrunk back. An
hour after, Mr. Watson came in the chaise. Before he came
to the bridge, many ran together, and began to throw what
ever came next to hand. The bridge itself they had blocked
up with large stones, so that a carriage could not pass; but an
old man cried out, “Is this the way you use strangers?”
and rolled away the stones. The mob quickly rewarded him
by plastering him over with mortar from head to foot. They
then fell upon the carriage, which they cut with stones in
several places, and well nigh covered with dirt and mortar.
From one end of the town to the other, the stones flew thick
about the coachman’s head. Some of them were two or three
pounds’ weight, which they threw with all their might. If
May, 1773.] JOURNAL. 495
but one of them had struck him, it would have effectually
prevented him from driving any farther; and then, doubtless,
they would have given an account of the chaise and horses.
I preached at Sydore in the evening and morning, and then
set out for Roosky. The road lay not far from Enniskillen.
When we came pretty near the town, both men and women
saluted us, first with bad words, and then with dirt and stones.
My horses soon left them behind; but not till they had broke
one of the windows, the glass of which came pouring in upon
me; but did me no further hurt.
About an hour after, John Smith came to Enniskillen.
The masons on the bridge preparing for battle, he was afraid
his horse would leap with him into the river; and therefore
chose to alight. Immediately they poured in upon him a
whole shower of dirt and stones. However, he made his way
through the town, though pretty much daubed and bruised.
At Roosky, Mr. Macburney, one of our Preachers, gave
me the following account:--On Thursday, March 4, he went
to Mr. Perry’s, a quarter of a mile from Achalun, a village
six or seven miles from Enniskillen. In the evening he was
singing an hymn, when a large mob beset the house. Six
of these rushed in, armed with clubs, and immediately fell
upon the people; but many of them joining together thrust
them out, and shut and fastened the door. On this they
broke every pane of glass in the windows, and threw in a large
quantity of stones. They then broke into the house, through
a weak part of the wall, and hauling out both men and women,
beat them without mercy. Soon after, they dragged out Mr.
Macburney, whom M- N instantly knocked down.
They continued beating him on the head and breast, while
he lay senseless on the ground. Yet, after a while, coming
a little to himself, he got up; but not being quite sensible,
staggered, and fell again. Then one of them set his foot
upon his face, swearing he would tread the Holy Ghost out
of him. Another ran his stick into his mouth. As soon as
he could speak, he said, “May God forgive you! I do.”
They then set him on his horse, and M N got up
behind, and forced him to gallop down the rocky mountain to
the town. There they kept him, till a gentleman took him
out of their hands, and entertained and lodged him in the
most hospitable manner. But his bruises, on the head and
breast in particular, would not suffer him to sleep; and ever
496 REv. J. wesDEY’s [May, 1773.
since he has felt such inward pain and weakness, that it is a
wonder he is still alive.
One of those that was much abused was Mr. Mitchell, who
lives about a mile from the town. On Saturday the mob
came to his house, about eight in the evening, swearing they
would have his father's heart’s blood. They threw many
large stones at the windows, and broke a great hole in the
door. Through this hole, Mr. Mitchell, seeing no other
remedy, fired twice with small shot. At the second shot, they
ran away with all speed, no man looking behind him.
Mr. Perry and Mitchell applying to Mr. Irwin, of Green
Hill, he granted warrants for six of the rioters; and the next
week, for fifteen more; but the Constable would not take
them; and the next week, at the Assizes held in Enniskillen,
the Grand-Jury threw out all the bills! Therefore, it is to
these honourable gentlemen I am obliged for all the insults
and outrage I met with. But, meantime, where is liberty, civil
or religious? Does it exist in Achalun or Enniskillen?
Wed. 26.--We set out at half-hour past two, and reached
Omagh a little before eleven. Finding I could not reach
Ding-Bridge by two o'clock in the chaise, I rode forward with
all the speed I could; but the horse dropping a shoe, I was
so retarded that I did not reach the place till between three
and four. I found the Minister and the people waiting;
but the church would not near contain them; so I preached
near it to a mixed multitude of rich and poor, Churchmen,
Papists, and Presbyterians. I was a little weary and faint
when I came, the sun having shone exceeding hot; but the
number and behaviour of the congregation made me forget
my own weariness.
Having a good horse, I rode to the place where I was to
lodge (two miles off) in about an hour. After tea, they told
me another congregation was waiting; so I began preaching
without delay; and warned them of the madness which was
spreading among them, namely, leaving the church. Most of
them, I believe, will take the advice; I hope all that are of
our society. The family here put me in mind of that at
Rehins: They breathe the same spirit.
Thur. 27.--I went on to Londonderry. Friday, 28. I was
invited to see the Bishop’s palace, (a grand and beautiful struc
ture,) and his garden, newly laid, and exceeding pleasant. Here
I innocently gave some offence to the gardener, by mentioning
June, 1773.] JOURNAL. 497
the English of a Greek word. But he set us right, warmly
assuring us that the English name of the flower is not
Crane's bill, but Geranium !
Sat. 29.--We walked out to one of the pleasantest spots
which I have seen in the kingdom. It is a garden laid out
on the steep side of an hill; one shady walk of which, in
particular, commands all the vale and the hill beyond. The
owner finished his walks,--and died.
In the evening I preached to a serious, artless congregation,
at Fahun, seven miles west from Derry. On Whit-Sunday,
MAY 30, I dined at Mr. S.’s, a sensible, friendly man; where
were five Clergymen besides me; all of whom attended the
preaching every evening. One would have imagined, from
this friendliness of the Clergy, joined with the good will both
of the Bishop and Dean, the society would increase swiftly.
But, in fact, it does not increase at all; it stands just as it
was two years ago: So little does the favour of man advance
the work of God!
Mon. 31.--At noon I preached at Muff, a town five miles
north-east of Derry. In returning, the wind being in our
back, and the sun in our face, it was intensely hot. But what
signifies either pain or pleasure, that passes away like a
dream?
Tues. JUNE 1.--I preached at the New-Buildings, and
spent an hour with the society. I found them as lively as
ever, and more exactly regular than any society in these parts.
Wed. 2.--I took my leave of this pleasant city, and agree
able people. When we came to the foot of the mountain
beyond Dungevan, my horses did not choose to draw me any
farther; so I walked on seven or eight miles, and ordered
them to follow me to Cookstown.
Thur. 3.--At noon I preached to a large congregation on
the Green, at Castle-Caulfield, and in the evening near the
barracks at Charlemount. Friday, 4. We went on to
Armagh. The evening congregation in the avenue was very
large, and exceeding serious; rich and poor kneeling down
on the grass when I went to prayer.
Sat. 5.--I walked over the fine improvements which the
Primate has made near his lodge. The ground is hardly two
miles round; but it is laid out to the best advantage. Part is
garden, part meadow, part planted with shrubs or trees of
various kinds. The house is built of fine white stone, and is
fit for a nobleman. He intends to carry away a bog which
lies behind it, and have a large piece of water in its place.
He intends also to improve the town greatly, and to execute
many other grand designs; I doubt too many even for a
Primate of Ireland, that is above seventy years old !
JUNE 6.--(Being Trinity-Sunday.) At nine I explained
the great text of St. John to an exceeding large congregation.
We had at church an anthem, which I know not that I have
heard these fifty years, “Praise the Lord, O my soul;” and
sung in a manner that would not have disgraced any of our
English Cathedrals. The congregation in the evening was the
largest I have seen in Ulster; and I believe, for the present,
all were convinced that nothing will avail, without humble,
gentle, patient love.
On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I preached at
Hamilton’s Bahn, Clanmain, Legall, the Grange, and Cock
hill. Thursday, 10. I rode to Derry-Anvil; [where are]
some of the liveliest Christians I have seen in the king
dom. Eight of them I examined closely, who testified that
they had never lost the witness, nor felt any decay, since the
hour they were perfected in love.
On Friday and Saturday I preached at Portadown, Kill
mararty, Dawson’s Grove, and Tanderagee. Sunday, 13. I
preached at nine with great enlargement of heart. At half
hour past eleven the Church Service began. The Curate
read Prayers exceeding well, and the Rector preached with
uncommon earnestness. But what I most admired was,
1. The cleanness of the church, equal to any I have seen in
England. 2. The serious behaviour of the whole congre
gation. And, 3. The excellent singing by forty or fifty
voices, half men and half women. I have heard nothing like
it in any church since I came into the kingdom.
The Rector inviting me to dinner, I spent an agreeable
hour with him and his Curate. The congregation at six was
exceeding numerous, and exceeding serious. We concluded
the day with the societies, gathered from all parts: And
great was our rejoicing. Many were filled with consolation,
and many feeble hands were strengthened.
Mon. 14.--After preaching at Lurgan, I inquired of Mr.
Miller, whether he had any thoughts of perfecting his speaking
statue, which had so long lain by. He said he had altered his
d2sign; that he intended, if he had life and health, to make
June, 1773.] JOURNAL. 499
two, which would not only speak, but sing hymns alternately
with an articulate voice; that he had made a trial, and it
answered well. But he could not tell when he should finish
it, as he had much business of other kinds, and could only
give his leisure hours to this. How amazing is it that no
man of fortune enables him to give all his time to the work!
I preached in the evening at Lisburn. All the time I could
spare here was taken up by poor patients. I generally asked,
“What remedies have you used?” and was not a little
surprised. What has fashion to do with physic? Why, (in
Ireland, at least,) almost as much as with head-dress.
T'listers, for anything or nothing, were all the fashion when
I was in Ireland last. Now the grand fashionable medicine
for twenty diseases (who would imagine it?) is mercury
sublimate | Why is it not an halter, or a pistol? They
would cure a little more speedily.
Tues. 15.--I went to dreary Newtown. This place always
makes me pensive. Even in Ireland I hardly see anywhere
such heaps of ruins as here; and they are considerably
increased since I was here before. What a shadow is human
greatness!
The evening congregation in the new market-house
appeared deeply attentive, especially the backsliders; several
of whom determined to set out afresh.
When I came to Belfast, I learned the real cause of the late
insurrections in this neighbourhood. Lord Donegal, the pro
prietor of almost the whole country, came hither to give his
tenants new leases. But when they came, they found two
merchants of the town had taken their farms over their heads;
so that multitudes of them, with their wives and children, were
turned out to the wide world. It is no wonder that, as their
lives were now bitter to them, they should fly out as they did.
It is rather a wonder that they did not go much farther. And
if they had, who would have been most in fault? Those who
were without home, without money, without food for themselves
and families? Or those who drove them to this extremity?
In the evening I preached to a numerous congregation in
the new market-house, but trifling enough. Yet by degrees
they sunk into seriousness. The greater part of them came
again in the morning; and their behaviour was then
remarkably decent.
Thur. 17.--There was a lovely congregation at the Shire
Hall in Carrickfergus, very large and very serious. Nor was it
much smaller at five in the morning. I added several to the
society, and could not but hope that there was seed sown
here that will never be rooted up.
Fri. 18.--I went to Ballymena, and read a strange tract,
that professes to discover “the inmost recesses of Free
masonry;” said to be “translated from the French original,
lately published at Berlin.” I incline to think it is a genuine
account. Only if it be, I wonder the author is suffered to
live. If it be, what an amazing banter upon all mankind is
reemasonry ! And what a secret is it which so many
concur to keep ! From what motive? Through fear, -or
shame to own it?
In the evening the Minister offered me the use of the
church. I feared it would not contain the people, who ran
together so eagerly, that it was with difficulty I could get to
the door. But after we had stowed them close together,
almost all could get in. I dealt exceeding plainly with them,
and they had ears to hear.
Sat. 19.--I declared to a loving people at Ballinderry,
“the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.” Many of them
experienced this; and many felt their wants; several children
in particular. In the evening I preached at Lisburn, and on
the two following days. Monday, 21. I met a gentleman,
who looked hard, and asked me if I did not know him.
Indeed I did not, though I had been at his house some years
ago, in Londonderry. Mr. Sampson was then one of the
Ministers there, --a lively, sensible man; very fat, and of a
fresh, ruddy complexion. But he was now, after a long and
severe melancholy, so thin, pale, and wan, that I did not
recollect one feature of his face. I spent an hour with him
very agreeably. He did not show the least touch of wild
ness, but calm, rational seriousness; so that I could not but
believe, it is good for him that he has seen affliction.
Wed. 23.--I preached at Drumbanahur and Newry.
Thursday, 24. Some friends from Dublin met us at
Drogheda. In the evening we walkcd to see the place where
King William passed the Boyne. It was almost a desperate
attempt, considering the depth of the river, and the steep
ness of the banks; but God was on his side. Near the place
an handsome obelisk is erected, with an inscription, giving a
brief account of that memorable action.
July, 1773.] JOURNAL, 501
Fri. 25.--I went on to Dublin. I left three hundred and
seventy-eight members in the society, and found four hundred
and twelve, many of whom were truly alive to God. Satur
day, JULY 3. I sent to the Commanding Officer, to desire
leave to preach in the barracks; but he replied, he would
have no innovations. No: Whoredom, drunkenness, cursing
and swearing, for ever!
Mon. 5.--About eleven we crossed Dublin bar, and were
at Hoy-Lake the next afternoon. This was the first night I
ever lay awake in my life, though I was at ease in body and
mind. I believe few can say this: In seventy years I never
lost one night’s sleep!
In my passage I read Dr. Leland’s “History of Ireland:”
--A fine writer, but unreasonably partial. I can easily believe
that the Irish were originally Tartars or Scythians, though
calling at Spain in their way; but not that they were a jot
less barbarous than their descendants in Scotland; or that
ever they were a civilized nation, till they were civilized by
the English; much less, that Ireland was, in the seventh or
eighth century, the grand seat of learning; that it had many
famous Colleges, in one of which only, Armagh, there were
seven thousand students. All this, with St. Patrick’s
converting thirty thousand at one sermon, I rank with the
history of “Bel and the Dragon.”
I went, by moderate stages, from Liverpool to Madeley;
where I arrived on Friday, 9. The next morning we went to
see the effects of the late earthquake: Such it undoubtedly
was. On Monday, 27, at four in the morning, a rumbling
noise was heard, accompanied with sudden gusts of wind, and
wavings of the ground. Presently the earthquake followed,
which only shook the farmer's house, and removed it entire
about a yard; but carried the barn about fifteen yards, and
then swallowed it up in a vast chasm; tore the ground into
numberless chasms, large and small; in the large, threw up
mounts, fifteen or twenty feet high; carried an hedge, with
two oaks, above forty feet, and left them in their natural
position. It then moved under the bed of the river; which,
making more resistance, received a ruder shock, being
shattered in pieces, and heaved up about thirty feet from its
foundations. By throwing this, and many oaks, into its
channel, the Severn was quite stopped up, and constrained to
flow backward, till, with incredible fury, it wrought itself a
502 REv. J. west EY’s [July, 1773.
new channel. Such a scene of desolation I never saw. Will
none tremble when God thus terribly shakes the earth?
In the evening I preached under a spreading oak, in
Madeley-Wood; Sunday, 11, morning and afternoon, in the
church. In the evening I preached to the largest congre
gation of all, near the market-house, at Broseley. I came
back just by the famous well; but it burns no more. It
ceased from the time a coal-pit was sunk near it, which drew
off the sulphurous vapour.*.
Mon. 12.--I preached at Wolverhampton and Birmingham.
In my journey from Liverpool, I read Dr. Byrom's Poems.
He has all the wit and humour of Dr. Swift, together with
much more learning, a deep and strong understanding, and,
above all, a serious vein of piety. A few things in him I
particularly remarked: 1. The first is concerning the patron
of England; and I think there can be no reasonable doubt
of the truth of his conjecture, that Georgius is a mistake for
Gregorius; that the real patron of England is St. Gregory;
(who sent Austin, the Monk, to convert England;) and that
St. George (whom no one knows) came in by a mere blunder:
2. His criticisms on Homer and Horace seem to be well
grounded. Very probably the xvves, mentioned by Homer,
were not dogs, but attendants; and without doubt ovenas
means, not mules, but the outguards of the camp.
It seems, that ode in Horace ought to be read,
Sume, Maecenas, cyathos amici
Sospitis. Cantum et vigiles lucernas
Perfer in lucem.
In the Art of Poetry he would read,
Unumque prematur in annum.
Lib. 1. Ode 9. For Campus et area,
Read Cantus et aleae.
Lib. 3. Ode 29. For Tum me biremis praesidio scaphae aura.
feret:
Read Cum me-Aura ferat.
Lib. 3. Ode 23. Read Thure placaris, et horna.
Fruge Lares, avidasque Parcas. And
Lib. 1. Ode. 20. Read Vile potabo.
A few things in the second volume are taken from Jacob
Behmen; to whom I object, not only that he is obscure;
July, 1773.] JOURNAL. 503
(although even this is an inexcusable fault in a writer on
practical religion;) not only that his whole hypothesis is
unproved, wholly unsupported either by Scripture or reason;
but that the ingenious madman over and over contradicts
Christian experience, reason, Scripture, and himself.
But, setting these things aside, we have some of the finest
sentiments that ever appeared in the English tongue; some
of the noblest truths, expressed with the utmost energy of
language, and the strongest colours of poetry: So that, upon
the whole, I trust this publication will much advance the
cause of God, and of true religion.
Tues. 13.--I preached at Wednesbury; Wednesday, 14,
at Dudley and Birmingham. Thursday, 15. I went on to
Witney, and had the satisfaction to find that the work of God
was still increasing. In the evening I preached at the east
end of the town, to a numerous and attentive congregation.
In the morning I met the select society, full of faith and
love; although the greater part of them are young, some little
more than children. At six I preached at the west end of the
town, near Mr. Bolton’s door. After preaching, I had a
pleasant journey to Wheatley, and the next day to London.
In this journey I read over that strange book, “The Life
of Sextus Quintus;” an hog-driver at first, then a Monk, a
Priest, a Bishop, a Cardinal, a Pope. He was certainly as
great a genius, in his way, as any that ever lived. He did
great things, and designed far greater; but death prevented
the execution. And he had many excellent qualities; but was
full as far from being a Christian, as Henry VIII., or Oliver
Cromwell.
Wed. 21.--We had our Quarterly Meeting at London; at
which I was surprised to find, that our income does not yet
answer our expense. We were again near two hundred pounds
bad. My private account I find still worse. I have laboured
as much as many writers; and all my labour has gained me,
in seventy years, a debt of five or six hundred pounds.
Sunday, 25, was a day of strong consolation, particularly
at Spitalfields. At five I preached in Moorfields, to (it was
supposed) the largest congregation that ever assembled there.
But my voice was so strengthened, that those who were
farthest off could hear perfectly well. So the season for
field-preaching is not yet over. It cannot, while so many are
in their sins and in their blood.
Tues. AUGUST 3.--Our Conference began. I preached
mornings as well as evenings; and it was all one. I found
myself just as strong as if I had preached but once a day.
Sun. 8.--At night I set out in the machine, and on
Monday reached Bristol. In the way I looked over Mr.
’s Dissertations. I was surprised to find him a
thorough convert of Mr. Stonehouse's, both as to the pre
existence of souls, and the non-eternity of hell. But he is
far more merciful than Mr. Stonehouse. He allows it to last
(not five millions, but) only thirty thousand years |
It would be excusable, if these menders of the Bible
would offer their hypotheses modestly. But one cannot
excuse them when they not only obtrude their novel scheme
with the utmost confidence, but even ridicule that scriptural
one which always was, and is now, held by men of the
greatest learning and piety in the world. Hereby they
promote the cause of infidelity more effectually than either
Hume or Voltaire.
Thur. 12.--I set out for Cornwall; and the next day
we came to Collumpton. For five or six days, I think, the
weather has been as hot as it is in Georgia. After preach
ing, I went on to Exeter with Ralph Mather, then an
humble, scriptural Christian. Saturday, 14. I went on to
Plymouth-Dock, and in the evening preached in the Square.
Sunday, 15. As I could not sleep (an uncommon thing
with me) till near two in the morning, my companion was
afraid I should not be able to go through the labour of the
day; but I knew I did not go a warfare at my own cost.
At seven I preached in Mr. Kinsman’s preaching-house, on,
“Strive to enter in at the strait gate;” and I think many
received the truth in the love thereof. Between one and
two I preached in the Tabernacle at Plymouth; and in the
evening declared in the Square, to a multitude of people, the
nature of that love, without which all we say, know, believe,
do, and suffer, profits nothing.
Mon. 16.-In the evening I preached at St. Austle;
Tuesday, 17, in the Coinage-Hall at Truro; at six, in the
main street at Helstone. How changed is this town, since a
Methodist Preacher could not ride through it without hazard
of his life
Wed. 18.--I preached in the Town-Hall in Penzance. It
was soon filled from end to end; and it was filled with the
Sept. 1773.] JOURNAL. 505
power of God. One would have thought every soul must
have bowed down before Him. In the evening I preached
at St. Just; Friday, 20, in Penzance and Marazion; and
in the evening in the market-place at St. Ives, to the largest
congregation I have yet seen in Cornwall.
Sat. 21.--I preached in Illogan and at Redruth; Sunday,
22, in St. Agnes Church-town, at eight; about one at Red
ruth; and at five, in the amphitheatre at Gwennap. The
people both filled it, and covered the ground round about,
to a considerable distance. So that, supposing the space to
be four-score yards square, and to contain five persons in a
square yard, there must be above two-and-thirty thousand
people; the largest assembly I ever preached to. Yet I found,
upon inquiry, all could hear, even to the skirts of the congre
gation | Perhaps the first time that a man of seventy had
been heard by thirty thousand persons at once |
Hence I went by Cubert, Port-Isaac, Camelford, and
Launceston, to Tiverton. Saturday, 28. I returned to
Bristol.
Fri. SEPTEMBER 3.--I went over to Kingswood, and
inquired into the ground of many heavy charges, which had
been confidently advanced against the management there.
One article was true, and no more. And this fault is now
amended.
I waited a few days before I set down what has lately
occurred among the children here. From the time God
visited them last, several of them retained a measure of the
fear of God. But they grew colder and colder, till Ralph
Mather met them in the latter end of August. Several then
resolved to meet in class again, and appeared to have good
desires. On Saturday, September 4, he talked with three
of them, about four in the afternoon. These freely
confessed their besetting sins, and appeared to be greatly
humbled. At five all the children met in the school.
During an exhortation then given, first one, then two or three
were much affected. Afterwards two more were taken apart,
who were soon deeply distressed; and one of them, (James
Whitestone,) in less than half an hour, found a clear sense
of the love of God. Near seven, they came down [to] the
boys in the school; and Mr. Mather asked, “Which of you
will serve God?” They all seemed to be thunderstruck, and
ten or twelve fell down upon their knees. Mr. Mather
506 REv. J. wesDEY’s [Sept. 1773.
prayed, and then James Whitestone. Immediately one and
another cried out; which brought in the other boys, who
seemed struck more and more, till about thirty were kneel
ing and praying at once. Before half-hour past nine, ten of
them knew that they were accepted in the Beloved. Several
more were brought to the birth; and all the children, but
three or four, were affected more or less.
Sun. 5.--I examined sixteen of them who desired to
partake of the Lord’s Supper. Nine or ten had a clear
sense of the pardoning love of God. The others were fully
determined never to rest till they could witness the same
confession.
Eighteen of the children from that time met in three Bands,
besides twelve who met in trial Band. These were remark
able for their love to each other, as well as for steady
seriousness. They met every day; beside which, all the
children met in class.
Those who found peace were James Whitestone, Alex
ander Mather, Matthew Lowes, William Snowdon, John
Keil, Charles Farr, John Hamilton, Benjamin Harris, and
IEdward Keil.
Mon. 6.--After Mr. Mather had preached at Pensford, he
met the children there. Presently the spirit of contrition fell
upon them, and then the Spirit of grace and of supplication,
till the greater part of them were crying together for mercy,
with a loud and bitter cry: And all Miss Owen’s children,
but one, (two-and-twenty in number,) were exceedingly
comforted.
Fri. 10.--I went over to Kingswood, and inquired into the
present state of the children. I found part of them had
walked closely with God; part had not, and were in heaviness.
Hearing in the evening that they were got to prayer by them
selves in the school, I went down; but, not being willing to
disturb them, stood at the window. Two or three had gone
in first; then more and more, till above thirty were gathered
together. Such a sight I never saw before nor since. Three
or four stood and stared, as if affrighted. The rest were all
on their knees, pouring out their souls before God, in a
manner not easy to be described. Sometimes one, sometimes
more, prayed aloud; sometimes a cry went up from them
all; till five or six of them, who were in doubts before, saw
the clear light of God’s countenance.
Sept. 1773.] JOURNAL. 507
Sun. 12.--Four of Miss Owen’s children desired leave to
partake of the Lord's Supper. I talked with them severally,
and found they were all still rejoicing in the love of God.
And they confirmed the account, that there was only one of
their whole number who was unaffected on Monday: But all
the rest could then say with confidence, “Lord, thou knowest
that I love thee.” I suppose such a visitation of children
has not been known in England these hundred years. In so
marvellous a manner, “out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings” God has “perfected praise!”