

[Journal, 1760] JULY 1759, In the West Riding

[Journal, 1760] Tues. 10.-We took horse at half an hour past three, and rode over the huge mountains to Scarborough.[ For early Methodism in Scarborough see articles in Meth. Rec. Feb. 16, April 20, and June 8, 1905. See also below, April 19, 1764In 1760 Mr. George Cussons, of London, who figured so largely in the history of West Street, Hinde Street, and Great Queen Street, and who founded the Naval and Military Bible Society, joined the Scarborough society. Thomas Brown, Cussons, and William Hague were seized by the press-gang and taken on board a man-of-war lying off the shore. An unfavourable wind delayed the sailing of the ship and gave an opportunity for Brown, a treeman of Durham, to write General Lambton, M.P., who ordered their immediate release. Mr. Bland, a Quaker, further interposed against civilian persecution. Between 1761 and 1765 larger premises were obtained in Bennett's entry or Foster's yard, near the present markethall. Here William Alwood, appointed preacher, had to escape by getting out of the window. See Meth. Rec. Feb. 16, 1905; Lyth's Methodism in York, p. 96; and W.M. Mag. 1826, P594.] I began to preach near the main street at seven. The congregation was large, and some of them wild enough; but in a short time all were quiet and still, nor did I hear one unkind word when I had done.

[Journal, 1760] In the afternoon I rode to York, where I thought to rest a few days, being almost worn out; but it was judged quite necessary I should go to Hull, lest the little flock should be discouraged. So, on Friday the I3th, I set out early and reached Pocklington between eight and nine. The last time I

[Journal, 1760] was here they rang the bells, in order to drown my voice. But he who then paid the ringers is run away; so I had a quiet and serious audience. I had a far finer congregation at Hull; so, for once, the rich have the gospel preached!

[Journal, 1760] At night Charles Delamotte [Then living at Barrow, near Barton, Lincolnshire. See W.H.S. vol. ii. pp. 8890; iv. 10,11; vii. 20. The interview may have taken place at Mrs. Snowden's house (see above, p. 20). During fourteen years she furnished a house for Wesley and his preachers in Hull(W..d/l Mag. 1837, p. 889).] called upon me, and seemed to be the same loving, simple man still. I should not repent my journey to Hull, were it only for this short

[Journal, 1760] interview.

[Journal, 1760] Sat. 14.-I preached at eight in Mr. Hilton's yard, near the great street in Beverley; and was surprised to see so quiet and civil a congregation, where we expected nothing less. All the men were uncovered, and the whole audience was attentive from beginning to end; nor did one person give us a rude word while we rode from one end of the town to the other. This, with the large and earnest congregation at York in the evening, made me forget all my labor.[ In the new chapel in Peaseholme Green (Lyth's Methodism in York, p. 91).]

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 15.-I began reading to the society an account of the late work of God at Everton; but I could not get through. At first there were only silent tears on every side, but it was not long before several were unable to refrain from weeping aloud; and quickly a stout young man dropped down and roared as in the agonies of death. I did not attempt to read any farther, but began wrestling with God in prayer. We continued herein till near nine o'clock. What a day of Jubilee was this![ On July 15 he wrote to Miss C------

[Journal, 1760] (W.M. Mag. 1847, p. 766).]

[Journal, 1760] Tues. 17.-I left York, and, about noon, preached at Tadcaster. Distant thunder did not lessen the number, but increased the seriousness, of the congregation, who appeared entirely different from those I saw here two years ago.

[Journal, 1760] At seven in the evening I preached to an immense congregation at the foot of a high mountain near Otley.[ See also June 30, 1772, and May t, 2> 3>!774John Crowther was vicar of Otley from April 1739. The ' high mountain' would be Otley Chevin.]

[Journal, 1760] Wed. 18.-I rode on to Mr. Marshal's,[ Cf. Life oj Richard BurdsaU,

[Journal, 1760] PP'77, 178.] at Guiseley, the Capua of Yorkshire.[ In allusion to 'Capua Hanmbalem corrupit' ( W.H.S. vol. v. p. 48). ]

[Journal, 1760] Hic nemus, hic gelidi fontes, hic mollia prata.[ 'Here a grove, here cool springs, here smooth lawns.' Altered from Virgil, Eel. x. 42, 43. ' Hie gelidi fontes, hie mollia prata, Lycori, hie nemus' (imitated by Virgil from Theocritus). As on another occasion, when quoting from Virgil, Wesley so alters as to keep the prosody (.W.H.S. vol. v. p. 48).]

[Journal, 1760] It is well God is here, or who could bear it

[Journal, 1760] Hence we rode to Keighley, where is a loving, earnest, well-established people. Here many of our preachers met me, and many of our brethren; and God was with us in all our assemblies.

[Journal, 1760] Fri. 20.-We went on to Colne (formerly, I suppose, a Roman colony), situate on the top of a high round hill, at the edge of Pendle Forest. I preached at eleven in an open space not far from the main street, and I have seldom seen a more attentive or decently behaved congregation. How is the scene changed since the drunken mob of this town used to be a terror to all the country!

[Journal, 1760] We rode to Broad Clough in the afternoon, a lone house in the midst of the Lancashire mountains. The people came in from all quarters, and it was a season of great refreshment. Among the rest was Mr. Milner,[ Mr. Milner, vicar of Chipping.] who gave us an account of his late trials. I wonder the butcher (doctor, so called) to whom he was committed did not murder him; he took true pains so to do, but his chain did not reach so far.

[Journal, 1760] Sat. 21.-Mr. Grimshaw led us to Gaulksholme,[ See above, p. 212.] another lone house on the side of an enormous mountain. The congregation stood and sat, row above row, in the sylvan theatre. I believe nothing on the post-diluvian earth can be more pleasant than the road from hence, between huge steep mountains, clothed with wood to the top, and washed at the bottom by a clear, winding stream. At four I preached to a very large congregation at Heptonstall, and thence rode on to Haworth.

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 22.-At ten Mr. Milner read prayers, but the church would not near contain the congregation; so, after prayers, I stood on a scaffold close to the church, and the congregation in the churchyard. The communicants alone filled the church. In the afternoon the congregation was nearly doubled; and yet most of these were not curious hearers, but men fearing

[Journal, 1760] God.

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 23.-I preached, near Huddersfield, to the wildest congregation I have seen in Yorkshire; yet they were restrained by an unseen hand, and I believe some felt the sharpness of His word. I preached at Halifax in the evening; but the preachinghouse was like an oven.[ The room was only 42 ft. by 30 it.]

[Journal, 1760] Tues. 24.-The house was well filled at five. About seven in the evening I preached at Bradford, at the door of the house, as it could not contain one-half of the congregation.

[Journal, 1760] Wed. 25.-I talked with most of those whom Edward Hales [' A young man from Wakefield who had preached among the seceding party' (i.e. some of the society who had adopted Calvinistic tenets). See Stamp's Methodism in Bradford, pp. 39, 40, and Dickon's Kirkgate Chapel, Bradford, PP33. 34-] had torn from their brethren. Just as he was coming to widen the breach it pleased God to take him to Himself. The wanderers were now willing to return, and I received them again, I trust, for ever.

[Journal, 1760] Thur. 26.-I preached in Gildersome at noon, and at Morley in the evening. A flame suddenly broke out here, where it was least of all expected, and it spreads wider and wider. When God will work, who is able to stay His

[Journal, 1760] hand[ On Tuesday the zyth he preached at Batley Carr.]

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 29.-I preached about eight at Birstall. The congregation covered a great part of the field, and my voice was exceedingly strengthened, so that I believe all could hear. At one I enforced those solemn words on an immense multitude: 'This is life eternal, to know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent.'

[Journal, 1760] I shall easily be excused for adding here a farther account of the work of God in and near Everton [H. J. Foster's note on the authorship of this ' farther account' is convincing: ' The writer incidentally mentions his sex see p. 339, end of second paragraph, "Made me another man," or else we might have suspected Mrs. Blackwell once more, for, very curiously, this second reporter also finds it exceedingly difficult to rise early! He repeatedly bewails his infirmity. . . . The writer is John Walsh, a converted Deist, and a correspondent of Wesley. In the Arm. Mag. for 1780, p. 103, is *. letter from him to Wesley, dated June 21, 1758, and giving some interesting particulars of a visit he has paid to Bedford. Incidentally he tells Wesley that on the second of June he walked over with " Brother Tansley " from Bedford to Everton to see and hear Berridge. Near the end of the account we are examining the writer says: " The first time I saw Mr. Berridge was on June 2, 1758." Near the beginning also it will be noted that on July 9 he reports the remarkable case of Ann Thorn, her visions and trances. Berridge himself writes to Wesley on July 16, 1759, a week later: " I would not have you publish the account of A. T. Ann Thorn which Mr. Walsh has sent you."' This is fairly conclusive. {W.H.S. voL iv. pp. 22-4.) For John Walsh see ArmMag. 1781, pp. 209-211.]

[Journal, 1760] July 1759, The Work near Everton

[Journal, 1760] On Monday, July 9, I set out, and on Wednesday noon reached Potton, where I rejoiced at the account given by John Keeling of himself and others. He was justified, it seems, on that memorable Sabbath,[ See above, p 317.] but had not a clear witness of it till ten days after; about which time his sister (who was, on that day, in great distress) was also set at liberty. I discoursed also with Ann Thorn, who told me of much heaviness following the visions with which she had been favored; but said she was at intervals visited still with such overpowering love and joy, especially at the Lord's Supper, that she often lay in a trance for many hours. She is twenty-one years old. We were soon after called into the garden, where Patty Jenkins (one of the same age) was so overwhelmed with the love of God that she sunk down, and appeared as one in a pleasant sleep, only with her eyes open; yet she had often just strength to utter, with a low voice, ejaculations of joy and praise; but, no words coming up to what she felt, she frequently laughed while she saw His glory. This is quite unintelligible to many; for a stranger intermeddleth not with our joy. So it was to Mr. Madan, who doubted whether God or the devil had filled her with love and praise. Oh the depth of human wisdom! Mr. Romaine, the meantime, was filled with a solemn awe. I no sooner sat down by her than the Spirit of God poured the same blessedness into my soul. Hers continued till the time we were to set out for Cockaigne-Hatley. Then her strength was restored in a moment, and we walked together, sixteen in number, singing to the Lord as we went along.

[Journal, 1760] Mr. Hicks preached an excellent sermon on the Strait Gate. The next morning, Thursday, 12, he gave me leave to take an extract from his Journal; but I had only time to write the occurrences of one morning, as follows:

[Journal, 1760] June 6, 1759.-I spoke this morning, at Orwell, on Isa. Iv I. One who had been before convinced of sin fell down in a kind of fit, and broke out, in great anguish of soul, calling on the Lord Jesus for salvation. He wrought as in the agonies of death, and was quite bathed in sweat. He beat the chair against which he kneeled, as one whose soul drew nigh unto hell. His countenance then cleared up at once: we hoped he would be presently set at liberty; but on a sudden he was more distressed than ever, being in the sharpest conflict. Every muscle of his body was in strong agitation, as if nature was just dissolving. I never saw any convulsion fit so violent. But in a moment God dispelled the cloud. His face was again covered with smiles, and he spake as seeing the Lord near him. He cried unto Him, and, the Lord hearing, pronounced him freely forgiven. At that instant he clapped his hands and cried aloud, ' Jesus is mine! He is my Saviour!' His soul was in peace; neither did he find the least bodily pain or soreness. I asked, ' For what would you undergo this again' He said, ' Not for all the world; but I would suffer more rather than be without Christ; yea, for His sake, I would suffer all things." ' An unwise man doth not consider this; a fool doth not understand it.'

[Journal, 1760] This morning, Ann Simpson, aged sixteen or seventeen, lay near an hour in the utmost distress, shrieking out, ' Christ! Christ!' and no other word, her face all the time being violently distorted. I left her awhile, but could scarce sit down before I heard the voice of praise. I went, and found her heaviness turned into joy, even the joyful assurance that her sins were pardoned. She sprang by me to a young woman who lay in a kind of trance, and clasped her in her arms, breathing forth praise to God. I retired again, but had not been long seated ere she came in, running to me in a transport of praise. I asked her why she cried out continually, ' Christ! Chiist!' She answered, 'I thought myself at that time on a little island, and saw Satan, in a hideous form, just ready to devour me, hell all around open to receive me, and myself ready to drop in; while no help appeared, nor any way to escape. But, just as I was dropping in, the Lord appeared between me and the great gulf, and would not let me fall into it. As soon as I saw Him all my trouble was gone, and all the pain I felt before; and ever since I have been light and joyful, and filled with the love of God.'

[Journal, 1760] So far Mr. Hicks, who told me he was first convinced of sin August 1, 1758, and, finding peace in about six weeks, first preached the gospel on September 17. From that time he was accounted a fool and a mad man. About two thousand souls seem to have been awakened by Mr. Berridge and him within this twelvemonth.

[Journal, 1760] Fri. 13.-Mr. Romaine, as well as Mr. Madan, was in doubt concerning the work of God here. But this morning they were both fully convinced, while Alice Miller, the little pale girl, justified May 20, who is in the sixteenth, and Molly Raymond, who is in the twelfth, year of her age, related their experience, their artless confidence confirming all their words. We walked this forenoon to Tadlow, in Cambridgeshire, to hear Mr. Berridge, but came too late for the sermon. However, the account we received of the wonderful works of God in this and the neighboring places was matter of great rejoicing to me, as are all manifestations of the world to come.

[Journal, 1760] Sat. 14.-Mr. Berridge, being ill, desired me to exhort a few people in his house, which the Lord enabled me to do with such ease and power that I was quite amazed. The next morning, at seven, his servant, Caleb Price, spoke to about two hundred people. The Lord was wonderfully present, more than twenty persons feeling the arrows of conviction. Several fell to the ground, some of whom seemed dead, others in the agonies of death, the violence of their bodily convulsions exceeding all description. There was also great crying and agonizing in prayer, mixed with deep and deadly groans on every side.

[Journal, 1760] When sermon was ended, one brought good tidings to Mr. Berridge from Grantchester, that God had there broken down seventeen persons last week by the singing of hymns only; and that a child, seven years old, sees many visions and astonishes the neighbors with her innocent, awful manner of declaring them.

[Journal, 1760] While Mr. Berridge preached in the church, I stood with many in the churchyard, to make room for those who came from far; therefore I saw little, but heard the agonizing of many, panting and gasping after eternal life. In the afternoon Mr. Berridge was constrained, by the multitude of people, to come out of the church and preach in his own close. Some of those who were here pricked to the heart were affected in an astonishing manner. The first man I saw wounded would have dropped, but others, catching him in their arms, did, indeed, prop him up, but were so far from keeping him still that he caused all of them to totter and tremble. His own shaking exceeded that of a cloth in the wind. It seemed as if the Lord came upon him like a giant, taking him by the neck and shaking all his bones in pieces. One woman tore up the ground with her hands, filling them with dust and with the hard-trodden grass, on which I saw her lie, with her hands clinched, as one dead, when the multitude dispersed. Another roared and screamed in a more dreadful agony than ever I heard before. I omitted the rejoicing of believers, because of their number, and the frequency thereof, though the manner was strange; some of them being quite overpowered with divine love, and only showing enough of natural life to let us know they were overwhelmed with joy and life eternal. Some continued long as if they were dead, but with a calm sweetness in their looks. I saw one who lay two or three hours in the open air, and, being then carried into the house, continued insensible another hour, as if actually dead. The first sign of life she showed was a rapture of praise intermixed with a small, joyous laughter.

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 16.-Mr. Berridge this evening preached in his house, where I observed Molly Raymond leaning all the while as if asleep; but an hour or two after she desired to speak with him. I wondered she was not gone home, and was concerned that so little a girl should have so far to go in the dark without company. Mr. Berridge told me neither she nor the other justified children were afraid of anything.

[Journal, 1760] Tues. 17.-We walked toward Harlston, near which Mr. Berridge overtook us. He was greatly fatigued and dejected, and said, ' I am now so weak, I must leave off field-preaching.' Nevertheless, he cast himself on the Lord, and stood up to preach, having near three thousand hearers. He was very weak at first, and scarce able to speak; but God soon performed His promise, imparting new strength to him, and causing him to speak with mighty power. A great shaking was among the dry bones. Incessant were the cries, groans, wringing of hands, and prayers of sinners, now first convinced of their deplorable state. After preaching he was lively and strong, so that the closeness of a crowded room neither affected his breath nor hindered his rejoicing over two children, one about eight, and the other about six years old, who were crying aloud to God for mercy.

[Journal, 1760] Not only Harlston, but Stapleford and Triplow, to which Mr. Berridge was now going, were places in which he had never preached the gospel, and probably never would have done had it not been for the thundering sermons made against him from their several pulpits. So does Satan frequently overshoot himself, and occasion the downfall of his own kingdom.

[Journal, 1760] I had been very ill the preceding week. Wherefore, last night I had recourse to God in prayer, and this morning, instead of rising with difficulty at eight or nine, as I had usually done, I rose with ease at five; and, instead of losing my strength in a mile or two, I walked eighteen without any weakness or weariness.

[Journal, 1760] Wed. 18.-We called at the house where Mr. Berridge had been preaching in the morning, and found several there rejoicing in God and several mourning after Him. While I prayed with them many crowded into the house, some of whom burst into a strange, involuntary laughter, so that my voice could scarce be heard, and when I strove to speak louder a sudden hoarseness seized me. Then the laughter increased. I perceived it was Satan, and resolved to pray on. Immediately the Lord rebuked him that laughter was at an end, and so was my hoarseness. A vehement wrestling with God ran through the whole company, whether sorrowful or rejoicing, till, beside the three young women of the house, one young man and a girl about eleven years old, who had been counted one of the wickedest in Harlston, were exceedingly blessed with the consolations of God.

[Journal, 1760] Among those under conviction was an elderly woman, who had been a scoffer at the gospel, and a keen ridiculer of all that cried out; but she now cried louder than any present. Another I observed who had known the Lord about five-and-twenty years. When Mr. Berridge first brought the gospel to her ears she was filled with gladness, knowing this was the same salvation which God had long <| ago brought to her heart.

[Journal, 1760] We walked hence to the middle of Shelford Moor, and, seeing no person but a young woman who kept sheep, the solitude invited us j to stop and sing a hymn, the sound thereof reached her. She came up slowly, weeping as she came, and then stood by a brook of water | over against us with the tears running down her cheeks apace. We sang another hymn for this mourner in Sion, and wrestled for her with God in prayer. But He did not yet comfort her. And indeed I have observed of the people in general who hear Mr. Bferridge, their convictions are not only deep and violent, but last a long time. Wherefore those that are offended at them who rejoice should consider how terrible a cup they received first. Now they are all light; but they well remember the darkness and misery, the wormwood and the gall.

[Journal, 1760] We met Mr. Berridge at Stapleford, five miles from Cambridge. His heart was particularly set on this people, because he was curate here five or six years; but never preached a gospel sermon among them till this evening. About one thousand five hundred persons met in a close to hear him, great part of whom were laughers and mockers. The work of God, however, quickly began among them that were serious, while not a few endeavoured to make sport by mimicking the gestures of them that were wounded. Both these and those who rejoiced in God gave great offence to some stern-looking men, who vehemently demanded to have those wretches horse-whipped out of the close. Need we wonder at this, when several of His own people are unwilling to let God work in His own way And well may Satan be enraged at the cries of the people, and the prayers they make in the bitterness of their souls, seeing we know these are the chief times at which Satan is cast out.

[Journal, 1760] However, in a while, many of the scoffers were weary, and went away; the rest continued as insensible as before. I had long been walking round the multitude, feeling a jealousy for my God, and praying Him to make the place of His feet glorious. My patience at last began to fail, and I prayed, ' O King of glory, break some of them in pieces; but let it be to the saving of their souls!' I had but just spoke when I heard a dreadful noise on the farther side of the congregation, and, turning thither, saw one Thomas Skinner coming forward, the most horrible human figure I ever saw. His large wig and hair were coal black; his face distorted beyond all description. He roared incessantly, throwing and clapping his hands together with his whole force. Several were terrified, and hasted out of his way. I was glad to hear him, after a while, pray aloud. Not a few of the triflers grew serious, while his kindred and acquaintance were very unwilling to believe even their own eyes and ears. They would fain have got him away, but he fell to the earth, crying, ' My burden! My burden! I cannot bear it!' Some of his brother scoffers were calling for horse-whips, till they saw him extended on his back at full length. They then said he was dead. And, indeed, the only sign of life was the working of his breast and the distortions of his face, while the veins of his neck were swelled as if ready to burst. He was just before the chief captain of Satan's forces. None was by nature more fitted for mockery; none could swear more heroically to whip out of the close all who were affected by the preaching. His agonies lasted some hours; then his body and soul were eased.

[Journal, 1760] When Mr. Berridge had refreshed himself a little he returned to the close and bid the multitude take warning by Skinner, who still lay roaring and tormented on the ground. All the people were now deeply serious, and several hundreds, instead of going when Mr. Berridge dismissed them, stayed in Mr. Jennings's yard. Many of these, especially men, were truly broken in heart. Mr. Berridge talked with as many as could come into the house, and, seeing what numbers stood hungering without, sent me word to pray with them. This was a grievous cross! I knew it was the Lord's will, but felt such weakness of body and sinking of spirit, and was withal so hoarse, that I supposed few could hear out of some hundreds who stood before me. However, I attempted, and in a moment the Lord poured upon me such a spirit of supplication, and gave me so clear and strong an utterance, that it seemed I was another man-a further instance that the servants of God are not sent a warfare on their own charge.

[Journal, 1760] No sooner had I finished than we were called to see John Dennis, aged twenty years, who lay on a table. His body was stiff and motionless as a statue; his very neck seemed as if made of iron. He was looking steadfastly up to heaven, and praying aloud with a melodious voice. His words surprised Mr. Berridge as well as me, who said to the assembly, ' You need no better preacher; none can tell you the truths of the gospel more clearly.' And, indeed, his prayer unfolded the whole Christian system with the greatest accuracy. When he came out of the fit he was in perfect health, but declared he knew not a word of all he had spoken. His mother then informed us he had had these fits for two years, at least once a. day, but he never spoke in any fit till three weeks ago; ever since he prays in them as to-night, but he is himself as ignorant of the matter as if he had been dead all the time.

[Journal, 1760] It was late when I went to lodge about half a mile off, where I found a young woman reading hymns, and the power of the Lord falling on the hearers, especially one young man, who cried aloud in such bitter anguish that I soon desired we might join in prayer. This was the seventh time of my praying in public that day, and had I been faithful I should probably have prayed seven more.

[Journal, 1760] Thur. 19.-I returned to Mr. Jennings's, who had set out at four in the morning to hear Mr. Berridge at Grantchester. He came soon after me, but was scarce able to speak. I never saw a man sweat in such a manner-the large drops seeming fixed all over his face, just like beads of glass. The congregation at Grantchester this morning consisted of about one thousand persons, among whom the Lord was wonderfully present, convincing a far greater number now than even last night. Mr. Jennings was a mild, good-natured Pharisee, who never had been awakened; but he was now thoroughly convinced of his lost estate, and stood for a time in utter despair, with his mouth wide open, his eyes staring, and full of huge dismay. When he found power to speak he cried out, ' I thought I had led a good life; I thought I was not so bad as others; but I am the vilest creature upon earth; I am dropping into hell! Now, now; this very moment!' He then saw hell open to receive him, and Satan ready to cast him in; but it was not long before he saw the Lord Jesus, and knew He had accepted him. He then cried aloud in an unspeakable rapture, ' I have got Christ! I have got Christ!' For two hours he was in the visions of God; then the joy, though not the peace, abated.

[Journal, 1760] I had left Mr. Jennings but a little while when I heard John Dennis loudly praising God. I no sooner kneeled by him than the consolations of God came upon me, so that I trembled and wept much. Nor was the Spirit poured out upon us alone; all in the house were partakers of it. John Dennis was kneeling when his 6t came. We laid him on the ground, where he soon became stiff as last night, and prayed in like manner. Afterwards his body grew flexible by degrees, but was convulsed from head to foot. When he was quite recovered he said he was quite resigned to the will of God, who gave him such strength in the inner man that he did not find any of these things grievous, neither could ask to be delivered from them.

[Journal, 1760] I walked from Stapleford with twenty persons to hear Mr. Berridge at Triplow, and saw many other companies, some before, some behind, some on either hand, going the same way. This brought to my mind the words of Zechariah, ' And the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts; I will go also.'

[Journal, 1760] Fifteen hundred or two thousand were assembled in the close at Triplow. The only unpolished part of the audience were a few gentlemen on horseback. They were much offended at the cries of those in conviction, but much more at the rejoicing of others, even to laughter; but they were not able to look them in the face for half a minute together. I looked after service at every ring which the people made about those that fell under the word. Here and there was a place with only one, but there were generally two or three together, and on one spot no less than seven who lay on the ground as if slain in battle. I soon followed Mr. Berridge to the house, and found both it and the orchard filled with serious people, to whom he spake till his strength failed, and then, seeing them unwilling to depart, desired me to dismiss them with a prayer. I felt great reluctance; but so mightily, when I began, came the Spirit upon me that I found no want of utterance while was praying with about two hundred persons. I thought they had then gone away, but perceived, an hour after, most of them were still in the house or orchard-sighs and groans, prayers, tears, and joyful praise being intermixed on every

[Journal, 1760] side.

[Journal, 1760] July 1759, In and near Everton

[Journal, 1760] Fri. 20.-I was wakeful before five; but, conferring with flesh and blood, I slept again. Mr. Berridge sent for me at seven; but I was then so weak I could not go till the people were -dispersed. Three times more persons were struck with convictions this morning than had been last night. Mr. Berridge had prayed with them till near fainting, who then sent for me to come; and who knows what God might have done, even by me, if I had not been indulging my vile body I was glad to see a woman, supposed the chief sinner in the town, now rolling on the earth, screaming and roaring in strong convictions. The man of the house informed us of her having had nine or ten children by whoredom; and that, being at last married, her husband was more angry with her for hearing the word than he would probably have been for committing adultery. Nor was her minister displeased that she never came to church, but mightily strove to prevent both her and all the sinners of his parish from going to hear the gospel. I observed also a beggar-girl, seven or eight years old, who had scarce any clothes but a ragged piece of old rug. She too had felt the word of God as a two-edged sword, and mourned to be covered with Christ's righteousness.

[Journal, 1760] From Triplow I walked to Orwell, and thence to Everton, in weak-, ness of body and heaviness of spirit. Mr. Berridge was preaching when I came in. Here God again refreshed my soul. I shook from head to foot, while tears of joy ran down my face, and my distress was at an end.

[Journal, 1760] Sat. 21.-I was troubled for some of our brethren, who began to doubt whether this was a work of God or of the devil; John Keeling in particular, who, instead of his frank, lively zeal, and happiness in God, was now filled with gloomy discontent, and grown dark, sullen, and reserved. As we were walking together, he told me it was his resolution to keep himself to himself; to let them who struggled so struggle as they would, and leave all those to themselves whom Satan cast into visions or trances till Satan brought them out again. ' But,' he added, ' I am so uneasy, I don't know what to do; and most of our people begin to shun one another.' The snare was now broken. He saw the delusion he had been in, and I trust will hereafter shun the troublers of Israel.

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 22.-The church was quite filled, and hundreds were without. And now the arrows of God flew abroad. The inexpressible groans, the lamenting, praying, roaring, were so loud, almost without intermission, that we who stood without could scarce help thinking all in the church were cut to the heart. But, upon inquiry, we found about two hundred persons, chiefly men, cried aloud for mercy; but many more were affected, perhaps as deeply, though in a calmer way.

[Journal, 1760] I rejoiced to see many from Cambridgeshire, particularly John Dennis, Thomas Skinner, and the sorrowful young woman with whom we had prayed on Shelford Moor. Now, too, came good news from several parts, especially Grantchester, where ten more persons were cut to the heart in singing hymns among themselves, and the little child before-mentioned continues to astonish all the neighbourhood. A noted physician came some time ago and closely examined her. The result was, he confessed it was no distemper of mind, but the hand of God.

[Journal, 1760] I sought for Thomas Skinner after morning service, and found him, with many more, singing hymns under a tree. When they stopped, I asked, ' How do you find your mind now' Instead of speaking he looked upon me with great steadiness, fetched a deep sigh, burst out into tears and prayers, and, throwing himself along on the ground, fell into more and more agony, till he roared aloud. I told him how great a sinner I had been; but the more I spoke, the more was he distressed. Wherefore John Dennis and I went to prayer for him; but his deliverance was not yet. Make him, O Lord, a greater champion for Thy truth than ever he was against it!

[Journal, 1760] Mr. Berridge preached in his close this afternoon, though in great bodily weakness; but when he is weakest, God so strengthens him that it is surprising to what a distance his voice reaches. I have heard Mr. Whitefield speak as loud, but not with such a continued, strong, unbroken tenor.

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 23.-Mr. Keeling and I walked to Bedford. I was relating there how God had plucked such a brand as me out of the burning, but my voice was quickly stopped by rejoicing; and I have often found that nothing I can say makes so much impression on myself or others as thus repeating my own conversion.

[Journal, 1760] The first time I saw Mr. Berridge was June 2, 1758. But I scarce thought of him again till June 7, as I was walking up to Luton Down. There an awful sense of God's presence fell upon me, and my voice grew louder and louder, in proportion to the joy of my soul, with a strong impulse to pray for the success of Mr. Berridge's labors. And such a foresight did the Lord give me of what He was bringing to pass through his ministry that I was quite overwhelmed for near an hour; till my voice was lost, and only tears remained. And oh, how graciously has the God of truth accomplished all those things! With what delight hast Thou since caused me to walk round the walls of Thy Sion, to mark well her bulwarks, and count the towers thereof!

[Journal, 1760] AUG.1, Wed.-A few of us spoke freely and largely to a brother who had been ' overtaken in a fault,' and endeavoured to ' restore him in the spirit of meekness'; and we were much comforted over him, having great hope that God would restore his usefulness as well as his strength.

[Journal, 1760] Aug. 1789, At Gainsborough

[Journal, 1760] Thur. 2.-I rode to Sheffield, and preached at one to a large and quiet congregation. I was afterward desired to visit Mr. Dodge, curate of the new church. I found him on the brink of eternity, rejoicing in God his Saviour.[ The dying curate was the same man whom the first Methodists were accustomed to go from Sheffield to Ecclesall to hear; and one of the ' six women' was in all probability Mrs. Green, (Meth. in Sheffield, p. 136.)] Thence I went on to Rotherham, and talked with five men and six women (as I had done with many others before in various places) who believe they are saved from sin. And this fact I believe, that they ' rejoice evermore, pray without ceasing, and in everything give thanks.' I believe they feel nothing but love now: what they will do, I leave to God.

[Journal, 1760] Fri. 3.-I preached at Gainsborough, in Sir Nevil Hickman's great hall.[ See W.H.S. vol. vi. p. 68; also below, p. 474.] It is full as large as the Weavers' Hall, in Bristol. At two it was filled with a rude, wild multitude (a few of a better spirit excepted). Yet all but two or three gentlemen were attentive while I enforced our Lord's words, ' What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul' I was walking back through a gaping, staring crowd, when Sir Nevil came and thanked me for my sermon, to the no small amazement of his neighbours, who shrunk back as if they had seen a ghost. Thence I rode to North Scarle,[ Methodism had been introduced into North Scarle by a person named Arden, who had heard Wesley in Moorfields (Watmough's History of Methodism in Lincolnshire, p. 13).] the last village in Lincolnshire, ten miles short of Newark. Here a great multitude assembled from various parts, most of them wholly unacquainted with the ways of God; indeed to such a degree that, though I spoke as plain as I could on the first principles of religion, yet it seemed very many understood me no more than if I was talking Greek. Oh what a condition is the bulk of Reformed Christians in to this day!

[Journal, 1760] Sat. 4.-As we took horse the rain began, and accompanied us till we alighted in the evening.

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 5.-Between eight and nine I reached Everton, faint and weary enough. During the prayers, as also during the sermon and the administration of the sacrament, a few persons cried aloud; but it was not from sorrow or fear, but love and joy. The same I observed in several parts of the afternoon service. In the evening I preached in Mr. Hicks's church.[ At Wrestlingworth] Two or three persons fell to the ground, and were extremely convulsed; but none cried out. One or two were filled with strong consolation.

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 6.-I soon found Satan was laboring to create misunderstandings between Mr. Berridge and Mr. Hicks. But on Monday they talked freely together, and the snare was broken. In the afternoon [The new text at this point is from a fragmentary MS. in the handwriting or John Wesley found in a volume of Benson's edition of the Works, and supplied to this edition by the Rev. W. L. Cornish (see W.M. Mag. 1911, p. 787). The MS. illustrates Wesley's editing of the Journal.] I talked largely with Ann Thorn and two others, who had been several times in trances. What they all agreed in was: (i) that when they went away, as they termed it, it was always at the time they were fullest of the love of God; (2) that it came upon them in a moment, without any previous notice, and took away all their senses and strength; (3) that there were some exceptions, but in general, from that moment they were in another world, knowing nothing of what was done or said by all that were round about them.

[Journal, 1760] Aug. 1759, A Fragmentary MS

[Journal, 1760] 1. THE OLD HALL OF SIR NEVIL HICKMON. GAINSBOROUGH.

[Journal, 1760] 2. THE REV. JOHN BERRIDGE.

[Journal, 1760] 3. EVERTON CHURCH.

[Journal, 1760] About five in the afternoon I heard them singing hymns. Soon after, Mr. Berridge came up and told me Alice Miller (fifteen years old) was fallen into a trance. I went down immediately, and found her sitting on a stool and leaning against the wall, with her eyes open and fixed upward. I made a motion as if going to strike, but they continued immovable. Her face showed an unspeakable mixture of reverence and love, while silent tears stole down her cheeks. Her lips were a little open, and sometimes moved, but not enough to cause any sound. I do not know whether I ever saw a human face look so beautiful. Sometimes it was covered with a smile, as from joy, mixing with love and reverence; but the tears fell still, though not so fast. Her pulse was quite regular. In about half an hour I observed her countenance change into the form of fear, pity, and distress; then she burst into a flood of tears, and cried out,' Dear Lord; they will be damned! They will all be damned!' But in about five minutes her smiles returned, and only love and joy appeared in her face. About half an hour after six I observed distress take place again; and soon after she wept bitterly, and cried out, ' Dear Lord, they will go to hell! The world will go to hell!' Soon after, she said,' Cry aloud! Spare not!' And in a few moments her look was composed again, and spoke a mixture of reverence, joy, and love. Then she said aloud,' Give God the glory." About seven her senses returned. I asked, ' Where have you been ' 'I have been with my Savior.' ' In heaven, or on earth' 'I cannot tell; but I was in glory.' ' Why, then, did you cry' ' Not for myself, but for the world; for I saw they were on the brink of hell.' ' Whom did you desire to give the glory to God' ' Ministers, that cry aloud to the world; else they will be proud; and then God will leave them, and they will lose their own souls.'

[Journal, 1760] I preached at eight on ' The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the people that forget God.' The whole congregation was earnestly attentive; but not above one or two cried out, and I did not observe any that fainted away, either then or in the morning. I have generally observed more or less of these outward symptoms to attend the beginning of a general work of God. So it was in New England, Scotland, Holland, Ireland, and many parts of England; but, after a time, they gradually decrease, and the work goes on more quietly and silently. Those whom it pleases God to employ in His work ought to be quite passive in this respect; they should choose nothing, but leave entirely to Him all the circumstances of His own work.[ The above passage is quoted, in part, in Life of C. of Huntingdon, vol. i. p. 398, where these manifestations are discussed in notes, and an interesting letter to the Countess from John Wesley is published]

[Journal, 1760] Aug. 1769, At Everton

[Journal, 1760] Tues. 7.-I then began at four (because of the harvest), and, after preaching, took horse. At Stevenage we put up at the same inn with Mr. Venn, going down with his family to Yorkshire. In the afternoon, riding easily, I reached London, thoroughly tired having rode in seven months above four-andtwenty hundred miles.

[Journal, 1760] Wed. 8.-Our Conference began,[ The sixteenth Annual Conference. (Tyerman's Life of Wesley, vol. ii. p. 333. See also MyWs Chron. Hist. p. 84.)] the time of which was almost entirely employed in examining whether the spirit and lives of our preachers were suitable to their profession.[ On Thursday the 9th and on Friday the 10th he preached at the Foundery.] On Saturday, in the afternoon, we concluded. Great was the unanimity and love that reigned among us throughout; and if there were any who hoped or feared the contrary, they were happily disappointed. Is not this another token for good Surely while we are thus striving for the hope of the gospel we shall not be delivered to the will of our enemies.

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 12.- I was afraid to look forward to the work of the day, knowing my strength was not sufficient for it; but God looked to that; for though I was exceeding weak at Snowsfields in the morning, I was stronger at noon; and after preaching in the afternoon to a large multitude in Moorfields, and meeting the society for near an hour, I felt no weakness or weariness at all.

[Journal, 1760] I had designed to set out on Tuesday morning either for Norwich or Cornwall; but I still felt I had need of a little rest, and so determined to defer my journey. However on Monday the I3th I took a little ride to Croydon, one of the seats of the Archbishops of Canterbury. Was it one of these who ordered, many years ago (for the characters are of old standing), that dreadful inscription to be placed just over the communion table ' And now, ye priests, this commandment is for you. If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto My name, saith the Lord, I will even send a curse among you, and I will curse your blessings; yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart. Behold, I will corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts, and one shall take you away with it.'

[Journal, 1760] The Archbishop's palace [It dates from the early part of the thirteenth century, and is one of the first buildings constructed entirely of brick] is an ancient, venerable pile, and the gardens are extremely pleasant. The late Archbishop had improved them at a large expense; but continual illness prevented his enjoying them, till, after four years' constant pain, he was called away-one may hope, to the garden of God.

[Journal, 1760] I dined at Mr. Belchier's in Epsom, whose house and gardens lie in what was once a chalk-pit.[ see an article by the Rev. John Telford in W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 67.] It is the most elegant spot I ever saw with my eyes, everything, within doors and without, being finished in the most exquisite taste. Surely nothing on earth can be more delightful; what will the possessor feel when he cries out:

[Journal, 1760] Must I then leave thee, Paradise Then leave These happy shades, and mansions fit for gods[ Altered from Milton's Paradise Lost, xi 269. See W.H.S. vol. v. p. 116. Or he may have quoted from Dr. Ames Hymn of Eve. Both the words and music of this were composed by Dr. Arne.]

[Journal, 1760] Fri. 17.-I spent an hour pleasantly and profitably at------

[Journal, 1760] ------'s. How gracious is God, who still preserves him unconsumed in fire! How plain that with God all things are possible! He can draw the sting either of wealth or death.

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 19.-I preached in the afternoon to a huge multitude in the fields [The Sermon Register says at Epsom. On this day he wrote to Miss Furly (Worts, vol. xii. p. 204), and on the 22nd he wrote the last of six letters to Richard Tompson (IVorks, vol. xii. P474).] on ' Now God commandeth all men everywhere to repent.'[On Saturday, Aug. 25, he preached at Snowsfields and West Street]

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 27.-I rode to Bedford, and about six preached on St. Peter's Green. None of the numerous congregation stood with their heads covered except the Germans. Blessed be God that I have not so learned Christ! If they know no better I cannot help it.

[Journal, 1760] Tues. 28.-I rode on to Mr. Berridge's at Everton, and in the evening went to the church; but unusually heavy, and hardly expecting to do any good there. I preached on those words in the Second Lesson, ' We know that we are of God.' One sunk down, and another, and another. Some cried aloud in agony of prayer. I would willingly have spent some time in prayer with them; but my voice failed, so that I was obliged to conclude the service, leaving many in the church crying and praying, but unable either to walk or stand. One young man and one young woman were brought with difficulty to Mr. Berridge's house, and continued there in violent agonies, both of body and soul. When I came into the room the woman lay quiet, wrestling with God in silent prayer. But even the bodily convulsions of the young man were amazing: the heavings of his breast were beyond description-I suppose equal to the throes of a woman in travail. We called upon God to relieve his soul and body, and both were perfectly healed. He rejoiced in God with joy unspeakable, and felt no pain, or weakness, or weariness. Presently after the woman also was delivered, and rose rejoicing in God her Saviour.

[Journal, 1760] Wed. 29.-I rode to Lakenheath, and spoke exceeding plain to an honest, drowsy people.

[Journal, 1760] Thur. 30.-I preached at the Tabernacle in Norwich to a large, rude, noisy congregation. I took knowledge what manner of teachers they had been accustomed to, and determined to mend them or end them. Accordingly the next evening, after sermon, I reminded them of two things: the one, that it was not decent to begin talking aloud as soon as service was ended, and hurrying to and fro as in a bear-garden; the other, that it was a bad custom to gather into knots just after sermon and turn a place of worship into a coffee-house. I therefore desired that none would talk under that roof, but go quietly and silently away. And on Sunday, SEPT. 2, I had the pleasure to observe that all went as quietly away as if they had been accustomed to it for many years.

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 3.-I met the society at five, and explained the nature and use of meeting in a class. Upon inquiry, I found we have now about five hundred members; but a hundred and fifty of these do not pretend to meet at all. Of those, therefore, I make no account. They hang on but a single thread.

[Journal, 1760] Sept. 1759, At Hempnall

[Journal, 1760] Tues. 4.-I walked to Hempnall,[ Wesley spelt the woid ' Kemnal,' but the local pronunciation is ' Hemnal.' A tree in the centre of the village is still spoken of as ' Wesley's tree.' SeeW.H.S. vol. iv. p. 244. ] nine miles from Norwich, and preached at one o'clock. The ringleader of the mob came with his horn, as usual, before I began, but one quickly catched and threw away his horn, and in a few minutes he was deserted by all his companions, who were seriously and deeply attentive to the great truth,' By grace ye are saved through faith.'

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 9.-I met the society at seven, and told them in plain terms that they were the most ignorant, self-conceited, selfwilled, fickle, untractable, disorderly, disjointed society that I knew in the three kingdoms. And God applied it to their hearts, so that many were profited; but I do not find that one

[Journal, 1760] was offended.

[Journal, 1760] At ten we had another happy opportunity, and many stubborn hearts were melted down. Just at two the great congregation met, and the power of God was again present to heal, though not so eminently as at five, while I was describing ' the peace that passeth all understanding.' After preaching I was desired to spend an hour with some whom I supposed to be of our own society; but I soon found my

[Journal, 1760] mistake:

[Journal, 1760] Sensim medios delapsus in hostes.[ ' I had imperceptibly fallen into the midst of enemies.' Altered from Virgil, Aen. Bk. ii. 1. 377. See W.H.S. vol. v. p. 48. Wesley has ingeniously changed ' sensit' into ' sensim,' which, from its original meaning 'perceptibly,' passes into ' gradually,' and then so ' gradually' as to merge into ' imperceptibly."]

[Journal, 1760] One in particular warmly told me she could not like mine or Mr. John Murlin's[Murlin entered the itinerancy in His disinterested zeal is shown

[Journal, 1760] by the fact that, though possessed of private means, he labored, despite severe physical pain, till 1787. He was a man of great integrity, sincerity, and simplicity, and was in general so deeply affected with the subjects on which he preached that he obtained the name of ' The Weeping Prophet.' He died at High Wycombe in 1799, but at his own request his remains were carried to London and interred in Wesley's vault. A mural tablet to his memory was placed in City Road Chapel. See his autobiography in E.M P. vol. iii. p. 293; also Atmore's Memorial, p. 288.] doctrine: it always threw her into heaviness; but in dear Mr. Cudworth's she could find comfort. I desired we might pray. God quickly answered for Himself; her heart was broke in pieces. She was filled with love, and grief, and shame; but could only tell it by her eyes and her tears.

[Journal, 1760] About this time I received a remarkable letter from abroad, an extract of which follows:

[Journal, 1760] BERLIN, Aug. 26, 1759.

[Journal, 1760] God has again wrought publicly in this place, in the presence of many thousand people. A soldier of the King's Guard was sentenced to be hanged for desertion and theft. He was a wretch abandoned to all manner of wickedness. General K-----was much

[Journal, 1760] concerned for his soul. He earnestly desired me to take charge of it, though we saw no prospect of success. I visited him the day he was condemned, being Thursday. He seemed quite careless and unconcerned. I endeavoured to convince him of sin, but did not perceive any effect. I begged of him not to deceive his own soul, but to consider the condition he was in. On Friday this began to sink into his heart, and on Saturday much more. Perceiving this, I much insisted on those words: ' This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners.' The effect was astonishing. He laid hold of them by faith, and not only his burden was gone, but he had such experience of the love of Christ as it is impossible to describe. His peace, triumph, and joy increased every hour till the night before his execution, and indeed were never more observable than when he was brought out of prison, In his way to the place of execution he praised God for dragging him, as it were, with chains to heaven. ' What!' said he, ' will God, after all my hellish actions, give me eternal life into the bargain' The efficacy of the blood and death of Christ being made known to him by the Holy Ghost, he spoke of nothing but his wedding-day, which was to be this i3th of August. Every one that looked upon him was struck. Officers and all were moved. Being entered into the ring, I once more prayed with him, and gave him the last blessing. But the very instant he was to be turned off, Colonel H-----called out ' Pardon!' I was thunderstruck, and Mittelstadt protested it was to him like a ball shot through his body. He fainted away for some time. Being recovered, his first words were, 'Why was I not rather hanged, or even crucified, than pardoned Why am I thus stopped in my course I should now have been with Christ!' I was myself more afraid of him now than ever. But the grace of God was strong in his soul. And ever since it has continued the same. Yesterday I was informed by one who went on purpose to inquire that his whole employ during his confinement (which is to continue six months) is reading, praying, and comforting himself with the blood of Christ.

[Journal, 1760] Sept. 1759, West Street Chapel

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 10.-We took horse at half-hour after four. Before eight it was as warm as it is usually at Midsummer; and from ten we had the sun in our face all the way to Colchester. But we had the wind in our face, too, or the heat would have been insupportable. I was in a fever from the moment I came into the house; but it did not hinder me from preaching on the Green,[ See above, p. 289. ] and afterwards meeting the society. I then lay down as soon as possible, but could not sleep a quarter of an hour till between two and three in the morning. I do not know that I have lost a night's sleep before, sick or well, since I was six years old. But it is all one: God is able to give strength, either with sleep or without it. I rose at my usual time, and preached at five, without any faintness or drowsiness.

[Journal, 1760] Thur. 13.-We set out between four and five, and rode to Dunmow, about four-and-twenty miles [It would be interesting to know why he made this long detour of sixty to seventy miles, from Colchester via Dun mow (where he does not appear to have

[Journal, 1760] stayed) to Sundon-due west. Probably it was to visit his friends there, Mr.

[Journal, 1760] and Mrs. Cole. On an earlier visit (March 6-9, 1758) he stayed three days,

[Journal, 1760] See above, pp. 94, 254].; but here we were at a full stop. None could direct us any farther. So we were to cross the country as well as we could. But whenever we were at a loss (eight or ten times) we met some one to help us out. So about half an hour past one we were come within sixteen miles of Sundon.

[Journal, 1760] An honest blunderer then undertook to direct us a nearer way. By his help we wandered up and down, till our sixteen miles grew into six-and-twenty. However, we got to Sundon before seven, where a considerable number of people soon met, to whom I explained (what they seemed to know very little of) ' the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.' Fri. 14.-I returned to London.

[Journal, 1760] Sat. 15.-Having left orders for the immediate repairing of West Street Chapel, I went to see what they had done, and saw cause to praise God for this also. The main timbers were so rotten that in many places one might thrust his fingers into them. So that probably, had we delayed till spring, the whole building must have fallen to the ground.[ On Sunday the l6th he preached at Snowsfields.]

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 17.-I went to Canterbury. Two hundred soldiers, I suppose, and a whole row of officers, attended in the evening. Their number was increased the next evening, and all behaved as men fearing God.

[Journal, 1760] Wed. 19.-I preached at Dover, in the new room, which is just finished. Here also the hearers increase, some of whom are convinced and others comforted daily.

[Journal, 1760] Thur. 20.-I strongly applied at Canterbury, to the soldiers in particular,' He that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son of God hath not life.' The next day, in my return to London, I read Mr. Huygens's Conjectures on the Planetary World.[ Christian Huygens, a celebrated mathematician, born at the Hague 1629,died 1695; author of Celestial Worlds Discovered, 1699. See W.H.S, vol. iv. p. 134]He surprised me. I think he clearly proves that the moon is not habitable; that there are neither Rivers nor mountains on her spotty globe [See Milton, Paradise Lost, i. 291,where Satan's shield is likened to the enlarged orb of the moon as seen through the telescope (W.H.S. vol. v. P. 134).]; that there is no sea, no water on her surface, nor any atmosphere. And hence he very rationally infers that ' neither are any of the secondary planets inhabited.' And who can prove that the primary are I know the earth is. Of the rest I know nothing.

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 23.-A vast majority of the immense congregation in Moorfields were deeply serious. One such hour might convince any impartial man of the expediency of field-preaching. What building, except St. Paul's Church, would contain such a congregation And if it would, what human voice could have reached them there By repeated observations I find I can command thrice the number in the open air that I can under a roof. And who can say the time for field-preaching is over, while, (i) greater numbers than ever attend; (2) the converting as well as convincing power of God is eminently present with them

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 24.-I preached about eight at Brentford, and in the evening at Basingstoke, to a people slow of heart and dull of understanding.

[Journal, 1760] Tues. 25.-I preached in the new house at Whitchurch, and at Salisbury in the evening. The new room there is, I think, the most complete in England. It strikes every one of any taste that sees it; not with any single part, but an inexpressible something in the whole.

[Journal, 1760] The militia from Hampshire being in town, a large number of them were at the preaching. But it was as music to a horse; such brutish behaviour have I seldom seen. The next evening they behaved, if possible, worse than before. However, many of them, I believe, \vere struck; for they came again in the morning, and then appeared to be of quite another spirit, earnestly attending to what was spoken.

[Journal, 1760] Thur. 27.-I had appointed to preach at seven in the evening at Bradford [Bradford-on-Avon. ]; but when I came I found Mr. Hart was to preach at six.[ Mr. Hart was newly presented to the living of St. George's Kingswood.] So I delayed till the church service was ended, that there might not appear (at least on my part) even the shadow of opposition between us. Fri. 28.-I reached Bristol.

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 30.-The weather being fair and calm, I preached in the new Square,[ King's Square (see W.H.S. vol. ii. Pp. 104-110). Famous Methodists lived in the neighborhood, and Wesley often preached here.] for the sake of many people who do not choose to come to the room. My text was,' Him that cometh unto Me I will in no wise cast out.' I believe many found desires of coming to Him. Oh that they may be brought to good effect!

[Journal, 1760] OCT. I, Mon.-All my leisure time during my stay at Bristol I employed in finishing the fourth volume of Discourses; probably the last which I shall publish.[ Issued in the following year. It contained seven sermons and six tracts. See Green's ibliography, No. 200.]

[Journal, 1760] Oct. 1759, The French Prisoners

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 15.-I walked up to Knowle, a mile from Bristol, to see the French prisoners. Above eleven hundred of them, we were informed, were confined in that little place without anything to lie on but a little dirty straw, or anything to cover them but a few foul, thin rags, either by day or night, so that they died like rotten sheep. I was much affected, and preached in the evening on Exod. xxiii. 9, ' Thou shalt not oppress a

[Journal, 1760] stranger; for ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.' Eighteen pounds were contributed immediately, which were made up four-and-twenty the next day. With this we bought linen and woollen cloth, which were made up into shirts, waistcoats, and breeches. Some dozen of stockings were added; all which were carefully distributed where there was the greatest want. Presently after, the Corporation of Bristol sent a large quantity of mattresses and blankets; and it was not long before contributions were set on foot at London,[ The contributions from London were doubtless the result of a powerful appeal published by Wesley in Lloyd's Evening Post (Pawlyn's Bristol, p. S3).] and in various parts of the kingdom, so that I believe from this time they were pretty well provided with all the necessaries of life.[ The entries in the Sermon Register during the interval between Oct. I and 22 are few. He was busy with work for the press. But Wednesday the 3rd he preached at Warminster; on Sunday the 7th at' NorthCommon'; Tuesday the 9th, Bristol; and again at Bristol on Thursday the i8th. On Oct. 20 he wrote fromBristol to Mr.------describing an investigation respecting the French prisoners at Knowle, which ' many terrible accounts' had moved him to make. They were said to have ' died in whole shoals.' He shows that these accounts were quite baseless, but he appeals to the gentlemen of Bristol for clothing in view of the winter now coming upon them in a cold prison, and a colder climate than most of them have been accustomed to. (Works, vol. xii. p. 266.) ]

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 22.- I left Bristol, and, having preached at Shepton, Coleford, Frome, and Salisbury in my way, on Thursday the 25th determined to try if I could do any good at Andover. The congregation at ten in the morning was small; in the evening their number was increased, and I think some of them went away crying out, ' God be merciful to me, a sinner!'

[Journal, 1760] Nov. 1759, In London

[Journal, 1760] Fri. 26.-I rode to Basingstoke. I was extremely tired when I came in, but much less so after preaching. I then sent to inquire if there was a vacant place in any of the coaches which were going to London the next day; but they were all full, and I had promised to send back my mare to Bristol. The only way that remained was to take Joseph Jones's horse, and let him ride behind one of the coaches. So I ordered the horse to be brought soon after four in the morning, and was waiting for the coach, when a post-chaise drove by. I rode close after it, though it was so dark I could not see my horse's

[Journal, 1760] head; but I could hear, which was enough. About daybreak it drove away; but then I could see the road. It rained without intermission from the time I took horse till I came to the Foundery; so that I was wet through a great part of the day. But it did me no hurt at all.

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 28.-I found the ancient spirit in the congregation,

[Journal, 1760] both at Spitalfields and the Foundery.[ On Monday the 29* he preached at Spitalfields; on Wednesday, Nov. 7, *Bishop Bonner's, and on Thursday the 8th at West Street.]

[Journal, 1760] Tues. 30.-I preached at Deptford, and rejoiced to find an increasing work there also. Wednesday and Thursday I spent in revising and perfecting a Treatise on electricity.[ Published in 1760 as ' Tkt Denderatum; or. Electricity made Plain and Useful. By a Lover of Mankuid and of Common Sense.' See Works, vol. xiv. p 241, where the preface is printed tn *, and dated Nov. I, 1759; Greens Btoliografhy, No. 202; also above,P.190.]

[Journal, 1760] Nov. 2, Fri.-I spent an hour with that miracle of mercy, Miss------; a clear proof that God can, even without external means, preserve a bush in the midst of the fire.

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 4.-As I was applying those words, ' They neither marry, nor are given in marriage; neither can they die any more, for they are equal to angels,' the power of God fell upon the congregation in a very uncommon manner. How seasonable! Oh how does God sweeten whatever cross we bear for His sake!

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 12.-I talked with J-----D------, a gentleman's coachman, an uncommon monument of mercy. Last year he was a violent persecutor of the truth, and of his wife for the sake of it; but the second or third time he heard for himself, he was thoroughly convinced. Soon after he entered into the society, and in six weeks found peace with God. Yet his natural tempers quickly revived, which made him restless after a thorough change. In spring this restlessness so increased that he was crying to God day and night, till on Sunday, May 27, he was utterly broken in pieces, and ready to cast away the hope of it. But just as he received the bread in the Lord's Supper, the love of God filled his heart; and from that moment he had no doubt, but has continued always rejoicing, always praying, and praising God.[ On the I2th he preached at Zoar Chapel (Life of Eleanor Dornford, p. 17)]

[Journal, 1760] Sat. 17.-I spent an hour agreeably and profitably with Lady Gertrude Hotham, and Sir Charles Hfotham.[ In ' Charles Wesley's Account of his Two Sons," published with his Journal, vol. ii. pp. 140 ff., he says of Charles when about seven: ' Lady Gertrude Hotham heard him with much satisfaction and made him a present of all her music. . . . Sir Charles Hotham was particularly fond of him, promised him an organ, and that he should never want any means or encouragement in the pursuit of his art. But he went abroad soon after, and was thence translated to the heavenly country.' In letters to his wife (.LXIII, LXXV, LXXVI, LXXX) the references indicate the piety of the

[Journal, 1760] family, and relationships of Christian affection between them and the Wesleys. On the death of Lady Hotham, the wife of Sir Charles (Lady Gertrude was probably his mother) in 1756, Charles Wesley wrote a hymn of twenty-nine six-lined verses in five parts. The fine tune set in the early Methodist tunebooks to ' Jesu, Lover of my soul,' was composed by Madan, and was named after his and Wesley's friend, Sir Charles Hotham.] It is well a few of the rich and noble are called. Oh that God would increase their number! But I should rejoice (were it the will of God) if it were done by the ministry of others. If I might choose, I should still (as I have done hitherto) preach the gospel to the poor.[ On Sunday, Nov. 18, he preached at the Foundery and Spitalfields.]

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 19.-I spent an hour with Mr. B., who has escaped from Guadaloupe as with the skin of his teeth. He informed me that all the water they had in the voyage stunk intolerably; that the biscuit was full of maggots, and the beef mere carrion, so that none could bear to stand near a cask when it was opened. What wonder that the poor men died in troops! Who shall answer for their blood

[Journal, 1760] Thur. 22.-I took horse between six and seven, in one of the coldest mornings I ever remember. We reached St. Albans without much difficulty; but then the roads were all covered with snow. However, there was a beaten path, though slippery enough, till we turned into the by-road to Sundon. What we could have done there I cannot tell, for the snow lay deeper and deeper, had not a wagon gone awhile before us, and marked the way for six miles to Mr. Cole's gate.[ See W.M. Mag. 1849, p. 490.]

[Journal, 1760] Fri. 23.-The roads were so extremely slippery, it was with much difficulty we reached Bedford. We had a pretty large congregation, but the stench from the swine under the room was scarce supportable. Was ever a preaching-place over a hog-sty before Surely they love the gospel who come to hear it in such a place.[ John Walsh had been there the previous year and found that ' many had left off hearing because hogs were kept under the room' (Letter in Arm. Mag. 1780, p. 104). The room in George Street, Walsall, was over a hog-market.]

[Journal, 1760] Nov. 1759, Everton and Wrestlingworth

[Journal, 1760] Sat. 24.-We rode to Everton, Mr. Berridge being gone to preach before the University at Cambridge. Many people came to his house in the evening, and it was a season of great refreshment.

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 25.-I was a little afraid my strength would not suffice for reading prayers and preaching, and administering the Lord's Supper alone, to a large number of communicants; but all was well. Mr. Hicks began his own service early, and came before I had ended my sermon. So we finished the whole before two, and I had time to breathe before the evening service.

[Journal, 1760] In the afternoon God was eminently present with us, though rather to comfort than convince. But I observed a remarkable difference since I was here before as to the manner of the work. None now were in trances, none cried out, none fell down or were convulsed; only some trembled exceedingly, a low murmur was heard, and many were refreshed with the multitude of

[Journal, 1760] peace.

[Journal, 1760] The danger was to regard extraordinary circumstances too much, such as outcries, convulsions, visions, trances; as if these were essential to the inward work, so that it could not go on without them. Perhaps the danger is to regard them too little, to condemn them altogether; to imagine they had nothing of God in them, and were a hindrance to His work. Whereas the truth is: (i) God suddenly and strongly convinced many that they were lost sinners, the natural consequence whereof were sudden outcries and strong bodily convulsions; (2) to strengthen and encourage them that believed, and to make His work more apparent, He favoured several of them with divine dreams, others with trances and visions; (3) in some of these instances, after a time, nature mixed with grace; (4) Satan likewise mimicked this work of God, in order to discredit the whole work. And yet it is not wise to give up this part, any more than to give up the whole. At first it was, doubtless, wholly from God. It is partly so at this day; and He will enable us to discern how far, in every case, the work is pure, and where it mixes or degenerates.

[Journal, 1760] Let us even suppose that, in some few cases, there was a mixture of dissimulation-that persons pretended to see or feel what they did not, and imitated the cries or convulsive motions of *those who were really overpowered by the Spirit of God; yet ever this should not make us either deny or undervalue the real word of the Spirit. The shadow is no disparagement of the substance,' nor the counterfeit of the real diamond.

[Journal, 1760] We may further suppose that Satan will make these visions an occasion of pride. But what can be inferred from hence Nothing, but that we should guard against it; that we should diligently exhort all to be little in their own eyes, knowing that nothing avails with God but humble love. But still, to slight or censure visions in general would be both irrational and unchristian.

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 26.-In the evening I preached in Mr. Hicks's church at Wrestlingworth, and at ten the next morning. The people were deeply attentive, but none were so affected as when I was here last. In the evening Mr. Berridge returned from preaching before the University. In the midst of the sermon, he informed me, one person cried out aloud, but was silent in a few moments. Several dropped down, but made no noise, and the whole congregation, young and old, behaved with seriousness. God is strong as well as wise: who knows what work He may have to do here also

[Journal, 1760] Wed. 28.-I returned to London,[ From the wording we may infer that he had already preached at West Street (hence the next sentence: ' I preached again in the chapel'); on the 3Oth at the Bull-and-Mouth, on Dec. 2 at Spitalfields; on the 4th at the Foundery, and (probably) at Zoar on the 6th.] and on Thursday the 2gth, the day appointed for the General Thanksgiving,[ In August the battle of Minden saved Hanover for the British Crown,and in September Wolfe captured Quebec, winning Canada for England. The importance of Hawke's victory in Quiberon Bay may be inferred from the following: ' If the Brest ships were not completely wiped out as a result of the action, the French fleet ceased to be an offensive force.1 {England under the Hanoverians, PI52.)] I preached again in the chapel near the Seven Dials, both morning and afternoon. I believe the oldest man in England has not seen a thanksgiving-day so observed before. It had the solemnity of the General Fast. All the shops were shut up; the people in the streets appeared one and all with an air of seriousness; the prayers, lessons, and whole public service were admirably suited to the occasion. The prayer for our enemies, in particular, was extremely striking; perhaps it is the first instance of the kind in Europe. There was no noise, hurry, bonfires, fireworks in the evening, and no public diversions. This is indeed a Christian holiday, a 'rejoicing unto the Lord.' The next day came the news that Sir Edward Hawke had dispersed the French fleet.

[Journal, 1760] DEC. Sun. 9.-I had, for the first time, a lovefeast for the

[Journal, 1760] whole society.

[Journal, 1760] Wed. 12.-I began reading over the Greek Testament and the Notes with my brother and several others, carefully comparing the translation with the original, and correcting or enlarging the notes as we saw occasion.

[Journal, 1760] The same day I spent part of the afternoon in the British Museum. There is a large library, a great number of curious .manuscripts, many uncommon monuments of antiquity, and the whole collection of shells, butterflies, beetles, grasshoppers, &c., which the indefatigable Sir Hans Sloane, with such vast expense and labor, procured in a life of fourscore years.

[Journal, 1760] Fri. 14.-I was at a Christian wedding,8 to which were invited only two or three relations, and five clergymen, who spent part of the afternoon in a manner suitable to the solemn occasion.

[Journal, 1760] Dec. 1759, A Chanery Bill

[Journal, 1760] Wed. 19.-I was desired to read over a Chancery Bill. The occasion of it was this: A. B tells C. D. that one who owed him thirty pounds wanted to borrow thirty more, and asked whether he thought the eighth part of such a ship, then at sea, was sufficient security. He said he thought it was. On this A. B. lent the money. The ship came home; but, through various accidents, the eighth part yielded only twenty pounds. A. B. on this commenced a suit, to make C. D. pay him the residue of his money.

[Journal, 1760] This worthy story is told in no less than a hundred and ten sheets of paper! C. D. answers, he advised to the best of his judgment; not foreseeing those accidents whereby the share which cost two hundred pounds yielded no more than twenty. This answer brought on fifteen sheets of exceptions, all which a quarter of a sheet might have contained. I desired the plaintiff and defendant to meet me the next day; both of whom were willing to stand to arbitration; and they readily agreed that C. D. should pay half his own costs, and A. B. the rest of the expense.

[Journal, 1760] Fri. 21.-I inquired into the particulars of a very remarkable story. A ship, laden with wheat, and having no other ballast, about one in the morning on Sunday, November 18, the wind blowing hard, shifted her cargo, and in half an hour sunk. Mr. Austin, the mate, leaped off her side as she sunk; and, being an excellent swimmer, kept above water till he saw something floating toward him, which proved to be the capstan of the ship. He got upon it, and, although washed off several times, yet still recovered his seat, and floated all day and all the following night; but on Monday morning he was quite exhausted, and faint almost to death with thirst, having swallowed abundance of salt water. In this extremity he saw some apples floating toward him. He took up three, ate them, and was much strengthened. About noon Admiral Saunders's fleet came in sight, one of whose ships saw, and took him up. He could not stand, but, being blooded, and put into a warm bed, and fed with small broth, a spoonful or two at a time, he recovered strength apace, and in a few days was as well as ever.

[Journal, 1760] Sat. 22.-I went to Colchester, and on Sunday the 23rd preached in the shell of the new house. It is twelve-square, and is the best building, of the size, for the voice, that I know in England.[ The Castle brewery, in Maidenhurgh Street, now occupies the site.]

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 24.-We did not set out till after seven, intending to ride about forty miles; but, coming to Scole Inn [A posting-station on the main road to Norwich. The inn was a large brick building adorned with imagery and carved work, built in 1655, with a round large enough for thirty or forty wards soldiers. Formerly the address for Diss was 'nearScoleInn.' W.H.S.vol. iv.p.83.] before three, we pushed on, and before seven came safe to Norwich.

[Journal, 1760] Thur. 27.-I began visiting the society, and found the greater part much changed from what they were a year ago. They are indeed fewer in number, but are now of a teachable spirit, willing to be advised, or even reproved; and, if three hundred of this spirit remain, they are worth all our labor.

[Journal, 1760] Jan. 1760, In East Anglia

[Journal, 1760] 1760. JAN. I, Tues.-We began the service at four in the morning. A great number attended, and God was in the midst, strengthening and refreshing their souls.

[Journal, 1760] Thur. 3.-In the evening, while I was enforcing those awful words of the prophet,' The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved,' a young woman, who had contained herself as long as she could, sunk down and cried aloud. I found this was a new thing in Norwich. The women about her got water and hartshorn in abundance; but all would not do. When the service was ended, I asked her, ' What do you want' She immediately replied, ' Nothing but Christ.' And indeed what physician beside Him is able to heal that sickness

[Journal, 1760] Fri. 4.-I preached about one at Forncett to a much milder people than I left there; and in the evening at Kenninghall, where the Antinomians had labored hard in the devil's service. Yet all are not lost; a few are still left ' who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.'

[Journal, 1760] Sat. 5.-I preached in the evening at Colchester; and on Sunday the 6th rode to Langham (seven miles from thence), in such a day as I have seldom known, the north-east wind was so exceedingly keen, and drove the sleet full in our face; but this did not discourage the people, who nocked from all quarters. And those who took such pains to come were not sent empty away.

[Journal, 1760] Men. 7.-I returned to London, and finished, on the road, the celebrated Telemachus.[ Fenelon, Frangois de Salignac de La Mothe (1651-1715). The Adventures of telemachus was first published surreptitiously in Holland in 1699, and afterwards in several editions in many languages. (W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 134.)] Certainly it is wrote with admirable sense. But is it without fault Is there not abundantly too much machinery Are not the gods (such as they are) continually introduced without why or wherefore And is not the work spun out too long; drawn into mere French wire Would not twelve books have contained all the matter much better than four-and-twenty[ On Tuesday, Jan. 8, he preached at the Foundery; and on the nth at the Foundery and Bull-and-Mouth.]

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 13.-I preached again in West Street chapel, now enlarged and thoroughly repaired.[ And at Wapping.] When I took this, eighteen years ago, I little thought the world would have borne us till now. But the right hand of the Lord hath the pre-eminence; therefore we endure unto this day.

[Journal, 1760] Wed. 16.-One came to me, as she said, with a message from the Lord, to tell me I was laying up treasures on earth, taking my ease, and minding only my eating and drinking. I told her, God knew me better; and, if He had sent her, He would have sent her with a more proper message.[ On Jan. 17 he preached at West Street, and on the igth at Snowsfields.]

[Journal, 1760] Fri. 18.-I desired those who believed they were saved from sin (sixteen or seventeen in number) to meet me at noon; to whom I gave such cautions and instructions as I judged needful. Nor did any of these pretend to be above man's teaching, but received it with all thankfulness.

[Journal, 1760] Thur. 24..[ On this date he wrote to Mr. Merryweather, urging the sale ot The Christian Pattern and Primitive Physick (Works, vol. xii. p. 269).]-I rode to Brentford, where, after a stop of ten or twelve years, the work of God is broke out afresh. I preached in a large place newly fitted up.[ This was a rented house, so uncomely within and without that it served as a by-word in chapel-building (cf. May 16 and 24, 1788).] It was supposed there would be much disturbance, as a considerable number of rude, boisterous people were gathered together for that purpose. But God overruled, and they all calmly and silently attended to His word. Surely the ' times and seasons ' of sending His word effectually to any place ' God hath reserved in His own power.'

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 28.-I began visiting the classes in London, and that with more exactness than ever before. After going through them, I found the society now contained about three-and-twenty hundred and fifty members, few of whom we could discern to be triflers, and none, we hope, live in any willful sin.

[Journal, 1760] FEB. 5, Tues.-I baptized a gentlewoman at the Foundery, and the peace she immediately found was a fresh proof that the outward sign, duly received, is always accompanied with the inward grace.

[Journal, 1760] Tues. 12.-After preaching at Deptford[Other preaching appointments at this time include Snowsfields on Feb. a; Zoar Chapel on the 4*, Bull-andMouth on the 6th, B,shop Bonner s on the 7th, and West Street on the 9th.] I rode on to Welling, where I received (what few expected) an exceeding comfortable account of the death of Mr. Mason, of Bexley. For many years he seemed to be utterly senseless, neither justified, nor even convinced of sin. But in his last sickness the God that heareth prayer broke in upon his soul: and the nearer death came, the more did he rejoice, to the astonishment of all

[Journal, 1760] that saw him.

[Journal, 1760] Sat. 16.-I spent an hour in the evening with a little company at Mr.------'s. I have not known so solemn an hour for a long season, nor so profitable to my own soul. Mysterious providence! Why am I cut off from those opportunities, which of all others I most want Especially considering the benefit I might impart, as well as that which I might receive; seeing they stand in as much need of light as I do of heat.[ On Feb. 18 he wrote a letter from Windmill Hill to Lloyd's Evening Post (Tyerman, vol. ii. p. 348)]

[Journal, 1760] Feb. 1760, A Remarkable Account

[Journal, 1760] About this time we had a remarkable account from Yorkshire:

[Journal, 1760] On Friday the i3th about thirty persons were met together at Otley (a town about twelve miles from Leeds), about eight o'clock in the evening, in order (as usual) to pray, sing hymns, and provoke one another to love and good works. After prayer was ended, when they proceeded to speak of the several states of their souls, some, with deep sighs and groans, complained of the burden they felt for the remains of indwelling sin; seeing, in a clearer light than ever before, the necessity of a deliverance from it.

[Journal, 1760] When they had spent the usual time together, a few went to their own houses; but the rest remained upon their knees, groaning for the great and precious promises of God. One being desired to pray, he no sooner began to lift up his voice to God than the Holy Ghost made intercession in all that were present with groanings that could not be uttered. At length the travail of their souls burst out into loud and ardent cries. They had no doubt of the favour of God; but they could not rest while there was anything in them contrary to His nature. One cried out, in an exceeding great agony, ' Lord, deliver me from my sinful nature!' then a second, a third, and a fourth. And while the person who prayed first was calling upon God in those words, ' Thou God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, hear us for the sake of Thy Son Jesus!' one was heard to say, ' Blessed be the Lord God for ever, for He hath cleansed my heart! Praise the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me, praise His holy name!' Another said, ' I hold Thee with a trembling hand, but will not let Thee go '; and in a little time cried out, ' Praise the Lord with me; for He hath cleansed my heart from sin!' Another cried, ' I am hanging over the pit of hell by a slender thread'; a second, with loud and dismal shrieks, ' I am in hell: oh save me, save me!' while a third said, with a far different voice, ' Blessed be the Lord, for He hath pardoned all my sins!' Thus they continued for the space of two hours; some praising and magnifying God, some crying to Him for pardon or purity of heart, with the greatest agony of spirit. Before they parted, three believed God had fulfilled His word, and ' cleansed them from all unrighteousness.'

[Journal, 1760] The next evening they met again, and the Lord was again present to heal the broken in heart. One received remission of sins, and three more believed God had cleansed them from all sin. And it is observable, these are all poor, illiterate creatures, of all others most incapable of counterfeiting, and most unlikely to attempt it. But ' when' His ' word goeth forth, it giveth light and understanding to the simple.'[On Sunday, Feb. 17, he preached at the Foundery, on Monday the 25th at Wapping, and on the 24th at West Street.]

[Journal, 1760] Fri. 29.-A great number of us waited upon God, at five, at nine, and at one, with fasting and prayer; and at six in the evening we met at the church in Spitalfields to renew our covenant with God. It was a blessed time; the windows of heaven were open, and the skies poured down righteousness.[ On the 29th he preached also at the Foundery, and on March I at Snowsfields.]

[Journal, 1760] MARCH 3, Mon.-I left London. It rained great part of the day, but so gently that we were not wet through when, about seven, we came to Towcester. One person [Almost certainly Samuel Basford, for whom (and Thomas Simons), and the beginnings of the work in Towcester and Whittlebury, see Met/t. Mag. 1801, p. 476.] we found here whose soul God keeps alive, though he has scarce any in the town to converse with. Perhaps he is an earnest of a people hit shall be born here, and 'counted to the Lord for a generation.'

[Journal, 1760] Tues 4 -We came to Birmingham, where I rejoined several who had been long separated from their brethren; and left upwards of fifty resolved to stand together in the good old path.

[Journal, 1760] About Christmas, 1758, I was deeply convinced there was a greater salvation than I had attained. The more I saw of this, and the more I prayed for it, the happier I was. And my desires and hopes were continually increasing for above a year.

[Journal, 1760] On January 30, 1760, Mr. Fugill [William Fugill is one of the early Methodist preachers on whose career Atmore wrote a perfectly candid, if severe. Marcn 1760.} obituary notice, holding this unhappy man's memory up as a warning to others. (See Memorial, p. 147.)]talked with one who thought she had received that blessing. As she spoke, my heart burned within me, and my desire was enlarged beyond expression. I said to him, ' O sir, when shall I be able to say as she says' He answered, ' Perhaps to-night.' I said, ' Nay, I am not earnest enough.' He replied, ' That thought may keep you from it.' I felt God was able and willing to give it then, and was unspeakably happy. In the evening, as he was preaching, my heart was full, and more and more so, till I could contain no more. I wanted only to be alone, that I might pour out my soul before God; and when I came home I could do nothing but praise and give Him thanks. From that moment I have felt nothing but love in my heart; no sin of any kind. And I trust I shall never any more offend God. I never find any cloud between God and me: I walk in the light continually. I do ' rejoice evermore,' and ' pray without ceasing.' I have no desire but to do and suffer the will of God; I aim at nothing but to please Him. I am careful for nothing, but in all things make my requests known to Him with thanksgiving. And I have a continual witness in myself, that whatever I do, I do it to His glory.'

[Journal, 1760] March. 1760, Another Experience

[Journal, 1760] Elizabeth Longmore said:

[Journal, 1760] I was born in 1730. My mother died in childbed of me; my father, when I was a year or two old. So I was brought up by the parish, and taught nothing, not so much as to read. About eleven years old I was put out parish apprentice, to a man and woman who used me very harshly. I wanted much to learn to read; but they would not spare the time. I was about fourteen when I heard Mr. J. W. preach at the Cross in Wednesbury. I immediately believed it was the right way, and began to be very uneasy. I often wished I had died with my father or mother, fearing I should never be saved. But my convictions wore away by degrees; though still I could not rest. About twenty I was married. My husband had sometimes heard the preaching, but not lately. Soon after he began again, going with me constantly. I was now more and more convinced that I was a guilty, undone sinner. I cried to God day and night, laying down my work many times in a day. On Holy Thursday, 1756, I was sadly afraid ofgoing to the sacrament. However, I broke through and went. At the Lord's Table I found such a love as I cannot express. As soon as I came back I went up into my chamber and kneeled down to prayer. In praying I heard a voice, saying, ' Go in peace; thy sins are forgiven thee.' My soul sunk into nothing before God, and was filled with humble love. I loved God and all mankind, and thought no temptation could ever shake me more. But in a few days, being low and weak in body, I found hard thoughts of God. Yet I could not give up my confidence that my sins were forgiven. Nor do I know that I ever committed any wilful sin after I was justified. About a year and half ago Mr. Fugill came. One evening, while he was preaching, I was convinced that my heart was still desperately wicked, and needed to be wholly renewed. This made me sometimes afraid to die, lest I should be called before that change was wrought. But I had still hope at the bottom, and never could doubt but that God was my God. In the meanwhile, my desire to be wholly renewed increased continually, and I was every day and every hour praying for it, whatever I was about. When my hopes prevailed, I was happy; when my fears, I was quite cast down. Being convinced how little I loved God, I was grieved

[Journal, 1760] and ashamed before Him.

[Journal, 1760] On Friday, January 25, I took no food till the afternoon, though I had a child at my breast. I was much tempted to think I should never attain, and was quite uneasy. But the next morning my uneasiness was gone, and I calmly waited for what I believed God would soon give. In the evening I went to the preaching with a full expectation that He would meet me there. And so He did. As soon as Mr. Fugill began to speak, I felt my soul was all love. I was so stayed on God as I never felt before, and knew that I loved Him with all my heart. When I came home I could ask for nothing; I could only give thanks. And the witness that God had saved me from all my sins grew clearer every hour. On Wednesday this was stronger than ever, I have never since found my heart wander from God. When I have business to do, I just take a thought and do it; and it is gone, and my heart is with the Lord. I often in a day bow my knee to God; but my heart prays continually. He is never out of my thoughts: I see Him always; although most at preaching, and in my band and class. But I do not only see Him; I feel Him too, so as I cannot express. And the more I see and feel of God, the more I feel I am nothing. When I sleep, I sleep as in the arms of Jesus; and when I wake, my soul is full of praise, and it is as if all the angels were in the room round about me praising God. I never find any heaviness or coldness; and when I must go among the people of the world, God is as much with me as before, and I long for them so as no tongue can tell. I am careful of every word I speak, and every look, and every thought. I search my heart again and again; and I can find nothing but love there. Indeed, I know if God left me a moment, I should fall. But I trust He will never leave me nor forsake me.

[Journal, 1760] I observe the spirit and experience of these two run exactly parallel. Constant communion with God the Father and the Son fills their hearts with humble love. Now this is what I always did, and do now, mean by perfection. And this I believe many have attained, on the same evidence that I believe many are justified. May God increase their number a thousandfold!

[Journal, 1760] Fri. 7.-I rode over to Dudley, formerly a den of lions. I was constrained to preach abroad; but no one opened his mouth, unless to pray or praise God. I believe the steady behaviour of the society has made an impression on most of the town.

[Journal, 1760] Sat. 8.-I was surprised at coming into Wolverhampton, which is what Dudley was, to find the people so still; many gaping and staring, but none speaking an uncivil word. ' Aye," said a well-meaning man, ' we shall not find them so civil byand-by.' I wish these croakers would learn to hold their peace. I desire to hear no prophets of evil. What do they do but weaken the hands both of preachers and people, and transfuse their own cowardice into others

[Journal, 1760] But this prophet of evil was a false prophet too. For neither while I was preaching, nor after I had done, did any one offer the least rudeness whatsoever; and we rode as quietly out of the town as we could have done out of London or Bristol.

[Journal, 1760] Hence we went on to Burslem, near Newcastle-under-Lyme, a scattered town on the top of a hill, inhabited almost entirely by potters, a multitude of whom assembled at five in the evening. Deep attention sat on every face, though as yet accompanied with deep ignorance. But if the heart be toward God, He will, in due time, enlighten the understanding.

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 9.-I preached at eight to near double the number, though scarce half as many as came at five in the evening. Some of these seemed quite innocent of thought. Five or six were laughing and talking till I had near done; and one of them threw a clod of earth, which struck me on the side of the head. But it neither disturbed me nor the congregation.

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 10.-About nine I preached at Biddulph, about eight miles north of Burslem. The earnestness of the whole congregation well rewarded me for my labor. Hence we had an extremely pleasant walk, three or four miles, to Congleton. Here we were accosted in a very different manner, almost as soon as we entered the town, which caused some of our brethren to apprehend we should have rough treatment before we got out of it That I left to God. They had procured the use of a meadow adjoining to the preaching-house, in a window of which they had fixed a kind of scaffold. Most of the congregation were deeply serious; so that three or four who took much pains to disturb them entirely lost their labor.

[Journal, 1760] About seven in the evening I preached at Stockport, where more and more hear the word of God and keep it. In the morning we took horse at five, but could find none to tell us which was the road to Leeds; so we rode on to Mottram. Following the directions we received there, we rode up a mountain, and our path ended. We made toward a large house, and the gentleman sent a servant, who pointed out the way we were to take. But soon after it divided, and an honest man bidding us keep to the right (meaning the left), we did so, till we came to the top of another high mountain, among several old stone quarries. Here that road ended. However, we went straight forward, till we came to the brow. With great difficulty we led our horses down, and rode up a path on the opposite mountain. But at the top this likewise ended. Still we thought it best to push forward. But my horse was quickly embogged. After he had thrown me on one side, and scrambled out himself, we endeavoured to walk down the mountain; but such a walk I never had before, for steepness, and bogs, and large stones intermixed. That we got to the bottom without hurt either to man or beast was little less than a miracle. But we were still at a loss, till we met a sensible man, who directed us to Saddleworth. In our inn here we found one who had frequently heard me preach at Builth, in Brecknockshire, I fear to little purpose; for, on my speaking a few words, he ran away in haste. But the whole family seemed to fear God. So we did not repent of our clambering up and down the

[Journal, 1760] mountains.

[Journal, 1760] At six we reached Leeds, sufficiently tired; but I forgot it as soon as I began to preach, and the spirit of the congregation comforted us over all our labor.

[Journal, 1760] Wed. 12.-Having desired that as many as could of the neighboring towns, who believed they were saved from sin, would meet me, I spent the greatest part of this day in examining them one by one. The testimony of some I could not receive; but concerning the far greatest part, it is plain (unless they could be supposed to tell willful and deliberate lies), (i) that they feel no inward sin, and to the best of their knowledge commit no outward sin; (2) that they see and love God every moment, and pray, rejoice, give thanks evermore; (3) that they have constantly as clear a witness from God of sanctification as they have of justification. Now in this I do rejoice, and will rejoice, call it what you please; and I would to God thousands had experienced thus much, let them afterward experience as much more as God pleases.

[Journal, 1760] March 1760, A Mountain Journey

[Journal, 1760] Thur. 13.-We rode over the mountains, through furious wind and rain, which was ready to overthrow both man and beast. However, in the afternoon we came well to Manchester. On Friday the I4th, being the National Fast day, we had service at five, at seven, and at five in the evening; but I did not observe here anything of that solemnity with which the Public Fasts are observed in London.[ See above, pp. 360-1.] I was much out of order on Saturday, and not well on Sunday. However, having appointed to preach in Stockport at noon, I determined not to break my word. As it rained, our friends provided a postchaise. When we were gone half a mile, one of the horses began to kick and rear, and would go no farther; so we got out, and walked on; but another driver brought the chaise after, and carried me to Stockport. A large congregation was waiting, and received the word with all readiness of mind. For some years the seed seemed to be here sown in vain; but at length it yields a good increase.[ On the 17th he wrote . letter to Blackwell (Works, vol. xii. p. 188). See also W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 213.]

[Journal, 1760] March. 1760, In Liverpool

[Journal, 1760] On the following days I preached in several neighboring towns, and on Wednesday evening at Liverpool.

[Journal, 1760] Thur. 20.-I had a good deal of conversation with Mr Newton.[ He was residing at Liverpool, having in October 1755 been appointed a tide surveyor, which office he held until 1763. In 1764 Lord Dartmouth obtained ordination for him from Dr. Green, Bishop of Lincoln, and he was appointed curate of Olney. In 1758 the Archbishop of York had refused ordination. To this may be addrd a note by Rev. T. E. Brigden in W.H.S. vol. iii. p. 118, showing that Newton sometimes attended the Methodist preaching in Liverpool.] His case is very peculiar. Our Church requires that clergymen should be men of learning, and, to this end, have a university education. But how many have a university education, and yet no learning at all Yet these men are ordained! Meantime, one of eminent learning, as well as unblamable behaviour, cannot be ordained because he was not at the University! What a mere farce is this! Who would believe that any Christian bishop would stoop to so poor an evasion

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 24.-About noon I preached at Warrington. Many of' the beasts of the people ' were present; but the bridle from above was in their teeth, so that they made not the least disturbance. At seven in the evening I preached at Chester; but I was scarce able to open my eyes. They were much inflamed before I set out, and the inflammation was much increased by riding forty miles with a strong and cold wind exactly in my face; but in the evening I applied the eye-water made with Lapis Calaminaris[Carbonate of lime: found, for example, at Shipham in the Mendips.] which removed the disorder before morning.

[Journal, 1760] Tues. 25.-I rode to Mold, in Flintshire. The wind was often ready to bear away both man and horse; but the earnest, serious congregation rewarded us for our trouble.

[Journal, 1760] Wed. 26.-About nine I preached at Little Leigh, a mile or two from Northwich. Many of the congregation scarce ever heard a Methodist before; but I trust they did not hear in

[Journal, 1760] vain.[ In March (day unknown) he preached at ' Boslam' (probably Burslem).]

[Journal, 1760] Thur. 27.-I rode to Liverpool in order to embark for Dublin. We were desired to be on board by nine on Saturday morning; but the wind falling, and a fog coming on, we gained a little more time; so we had one more solemn opportunity in

[Journal, 1760] the evening.[ On the 29th he wrote a ' Letter to a Member' (Werkst vol. xii. p. 274). 23]

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 30.-The fog was gone, and the wind fair. We took ship about nine, and got under sail at noon, having only eight cabin passengers, seven of whom were our own company; so we prayed, and sung, and conversed, at our own discretion. But a poor woman whom we permitted to come into the cabin gave us some uneasiness. She had been tapped for dropsy in the infirmary but two days before. When I spoke to her concerning her soul she gave but little answer, appearing to be serious and willing to hear, but totally uninstructed. She would eat nothing, but willingly accepted a dish or two of tea and two or three glasses of wine. The next morning she was extremely restless, con-j tinually moving from place to place, till the captain put a bed I for her in the forecastle, on which she lay down about eight o'clock. A little after she grew light-headed, and began shrieking dreadfully. This she continued to do till about noon, and then died. At night, the captain and all the sailors being present, we committed her body to the deep.

[Journal, 1760] April 1760, In Ireland

[Journal, 1760] On Tuesday noon, APRIL i, we landed safe at Dublin.[ On April I, 3, 4, 6, 10, 13, 15, 17, 18, 20, he preached in Dublin. In April (day unknown) he preached in Drumcree.I could a tale unfold whose lightest word Would harrow up thy ioul, freeze thy young blood, Make thy two eyes, like stars, start fromtheir spheres, Thy knotted and combined locks to part, And each particular hair to stand on end, ] I never saw more numerous or more serious congregations in Ireland than we had all this week. On Easter Day, APRIL 6, I introduced our English custom, beginning the service at four in the morning.

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 7.-I began speaking severally to the members of the society, and was well pleased to find so great a number of them much alive to God. One consequence of this is that the society is larger than it has been for several years. And no wonder, for, where the real power of God is, it naturally spreads wider and wider.

[Journal, 1760] Thur. 10.-I was sitting with a friend when poor Mr. Cook came in. His eyes, his look, his hair standing-

[Journal, 1760] Like quills upon the fretful porcupine-[ Like quills upon the fretful porcupine. SHAKESPEARE, Hamlet, I. v. 20]

[Journal, 1760] his tattered gown, his whole person, as well as his speech, immediately bewrayed him; but he is quite an original, and has so much vivacity, with touches of strong sense, that I do not

[Journal, 1760] 1. EXTERIOR OF WHITEFRIAR STREET CHAPEL, DUBLIN.

[Journal, 1760] 2. ST. MARY'S CHURCH, DUBLIN.

375

[Journal, 1760] wonder the gentlemen of the college, as he told me, had given him an apartment there. What a noble fabric lies here in ruins! What pity that, when he first found himself a sinner, he had not one to speak to that understood his case, and could teach him the only method of cure!

[Journal, 1760] Sun, I3.__At three in the afternoon I preached in the

[Journal, 1760] Barrack Square, another kind of place than Ormondtown Green.[ The more usual name is Oxmantown Green, as elsewhere in the Journal. It is derived from an early settlement of the Danes, who, coming from the East of Great Britain, were called Eastmen, or Ostmen, and their town Ostmantown, or Oxmantown. Mr. D. B. Bradshaw (in W.H.S. vol. v. p. 71) says, however, that ' the only trace of the name Ormondtown he has been able to discover is in a map (circ. 1610) of Dublin where the north-western outskirt of the city is marked " Ostman or Ormontowne."'] No mob must show their heads here, for the soldiers would give them no quarter.

[Journal, 1760] Tues. 15.-I preached there again [On the l6th he wrote to ' A Member' ( Works, vol. xii. p. 274).]; but on Thursday, it being a rainy day, an offer was made me of the riding-house-a very large, commodious building, designed by Lord Chesterfield for a church, but never used as such till now. A troop of soldiers was exercising there when I came; but this was clear gains, for the officers forbade any of them to go away before the sermon was ended.

[Journal, 1760] Fri 18.-I went with Miss Freeman to see the French prisoners sent from Carrickfergus. They were surprised at hearing as good French spoke in Dublin as they could have heard in Paris, and still more at being exhorted to heartreligion, to the 'faith that worketh by love.'[In a letter to Blackwell, dated Newry, April 26, 1760 (Works, vol. xii. p. 188), he refers to Miss Freeman, writes of ' an extremely prosperous journey,' and anticipates a full account of the French raid (described below) which he thinks will be ' of use to the whole kingdom. Probably the Government will at last awake, and be a little better prepared against the next encounter.' After the raid described below (see under May 5) the French prisoners had been landed at Ramsey by Elliott, thence brought over by Captain Bowles, in the Weazle sloop, on March 12. See also below, May I.-On the 18th Wesley wrote from Dublin a letter to Berridge, which Tyerman justly describes as that of 'a faithful friend.' Wesley says: ' Of all persons I ever knew, save one, you are the hardest to be convinced ' ( Works, vol. xii. p. 233). Seven months later Berridge wrote a reply, which was published in the W.M. Mag. 1849, p. 491. In this reply he invites Wesley to call at Everton, and adds: ' You will be welcome. My invitation is sincere and friendly. Accept of it. I send my love to your brother, and to all that labor among you.']

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 20.-I appointed those of the society who desired to renew their covenant with God, which I had several times before explained, to meet me in the evening; and, I believe, of the five hundred and twelve members, hardly twelve were wanting.

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 21.-In riding to Rosmead I read Sir John Davis's Historical Relations concerning Ireland.[ A Discovery of the True Causes why Ireland was never entirely subdued, by Sir John Davis, or Davies (1569-1626), is still held to be an authority on the question. Sir John Davies was a member successively of the English and Irish Houses of Commons, and was Solicitor-and Attorney-General. He was afterwards appointed Lord Chief Justice of England, but died before he could enter on his duties.] None who reads these can wonder that, fruitful as it is, it was always so thinly inhabited; for he makes it plain that: (i) Murder was never capital among the native Irish; the murderer only paid a small fine to the chief of his sept. (2) When the English settled here, still the Irish had no benefit of the English laws. They could not so much as sue an EnglishMon. So the English beat, plundered, yea, murdered them, at pleasure.(3) Hence arose continual wars between them, for three hundred and fifty years together; and hereby both the English and Irish natives were kept few, as well as poor.

[Journal, 1760] (4) When they were multiplied during a peace of forty years, from 1600 to 1641, the general massacre, with the ensuing war, again thinned their numbers; not so few as a million of men, women, and children, being destroyed in four years' time. (5) Great numbers have ever since, year by year, left the'land merely for want of employment. (6) The gentry are continually driving away hundreds, yea, thousands, of them that remain, by throwing such quantities of arable land into pasture, which leaves them neither business nor food. This it is that now dispeoples many parts of Ireland, of Connaught in particular, which, it is supposed, has scarce half the inhabitants at this day which it had fourscore years ago.

[Journal, 1760] Wed. 23.-I rode to Newry, and preached at seven in the evening to a numerous congregation.[ On April 26 he wrote to Blackwell (Works, vol. xii. p. 188). The letter is referred to above (see p. 377). The rector had refused the church, but the ' Earl of Moira,' who had asked him to allow Mr. Wesley to preach in the church, sent the bellman round to summon the people to the service. See Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. p. 143.]

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 27.-We had a useful sermon at church; but they told me few attended the prayers in the afternoon: however, I

[Journal, 1760] resolved to set them the example, and the church was as full as in the forenoon. Of what importance is every step we take, seeing so many are ready to follow us!

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 28.-I rode to Rathfryland, seven Irish miles from Newry, a small town built on the top of a mountain, surrounded first by a deep valley, and at a small distance by higher mountains. The Presbyterian minister had wrote to the Popish priest to keep his people from hearing; but they would not be kept: Protestants and Papists flocked together to the meadow where I preached, and sat on the grass, still as night, while I exhorted them to ' repent, and believe the gospel.' The same attention appeared in the whole congregation at Terryhoogan in the evening, where I spent a comfortable night in the prophet's chamber, nine feet long, seven broad, and six high. The ceiling, floor, and walls were all of the same marble, vulgarly called

[Journal, 1760] clay.

[Journal, 1760] MAY i, Thur.-I rode to Moira. Soon after twelve, standing on a tombstone near the church,[ The Earl of Moira in the text and Lord Rawdon on the next page (note i) represent the same person. Sir John Rawdon, the fourth baronet, was created Baron Rawdon in April 17 50 and Earl of Moira in Dec. 1761. That Wesley should, under this date, refer to him as Earl is due to his habit of writing up his Journal from his diaries at a later date. This nobleman married in 1752 Lady Elizabeth Hastings, eldest daughter of the Countess of Huntingdon. His residence here mentioned is in Co. Down, near Lough Neagh, and is not to be confused with that of April 6, 1775, which is at Dublin.] I called a considerable number of people to ' know God, and Jesus Christ, whom He hath sent.' We were just opposite to the Earl of Moira's house,2 the best finished of any I have seen in Ireland. It stands on a hill, with a large avenue in front, bounded by the church on the opposite hill. The other three sides are covered by orchards, gardens, and woods, in which are walks of various kinds.

[Journal, 1760] General Flobert, who commanded the French troops at Carrickfergus, was just gone from Lord Moira's. Major -General de Bragelone was now there, a man of a fine person and extremely graceful behaviour. Both these affirmed that the French were all picked men out of the King's Guards; that their

[Journal, 1760] commission was to land either at Londonderry or Carrickfergus, while Monsieur Conflans landed in the south; and, if they did not do this within three months, to return directly to France.[ In a letter (now in the British Museum, reprinted in the Ulster Journal of Aichaeology for 1904), dated March 4, 1760, from Colonel Sandford, Commanding Officer at Belfast, addressed to Richard Rigby at Dublin Castle, is given an official list of the prisoners taken on the capture of Thurot's squadron. Amongst these is the name: ' Le Comte de Skordee, and Lieut.-Col. of Hussars.' The list preserves the names of the regiments to which the prisoners belonged, French Guards, Swiss Guards, Burgundy, Cambis, Volontaires Etrangers, and Sea Officers. Of the six officers of the French Guards the first two names are 'Mr. de Cavenac, Lieut.-Coln.,Chevr. de Bragelone, Major-General.' The above is the official spelling of the names, and is here followed. General 'Flaubert' of the ist edition is always ' Flobert' in the official correspondence. He stayed behind when Thurot left Carrickfergus, and does not appear to have been a prisoner. He was, in fact, for a time the guest of Lord Rawdon at Moira House, Dublin.]

[Journal, 1760] Fri. 2.-In the evening, and morning and evening on Saturday, I preached at Lisburn. The people here (as Mr. Boston said) are ' all ear'; but who can find a way to their heart

[Journal, 1760] Sun. 4.-After preaching to a large congregation at seven, I hastened to Comber, in order to be at church in time. As soon as service was ended I began, and four in five of the people behaved well. About six in the evening I preached at Newtownards, where there is usually the largest congregation in Ulster. But what avails ' the hearing ear' without the ' understanding heart'

[Journal, 1760] May 1760, The Carrickfergus Raid

[Journal, 1760] Mon. 5.-After preaching in the market-place at Belfast, to a people who care for none of these things, we rode on, with a furious east wind right in our face, to Carrickfergus, where I willingly accepted of an invitation from a merchant in the town, Mr. Cobham, to lodge at his house: the rather when I understood that Mr. Cavenac, the French lieutenant-general, was still there.[ Detained by a wound in the head. Mr. D. B. Bradshaw's illustrated articles in the Winter No. of the Meth. Rec. (1906, p. 44) give all the facts respecting this raid.] I now received a very particular account of what had been lately transacted here. Mrs. Cobham said,' My daughter came running in, and said, " Mamma, there are three Indiamen [Belle Isle, La Blonde, Terpsichore, the remains of a large squadron.] come into the bay, and I suppose my brothers are come in them" (who had been in the East Indies for some time). An hour after she came in again and cried," O mamma, they say they are Frenchmen; and they are landing; and their guns glitter in the sun."' Mr. Cavenac informed me that Mr. Thurot had received a thousand men out of the King's Guards,[ Thurot was a successful smuggler and privateer, whom the king of France commissioned to raid the coasts he knew so well. He spoke English, and was known in London. His wife, who is said to have accompanied him to Carrickfergus, was the daughter of a rich apothecary in Paddington. See also the strange second-

[Journal, 1760] sight story of John Smith, of Cootehill. (Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. pp. 140, 141.)] with orders to land in the north of Ireland, at the same time that Monsieur Conflans landed in the south; that a storm drove him up to Bergen, in Norway, from whence he could not get out till his ships were much damaged and his provisions consumed, nor could he there procure a supply at any price; that another storm drove him to sixty-six degrees north latitude; from whence he did not get back to Carrickfergus Bay till all on board were almost famished, having only an ounce of bread per man daily[He sailed Oct. 15, 1759, and reached Carrickfergus Feb. 21, 1760.]: that they then landed merely to procure provisions. I asked, ' Is it true that you had a design to burn the town' He cried out, ' Jesu, Maria! We never had such a thought! To burn, to destroy, cannot enter into the heart or head of a good man.'

[Journal, 1760] After they had landed (Mrs. Cobham and others informed me), they divided into two bodies. One of these marched up to the east gate, the other to the north. Twelve soldiers and a corporal were theYe on the wall, who fired upon them when they came near. Immediately General Flobert fell, having his leg broke by a musket-ball. The next in command, a young Marquis, then led them on. When the English had fired four rounds, having no more ammunition, they retired, and the French entered the town, and at the market-place met those who had come in at the east gate. When they had joined, they marched up to the castle (though the English there, who were a hundred and sixty-two in number, kept a constant fire), the gate of which was not barred,[ The official account states that battery by shot had shaken the bolts loose.] so that the Marquis thrust it open and went in. Just then he was shot dead. Mr. Cavenac immediately took his place, and drew up his men again. The English [Under Col. John Jennings, of the 62nd Regiment.] then desired a parley, and articled to furnish them with provisions in six hours. But they could not perform it, there being little in the town. On this Mr. Cavenac sent for Mr. Cobham, and desired him to go up to Belfast and procure them, leaving his wife with the general as a hostage for his return. But the poor Frenchmen could not stay for this. At the time prefixed they began to serve themselves with meat and drink, having been in such want that they were glad to eat raw oats to sustain nature. They accordingly took all the food they could find, with some linen and wearing-apparel. But they neither hurt nor affronted man, woman, or child, nor did any mischief for mischiefs sake; though they were sufficiently j provoked, for many of the inhabitants affronted them without j fear or wit, cursed them to their faces, and even took up pokers! or other things to strike them.

[Journal, 1760] While Mrs. Cobham was with the general, a little plaindressed man came in to whom they all showed a particular respect. It struck into her mind, Is not this Mr. Thurot Which was soon confirmed. She said to him, ' Sir, you seem much fatigued. Will you step to my house and refresh yourself' He readily accepted the offer. She prepared a little veal, of which he ate moderately, and drank three glasses of small warm punch; after which he told her, ' I have not taken any food before, nor slept, for eight-and-forty hours.' She asked,' Sir, will you please to take a little rest now' Observing he started, she added, ' I will answer, life for life, that none shall hurt you under my roof.' He said, ' Madam, I believe you: I accept the offer.' He desired that two of his men might lie on the floor by the bedside, slept about six hours, and then, returning her many thanks, went aboard his ship.

[Journal, 1760] Five days he was kept in the bay by contrary winds. When he sailed [Feb. 26.] he took the Mayor of Carrickfergus [Mr. Willoughby, Chaplain and Deputy Mayor, and Mr. George Spaight were the hostages.] and another gentleman as hostages for the delivery of the French prisoners. The next morning, as he was walking the deck, he frequently started, without any visible cause, stepped short, and said, ' I shall die to-day.' A while after he said to one of the English,' Sir, I see three ships [Aeolus, Capt. Elliott; Pallas, Capt. Clements; Brilliant, Capt. Logie. ]: pray take my glass, and tell me freely what you think they are.' He looked some time and said, ' I think they are English: and I guess they are about forty-gun ships.' He called his officers and said, ' Our ships are too foul to fight at a distance: we must board them.' Accordingly, when they came up, after a short fire, he ran up close to Captain Elliott; and Captain Scordee, with his four-and-twenty hussars, immediately leaped on board. Almost instantly nine of them lay dead; on which he was so enraged, that he rushed forward with his sabre among the English, who seized his arms and carried him away. Meantime, his men that were left retired into their own ship. Thurot, seeing this, cried out,' Why should we throw away the lives of the poor men' and ordered to strike the colours. A man going up to do this was shot dead; as was likewise a second; and, before a third could do it, Mr. Thurot himself was shot through the heart.[Lord Mahon says: ' Throughout the expedition the honour and humanity of the brave adventurer were warmly acknowledged by his enemies. He was only about twenty-nine at the time of his death.'] So fell a brave man; giving yet another proof that(there is no counsel or strength against the Lord.'

[Journal, 1760] NOTE.

[Journal, 1760] DURING this period Wesley was harassed by scurrilous attacks, sometimes from those who were, or had been, of his own inner circle, and constantly by clergy and dignitaries of the English Church. His preachers, who were the strength of the new movement, were also its weakness. A few fell into sin. A list of those who, for this reason, had to be ' laid aside' is preserved among the papers of Charles Wesley, whose shorthand notes reveal the shameful details. John Wesley, knowing the temptations of their calling, hoped against hope for the restoration of his fallen preachers. Others of their number were bewitched by forms of error such as so frequently appear in times of intense religious excitement. Wesley dreaded error, and fought it fiercely, knowing that it usually ended in Antinomian immoralities.

[Journal, 1760] 'As the century advanced Wesley became a lonely knight-errant. Comrades of earlier years fell away from him. Old friends among the Anglican clergy and laity were shaken in their loyalty. Even Grimshaw, Venn, Madan, Berridge, and Lady Huntingdon herself were troubled by grave misgivings, ' Christian Perfection,' as taught not so much by Wesley as by some of his preachers, became a rock of offence; for surely, they argued, it was without warrant in either reason or Holy Scripture. Charles Wesley, who since, and partly because of, his own mishandling of the Bennet-Murray episode had never been quite the same, grew less and less sympathetic and more and more critical, especially with regard to the preachers. Many onlookers began to hope, or fear, that Methodism, if it did not perish in tempests of obloquy, would survive only as a discredited and slowly dwindling sect.

[Journal, 1760] It was in this time of peril and sorrow that Wesley's views on Christian doctrine cleared themselves and won that just balance which, accepted by his followers and their children, has suffered little if any disturbance to the present day.

[Journal, 1760] Coincidently, the disciplinary system of Methodism began to take shape. Certain of the preachers-men, in some instances, of extraordinary popularity, and all of them personally dear to Wesley-were among the first to feel the lash, the curb, the spur. Those who desire to understand the immeasurable influence wielded by Methodism in the second half of the eighteenth century should study the Doctrinal and Disciplinary Minutes.

[Journal, 1760] It was during the whole period covered by the present volume and the following one that Methodism, led by Wesley alone, silently created forces in English social life destined, before the century closed, to save the nation from irretrievable ruin. Modern historians of various schools of thought have clearly seen this. Oxford, in its History of England during the Hanoverian Period, like Cambridge in its Modern History, has emphasized the ' epoch-making' character of ' Wesley's movement.' In the Prefatory Note which introduces the Twelfth Part of the Journal (see p. 386), a few sentences from the sixth volume of Dr. Oman's History of England may suffice to illustrate the nature and extent of this emphatic testimony.