This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.

https://books.google.com

Mason

Third Edition.

1829.

[Entered at Stationers' Wall.]

{

:

Mon. SEPTEMBER 13.-My cold remaining, I was ill able to

speak. In the evening Iwas muchworse,mypalate and throat

being greatly inflamed. However, I preached as I could ; but

I could then go no farther. I could swallow neither liquids nor

solids, and the windpipe seemed nearly closed. I lay down at

myusual time, but the defluxion of rheum was so uninterrupted,

that I slept not a minute till near three in the morning. On

the following nine days I grew better. Friday, 17. I went to

Kingswood, and found several of the children still alive to God.

Sat. 18. I gave them a short exhortation, which tired but

did not hurt me.

Sun. 19. I thought myselfable to speak to the congregation,

which I did for half an hour ; but afterwards I found a pain in

my left side and inmy shoulder by turns, exactly as I did at

Canterbury twenty years before. In the morning I could scarce

liftmyhand tomyhead ; but, after being electrified, I was much

better; so that I preached with tolerable ease in the evening ;

and the next evening read the letters, though myvoicewas weak.

From this time I slowly recovered my voice and my strength,

and on Sunday preached without any trouble.

Wed. 29. After preaching at Pensford, I went to Publow,

and in the morning spent a little time with the lovely children.

Those ofthem who were lately affected, did not appear tohave

lost anything of what they had received; and some of them

were clearly gaining ground, and advancing in the faith which

works by love. Sunday, OCTOBER 3. I took a solemn leave of

the society at Bristol, now consisting of eight hundred members.

Mon. 4.-I went, by Shepton-Mallet, to Shaftesbury, and on

Tuesday to Salisbury. Wednesday, 7. Taking chaise at two

in the morning, in the evening I came well to London. The

rest of the week I made what inquiry I could into the state of

my accounts. Some confusion had arisen from the sudden


death ofmybook-keeper ; but itwas less than might have been

expected.

Monday, 11 , and the following days, I took a little tour

through Bedfordshire and Northamptonshire. Between North-

ampton and Towcester we met with agreat natural curiosity,

the largest elm I ever saw ; it was twenty-eight feet in circum-

ference; six feet more than that which was some years ago in

Magdalen-College walks at Oxford.

Mon. 18. I began my little journey through Oxfordshire

and Buckinghamshire. In the way I read over Sir Richard

Blackmore's " Prince Arthur." It is not a contemptible poem,

although by no means equal to his Poem on the Creation, in

which are many admirably fine strokes.

Mon. 25. I went to Shoreham, and spent two days both

agreeably and profitably. The work of God, which broke out

here two or three years ago, is still continually increasing. I

preached near Bromley on Thursday, and on Friday, 29, had

the satisfaction ofdining with an old friend. I hope she meant

all the kindness she professed. If she did not, it was her own

loss.

Mon. NOVEMBER 1.-I set out for Norfolk, andcame to Lynn

while the congregation was waiting for me. Here was once a

prospect of doing much good ; but itwas almost vanished away.

Calvinism, breaking inupon them, had torn the infant society in

pieces. I did all I could to heal the breach, both in public and

private ; and, having recovered a few, I left them all in peace,

and went on to Norwich on Wednesday.

Fri. 5. I preached at noon to the warm congregation at

Loddon, and in the evening to the cold one at Yarmouth. I

know there is nothing too hard for God ; else I should go thither

no more. Monday, 8. I found the society at Lakenheath was

entirely vanished away. Ijoined them together once more, and

they seriously promised to keep together. If they do, I shall

endeavour to see them again; if not, I have better work.

Tues. 9. I preached at Bury ; and on Wednesday, at Col-

chester, where I spent a day or two with much satisfaction,

among a poor, loving, simple-hearted people. I returned to

London on Friday, and was fully employed in visiting the

classes from that time to Saturday, 20.

In my latejourney I read over Dr. Lee's " Sophron." He

is both a learned and a sensible man; yet Ijudge his book will

Dec. 1773.1

hardly come to a second impression,for these very obvious rea-

sons:-1 . His language is generally rough and unpleasing ;

frequently so obscure that one cannot pick out the meaning of
a sentence, without reading it twice or thrice over : 2. His

periods are intolerably long,beyond all sense and reason ; one

period often containing ten or twenty, and sometimes thirty,

lines : 3. When he makes a pertinent remark he knows not

when to have done with it, but spins it out without any pity to

the reader : 4. Many of his remarks, like those of his master,

Mr. Hutchinson, are utterly strained and unnatural ; such as

give pain to those who believe the Bible, and diversion to those

whodonot.

Mon. 22. I set out for Sussex, and found abundance of

peoplewilling to hear the good word; at Rye in particular.

And they domany things gladly: But they will not part with

the accursed thing, smuggling. So I fear, with regard to these,

our labour will be in vain.

Monday, 29. I went to Gravesend ; on Tuesday, to Chat-

ham; and on Wednesday, to Sheerness ; over that whimsical

ferry, where footmen and horses pay nothing, but every carriage

four shillings ! I was pleasing myself that I had seen one fair
day at Sheerness! But that pleasure was soon over. Wehad

rain enough in the evening. However, the House was crowded

sufficiently. I spoke exceeding plain to the bigots on both sides.

MayGod write it on their hearts !

Mon. DECEMBER 6.-I went to Canterbury in the stage-

coach, and by the way read Lord Herbert's Life, written by

himself; the author of the first system ofDeism that ever was

published in England. Was there ever so wild a knight-errant

as this ? Compared to him, Don Quixote was a sober man.

Who can wonder, that a man of such a complexion should be

an Infidel ? I returned to London, Friday, 10, with Captain

Hinderson, of Chatham, who informed us,-" Being off the

Kentish coast, on Wednesday morning last, I found my ship

had been so damaged by the storm, which still continued, that

she could not long keep above water ; so we got into the boat,

twelve in all, though with little hope of making the shore. A

ship passing by, we made all the signals we could; but they

took no notice. A second passed near: We made signals and

called; but they would not stay for us. Athird put out their

boat, took us up, and set us safe on shore."


Fri. 17.-Meeting with a celebrated book, avolume of Cap-

tain Cook's Voyages, I sat down to read it with huge expectation.

But how was I disappointed ! I observed, 1. Things absolutely

incredible : " A nation without any curiosity ;" and, what is

stranger still, (I fear related with no good design,) "without any

sense ofshame ! Menandwomen coupling together in the face

ofthesun, and in the sightof scores of people ! Men whose skin,

cheeks, and lips are white as milk." Hume or Voltaire might

believe this ; but I cannot. I observed, 2. Things absolutely

impossible. To instance in one, for aspecimen. Anative of

Otaheite is said to understand the language of an island eleven

hundred degrees distant from it in latitude; besides I know not

how many hundreds in longitude ! So that I cannot but rank

this narrativewith that of Robinson Crusoe ; and accountTupia

to be, in several respects, akin to his man Friday.

Saturday, 25, and on the following days, we had many happy

opportunities of celebrating the solemn Feast-days, according

to the design of their institution. We concluded the year with

a Fast-day, closed with a solemn watch-night.

Tues. JANUARY 4, 1774.-Three or four years ago, a stum-

bling horse threw me forward on the pommel of the saddle. I

felt a good deal ofpain ; but it soon went off, and I thought of

it no more. Some months after I observed, testiculum alterum

altero duplo majorem esse. I consulted a Physician : He told

me it was acommon case, and did not imply any disease at all.

In May twelvemonth it was grown near as large as a hen's egg.

Being then at Edinburgh, Dr. Hamilton insisted on my having

the advice of Drs. Gregory and Munro. They immediately

saw it was a Hydrocele, and advised me, as soon as I came to

London, to aim at a radical cure, which they judged might be

effected in about sixteen days: When I came to London, I

consulted Mr. Wathen. He advised me, 1. Not to think of a

radical cure, which could not be hoped for, without my lying in

one posture fifteen or sixteen days. And he did not knowwhe-

ther this might not give awound to my constitution, which I

should never recover. 2. To do nothing while I continued

easy. And this advice I was determined to take.

Last month the swelling was often painful. So on this day,

Mr. Wathen performed the operation, and drew off something

more than half a pint of a thin, yellow, transparent water.

With this came out (to his no small surprise) a pearl of the

Feb. 1774.] 7

size ofa small shot ; which he supposed might be one cause of

the disorder, by occasioning aconflux of humours to the part.

Wednesday, 5. I was as perfectly easy, as ifno operation had

beenperformed.

Tues. 12.-I began at the east end of the town to visit the

society from house to house. I know no branch of the pastoral

office, which is of greater importance than this. But it is so

grievous to flesh and blood, that I can prevail on few, even of

our Preachers, to undertake it.

Sun. 23. Mr. Pentycross assisted me at the chapel. O

what a curse upon the poor sons of men is the confusion of

opinions ! Worse by many degrees than the curse of Babel,

the confusion of tongues. What but this could prevent this

amiable young man fromjoining heart and hand with us ?

Mon. 24. I was desired by Mrs. Wright, of New- York, to

let her take my effigy inwax-work. She has that of Mr. White-

field andmany others ; but none ofthem, I think, comes up to

awell-drawn picture.

Fri. 28. I buried the remains of that venerable mother in

Israel, Bilhah Aspernell. She found peacewith God in 1738 ;

and soon after, purity of heart. From that time she walked in

the light of God's countenance, dayand night, without the least

intermission. She was always in pain, yet always rejoicing, and

going about doing good. Her desire was, that she might not

live to be useless : And God granted her desire. On Sunday

evening she met herclass, as usual. The next day she sent for

her old fellow-traveller, Sarah Clay, and said to her, " Sally, I

am going." She asked, " Where are you going ?" She cheer-

fully answered, " To my Jesus, to be sure ! " and spoke no
.more.

Saturday, 29, and several times in the following week, I had

much conversation with Ralph Mather, a devoted young man,

but almost driven out of his senses by Mystic Divinity. If he

escapes out of this specious snare of the devil, he will be an

instrument ofmuch good.

Thur. FEBRUARY 10.-I was desired by that affectionate

man, Mr. P , to give him a sermon at Chelsea. Every

corner of the room was throughly crowded ; and all but two or

three gentlewomen (so called) were deeply serious, while I

strongly enforced, " Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way,

that leadeth unto life ."

[March, 1774.

Mon. 14. In mywayto Dorking, I gave another reading to

the " Life of Anna Maria Schurman : " Perhaps awoman of the

strongest understanding that the world ever saw. And she was

likewise deeply devoted to God. So was also Antoinette Bour-

ignon, nearly her equal in sense, though not in learning ; and

equally devoted to God. In manythings there was a surprising

resemblance between them, particularly in severity of temper,

leading them to separate from all the world, whom they seemed

to give up to the devil without remorse ; only with this differ-

ence, Madame Bourignon believed there were absolutely no

children of God, but her and her three or four associates : Anna

Schurman believed there were almost none, but her and her

little community. Nowonder that the world returned their love,

by persecuting them in every country.

Thur. MARCH 3.-I preached at L-. But O what a

change is there ! The society is shrunk to five or six members,

and probably will soon shrink into nothing. And the family is

not even a shadow of that which was for some years a pattern

to all the kingdom !

Sun. 6. In the evening I went to Brentford, and on Mon-

day to Newbury. Tuesday, 8. Coming to Chippenham, I was

informed that the floods had made the road by Marshfield

impassable. So I went round by Bath, and came to Bristol

just as my brother was giving out the hymn ; and in time to

beseech a crowded audience, not to receive " the grace of God

invain."

Sat. 12.-I went over to Kingswood, and put an end to some

little misunderstandings which had crept into the family. At

this I rejoiced ; but I was grieved to find that Ralph Mather's

falling into Mysticism and Quakerism hadwell nigh put an end

to that uncommon awakening which he had before occasioned

among the children. But the nextday I found, the little maids

at Publow, who found peace by his means, had retained all the

life which they had received ; and had indeed increased therein .

Tues. 15. I beganmynorthernjourney, and wentby Stroud,

Gloucester, and Tewkesbury, to Worcester. Thursday, 17. I

preached in the Town-Hall at Evesham, to a numerous and

serious congregation. Friday, 18. I returned to Worcester.

The society here continues walking together in love, and are

not moved by all the efforts of those who would fain teach them

another Gospel. I was much comforted by their steadfastness

March, 1774 ] 9

and simplicity. Thus let them " silence the ignorance of foolish

men!"

Sat. 19. In the evening I preached at Birmingham, and at

eight in the morning. At noon I preached on Bramwick-Heath ;

and, the Room being far too small, stood in Mr. Wiley's court-

yard, notwithstanding the keen north-eastwind. At Wednes-

bury, likewise, I was constrained by the multitude of people to

preach abroad in the evening. I strongly enforced upon them

the Apostle's words, " How shallwe escape, ifwe neglect so great

salvation ? " If we do not " go on to perfection," how shall we

escape lukewarmness, Antinomianism, hell-fire ?

Mon. 21. I preached at nine in Darlaston, and about noon

at Wolverhampton. Here I had the pleasure of meeting Mr.

Fletcher, and we took sweet counsel together. Tuesday, 22.

At five I explained that important truth, that God trieth us

every moment, weighs all our thoughts, words, and actions, and

is pleased or displeased with us, according to our works. I see

more and more clearly, that "there is agreat gulffixed" between

us and all those who, by denying this, sap the very foundation

both of inward and outward holiness .

At ten I preached at Dudley, and in the afternoon spent

some time in viewing Mr. Bolton's works, wonderfully ingeni-

ous, but the greater part of them wonderfully useless. Wed-

nesday, 23. I preached at Ashby-de-la-Zouch ; and Thursday,

24,went on to Markfield. The church was quickly filled. I

preached on those words in the Second Lesson, " Lazarus, come

forth !" In the evening I preached at Leicester. Here, like-

wise, the people "walk in the fear ofthe Lord, and in the com-

fort of the Holy Ghost."

Sun. 27.-About noon I preached at Stapleford, six miles

westfrom Nottingham. I stood in a meadow, because no house

could contain the congregation. But it was nothing to that at

Nottingham-Cross in the evening, the largest I have seen for

many years, except at Gwennap. Monday, 28. About noon

I preached at Donnington. It was a showery day, but the

showers were suspended during the preaching. In the evening

I preached at Derby, and had the satisfaction to observe an

unusual seriousness in the congregation. Careless as they

used to be, they seemed at length to know the day of their

visitation.

Tues. 29. About ten I preached in the market-place at


Ashbourne to a large and tolerably serious congregation ; and

some, I believe, felt the word ofGod quick and powerful, while

I enforced, "God now commandeth all men everywhere to

repent." After dinner we went on to Newcastle-under-Lyne,

(that is the proper name of the river,) where I was invited by

the Mayor, a serious, sensible man,to lodge at his house. I

was desired (our Room being but small) to preach in the

market-place. Abundance of people were soon gathered toge-

ther, who surprised me not a little, by mistaking the tune, and

striking up the March in Judas Maccabeus. Many of them

had admirable voices, and tolerable skill. I know not when I

have heard so agreeable a sound : It was indeed the voice of

melody. But we had one jarring string: A drunken gentle-

man was a little noisy, till he was carried away.

Wed. 29. I went on to Congleton, where I received letters,

informing me that my presence was necessary at Bristol. So

about one I took chaise, and reached Bristol about halfan hour

after one the next day. Having done my business in about

two hours, on Friday in the afternoon I reached Congleton

again ; (about ahundred and forty miles from Bristol;) no more

tired (blessed be God!) than when I left it. What achange

is in this town ! The bitter enmity of the townsfolks to the

Methodists is clean forgotten. So has the steady behaviour of

the little flock turned the hearts of their opposers.

APRIL 3.-(Being Easter Day.) I went on to Macclesfield,

andcamejust in time (so is the scene changed here also) towalk to

the old church, with the Mayor andthe two Ministers. The rain

drove us into the House in the evening, that is, as many as

could squeeze in; and we had a season of strong consolation,

both at the preaching, and at the meeting of the society.

Mon. 4.-I went on to Manchester, where the work of God

appears to be still increasing. Tuesday, 5. About noon E

preached at New-Mills, to an earnest, artless, loving people; and

in the evening, at poor, dull, dead Stockport, not without hopes

that God would raise the dead. As one means ofthis, I deter-

mined to restore the morning preaching, which had been dis-

continued for many years. So I walked over from Portwood in

the morning, and found the House well filled at five o'clock.

Wednesday, 6. I preached at Pendleton-pole, two miles from

Manchester, in a new chapel designed for a Church Minister,

which was filled from end to end.

April, 1774.1

Thur. 7.-I preached about noon at Northwich, now as quiet

as Manchester : And in the evening at that lovely spot, Little-

Leigh. Friday, 8. I went on to Chester. Saturday, 9. I

visited our old friends at Alpraham; many of whom are now

well nigh worn out, andjust ready for the Bridegroom.

Mon. 11. I preached about noon at Warrington, and in the

evening at Liverpool. Thursday, 14. I preached in Wigan

atnoon, where all tumult is now at an end : The lives of the

Christians having quite put to silence the ignorance of foolish

men. In the evening I preached at Bolton, to the most lively

and most steady people in all these parts.

Fri. 15. I preached at a preaching-house just built at Chow-

bent, which was lately a den of lions ; but they are all now

quiet as lambs. So they were the next day at the new House,

near Bury. Friday, 16. At noon I preached in Rochdale ; and

inthe evening near the church in Huddersfield. The wind was

high, and very sharp ; but the people little regarded it, while I

strongly enforced those words, " What doest thou here, Elijah ?"

Sun. 17.-I rode to Halifax. Such a country church I

never saw before. I suppose, except York Minster, there is

none in the county so large. Yet it would not near contain the

congregation. I was afraid it would be impossible for all to

hear; but God gave me a voice for the occasion : So that I

believe all heard andmany felt the application of those words,

(part of the First Lesson, ) " Let me die the death of the

righteous, and let my last end be like his ! "

While I was at dinner at Dr. Leigh's, one came from Hud-

dersfield to tell me the Vicar was willing I should preach in

the church. Dr. Leigh lending me his servant and his horse,

I set out immediately ; and, riding fast, came into the church

while the Vicar was reading the Psalms. It was well the people

had no notice of my preaching, till I came into the town : They

quickly filled the church. I did not spare them, but fully

delivered my own soul.

Mon. 18. The Minister of Heptonstall sent me word that I

waswelcome to preach in his church. Itwas with difficulty we

got up the steep mountain ; and when we were upon it, the

wind was ready to bear us away. The church was filled, not

with curious but serious hearers. No others would face so

furious a storm. At the Ewood, in the evening, we had the

usual blessing.

[April, 1774.

Tues. 19. Mrs. Holmes, who has been some years confined

to her bed, sent, and desired I would preach at her house. As

I stood in the passage,both she could hear, and all that stood

in the adjoining rooms. I preached on Rev. xiv. 1-5.

It was a refreshing season to her and to many. At half-hour

after ten, I preached in the new House at Hightown, and in the

evening at Daw-Green.

I found Mr. Greenwood (with whom I lodged) dying (as was

supposed) of the gout in the stomach. But, on observing the

symptoms, I was convinced it was not the gout, but the angina

pectoris : (Well described by Dr. Heberden, and still more

accurately by Dr. M'Bride of Dublin :) I therefore advised

him to take no more medicines, but to be electrified through

the breast. He was so. The violent symptoms immediately

ceased, and he fell into a sweet sleep.

Thur. 21. I preached at Morley, on, "O thou of little faith,

wherefore didst thou doubt?" About two I preached at the

new-built House at Pudsey, wherethe Germans (I was informed)

are continually declining. Twenty years since onewould have

thought they would never have been moved ; but who can

stand any longer than God is on their side ? This evening

and the next I preached to the lively congregation at Bradford,

and was much comforted ; so were many ; indeed all that ear-

nestly desired to recover the whole image ofGod.

Fri. 22. I rode and walked to Bradshaw House, standing

alone in a drearywaste. But although it was a cold and stormy

day, the people flocked from all quarters. So they did at noon

the nextday, to Clough, (two or three miles from Colne,) where,

though it was cold enough, I was obliged to preach abroad. In

the evening I preached to our old, upright, loving brethren at

Keighley.

Sun. 24. It being acold and stormy day,Haworth church

contained the people tolerably well. On Monday, Tuesday,

and Wednesday, I preached at Bingley and Yeadon ; and on

Thursday opened the new House at Wakefield. What a

change is here, since our friend was afraid to let me preach in

his house, lest the mob should pull it down! So I preached in

the main street : And then was sown the first seed, which has

since borne so plenteous a harvest.

Hence I went to Leeds, and on Saturday, 30, to Birstal.

Here, on the top of the hill, was the standard first set up four-

May, 1774.1

and-thirty years ago. And since that time, what hath God

wrought!

Sun. MAY 1.-I preached at eight on that delicate device of

Satan to destroy the whole religion of the heart, the telling

men not to regard frames or feelings, but to live by naked

faith ; that is, inplain terms, not to regard either love, joy, peace,

or any other fruit of the Spirit : Not to regard whether they feel

these, or the reverse ; whether their souls be in an heavenly or

hellish frame ! At one I preached at the foot of the hill to

many thousand hearers ; and at Leeds to about the same num-

ber, whom I besought in strong terms not to receive " the

grace ofGod invain."

On Monday and Tuesday I preached at Otley and Pateley-

Bridge. Wednesday, 4. I went on to Ambleside ; and on

Thursday to Whitehaven. Monday, 9. I set out for Scotland.

At eight I preached in the Castle-yard at Cockermouth, to

abundance ofcareless people, on , " Where their worm dieth not,

and the fire is not quenched." In the evening I preached at

Carlisle. On Tuesday I went on to Selkirk, and on Wednes-

day to Edinburgh ; which is distant from Carlisle ninety-five

miles, and no more. Thursday, 12. I went in the stage-coach

to Glasgow ; and on Friday and Saturday, preached on the

old Green, to a people, the greatest part ofwhom hear much,

know every thing, and feel nothing.

Sun. 15. My spirit was moved within me at the sermons

I heard both morning and afternoon. They contained much

truth, but were no more likely to awaken one soul than an

Italian Opera. In the evening a multitude of people assembled

onthe Green, to whom I earnestly applied these words, " Though

I have all knowledge, though I have all faith,-though I give

all my goods to feed the poor," &c., " and have not love, I am

nothing."

Mon. 16. In the afternoon, as also at seven in themorning,

I preached in the kirk at Port-Glasgow. My subjects were

Death and Judgment, and I spoke as homeas I possibly could.

The evening congregation at Greenock was exceeding large. I

opened and enforced these awful words, " Strait is the gate,

and narrow is the way, that leadeth unto life." I know not that

ever I spoke more strongly. And some fruit of it quickly

appeared; for the House, twice as large as that at Glasgow,

was throughly filled at five in the morning. In the evening,

[May, 1774.

Tuesday, 17, I preached on the Green at Glasgow once more,

although the north windwas piercing cold. At five in the morn-

ing I commended our friends to God.

How is it that there is no increase in this society ? It is

exceeding easy to answer. One Preacher stays here two or three

months at a time, preaching on Sunday mornings, and three or

four evenings in a week. Can a Methodist Preacher preserve

either bodily health, or spiritual life, with this exercise ? And if

he is but half alive, what will the people be ? Just so it is at

Greenock too.

Wed. 18.-I went to Edinburgh, and on Thursday to Perth .

Here likewise the morning preaching had been given up : Con-

sequently the people were few, dead, and cold. These things

must be remedied, or we must quit the ground.

In the way to Perth, I read that ingenious tract, Dr. Gre-

gory's " Advice to his Daughters." Although I cannot agree

with him in all things ; (particularly as todancing, decent pride,

and both a reserve and a delicacy which I think are quite

unnatural ; ) yet I allow there are many fine strokes therein,.

and abundance of common sense : And if a young woman

followed this plan in little things, in such things as daily occur,

and in great things copied after Miranda, she would form an

accomplished character.

Fri. 20.-1 rode over to Mr. Fraser's, at Monedie, whose

mother-in-law was to be buried that day. O what a difference

is there between the English and the Scotch method of burial !

The English does honour to human nature; and even to the

poor remains, that were once a temple of the Holy Ghost ! But

when I see in Scotland a coffin put into the earth, and covered

up without a word spoken, it reminds me of what was spoken

concerning Jehoiakim, " He shall be buried with the burial of

anass !"

Sat. 21. I returned to Perth, and preached in the evening

to a large congregation. But I could not find the way to their

hearts. The generality of the people here are so wise that they

need no more knowledge, and so good that they need no more

religion ! Who can warn them that are brimful of wisdom and

goodness, to flee from the wrath to come ?

Sun. 22. I endeavoured to stir up this drowsy people, by

speaking as strongly as I could, at five, on, "Awake, thou that

sleepest ; " at seven, on, " Where theirworm dieth not ;" and in

May,1774.1

the evening, on, " I saw the dead,small and great, stand before

God." In the afternoon ayoung gentleman, in the west kirk,

preached such a close, practical sermon, on, " Enoch walked with

God," as I have not heard since I came into the kingdom.

Mon. 23. About ten, I preached to a considerable number

ofplain, serious, country-people, at Rait, a little town in the

middle of that lovely valley, called the Carse of Gowry. In

riding on to Dundee, I was utterly amazed at reading and con-

sidering a tract put into my hands, which gave a fuller account

than I had ever seen of the famous Gowry conspiracy in 1600.

AndIwasthroughlyconvinced,-1. Fromthe utterimprobability,

if one should not rather say, absurdity, of the King's account,

the greater part of which rests entirely on his own single word ;

2. From the many contradictions in the depositions which were

made to confirm some parts of it ; and, 3. From the various

collateral circumstances, related by contemporary writers, that

the whole was a piece of king-craft ; the clumsy invention of a

covetous and blood-thirsty tyrant, to destroy two innocent men,

thathemightkillandalso take possession of their large fortunes.

In the evening I preached at Dundee, and on Tuesday, 24,

went on to Arbroath. In the way I read LordK-'s plausible

"Essays on Morality andNatural Religion." Did everman take

somuch pains to so little purpose, as he does in his Essay on

Liberty and Necessity ? Cui bono ? What good would it do to

mankind, if he could convince them that they are a mere piece

of clock-work ? that they have no more share in directing their

own actions, than in directing the sea or the north wind ? He

owns, that " if men saw themselves in this light, all sense of

moral obligation, ofright andwrong, of good or ill desert, would

immediately cease." Well, my Lord sees himself in this light ;

consequently, if his own doctrine is true, he has no " sense of

moral obligation, of right and wrong, ofgood or ill desert." Is

he not then excellently well-qualified for a Judge ? Will he

condemn aman for not " holding the wind in his fist ? "

Thehigh and piercing windmade it impracticable to preach

abroad in the evening. But the House contained the people

tolerably well, as plain and simple as those at Rait. I set out

earlyinthemorning; but,not being able to ford the North-Esk,

swollen with the late rains, was obliged to go round some miles.

However, I reached Aberdeen in the evening.

Here I met with another curious book, " Sketches of the

[June, 1774.

History of Man. " Undoubtedly, the author is aman of strong

understanding, lively imagination, and considerable learning ;

and his book contains some useful truths. Yet some things in

it gave me pain : 1. His affirming things that are not true ; as

that all Negro children turn black the ninth or tenth day from

their birth. No : most ofthem turn partly black on the second

day, entirely so on the third. That all the Americans are of a

copper colour. Not so : Some of them are as fair as we are.

Many more such assertions I observed, which I impute not to

design but credulity. 2. His flatly contradicting himself; many

times within a page or two. 3. His asserting, and labouring to

prove, that man is a mere piece ofclock-work : And, lastly, his

losing no opportunity of vilifying the Bible, to which he appears

to bear amost cordial hatred. I marvel if any but his brother

Infidels will give two guineas for such a work as this !
Sun. 29.-At seven the congregation was large. In the

evening the people were ready to tread upon each other. I

scarce ever saw people so squeezed together. And they seemed

to be all ear, while I exhorted them, with strong and pointed

words, not to receive " the grace ofGod in vain."

Mon. 30.-I set out early from Aberdeen, and preached at

Arbroath in the evening. I know no people in England, who

aremore loving, andmore simple of heart, than these. Tuesday,

31. I preached at Easthaven, asmall town, inhabited by fish-

ermen. I suppose all the inhabitants were present ; and all were

ready to devour the word. In the evening I preached at Dun-

dee, and had great hope that brotherly love would continue.

In my way hither, I read Dr. Reid's ingenious Essay. With

the former part ofit I was greatly delighted : But afterwards I

was much disappointed. I doubt whether the sentiments are

just: But I am sure his language is so obscure, that to most

readers it must be mere Arabic. But I have a greater objection

than this ; namely, his exquisite want ofjudgment, in so admir-

ing that prodigy of self-conceit, Rousseau,-a shallow, yet

supercilious Infidel, two degrees below Voltaire ! Is it possible,

that aman who admires him can admire the Bible ?

Wed. JUNE 1.-I went on to Edinburgh, and the next day

examined the society one by one. Iwas agreeably surprised.

They have fairly profited since Iwas here last. Such a number

ofpersons having sound Christian experience I never found in

this society before. I preached in the evening to a very elegant

June, 1774.] JOURNAL . 17

congregation, and yetwith great enlargement of heart. Satur-

day, 4. I found uncommon liberty at Edinburgh in applying

Ezekiel's vision of the Dry Bones. As I waswalking home, two

men followed me, one ofwhom said, " Sir, you are my prisoner.

Ihave awarrant from the Sheriff, to carryyou to the Tolbooth."

At first I thought he jested ; but finding the thing was serious,

When
Idesired one or two of our friends to go up with me.

we were safe lodged in a house adjoining to the Tolbooth, I

desired the Officer to let me see his warrant. I found the prose-

cutor was one George Sutherland, once a member of the society.

He had deposed, " That Hugh Saunderson, one of John Wes-

ley's Preachers, had taken from his wife one hundred pounds in

money, and upwards of thirty pounds in goods ; and had, besides

that, terrified her into madness ; sothat, through the want of her

help, and the loss of business, he was damaged five hundred

pounds."

Before the Sheriff, Archibald Cockburn, Esq. , he had deposed,

"That the said John Wesley and Hugh Saunderson, to evade

her pursuit, were preparing to fly the country ; and therefore

he desired his warrant to search for, seize, and incarcerate them

in the Tolbooth, till they should find security for their appear-

ance. " To this request the Sheriff had assented, and given his

warrant for that purpose.

But why does he incarcerate John Wesley ? Nothing is laid

against him, less or more. Hugh Saunderson preaches in con-

nexion with him. What then ? Wasnot the Sheriff strangely

overseen ?

Mr. Sutherland furiously insisted that the Officer should

carry us to the Tolbooth without delay. However, he waited

till two or three of our friends came, and gave a bond for

our appearance on the 24th instant. Mr. S. did appear,

the cause was heard, and the prosecutor fined one thousand

pounds.

Sun. 5.-About eight I preached at Ormiston, twelve miles

from Edinburgh. The House being small, I stood in the street,

and proclaimed " the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ." The

congregation behaved with the utmost decency. So did that

on the Castle-Hill in Edinburgh, at noon ; though I strongly

insisted, that God " now commandeth all men every where to

repent." In the evening the House was throughly filled ; and

many seemed deeply affected. I do not wonder that Satan, had


it been in his power, would have had me otherwise employed

this day.

Wed. 8.-I took my leave of our affectionate friends, and in

the evening preached at Dunbar. Thursday, 9. The wind

being high, I preached in the Court-House at Alnwick ; but it

was intolerably hot. Friday, 10. About eleven I preached in

the little Square, adjoining to the preaching-house in Morpeth.

In the evening I preached at Newcastle ; and in the morning,

Saturday, 11 , set out for the Dales. About noon I preached

at Wolsingham, and in the evening near the preaching-house in
Weardale.

Sun. 12. The rain drove us into the House, both morning

and afternoon. Afterwards I met the poor remains of the select

society ; but neither ofmy two lovely children, neither Peggy

Spence nor Sally Blackburn, were there. Indeed awhole row

of such I had seen before ; but three in four ofthem were now

as careless as ever. In the evening I sent for Peggy Spence

and Sally Blackburn. Peggy came, and I found she had well

nigh regained her ground, walking in the light, and having a

lively hope of recovering all that she had lost. Sally flatly

refused to come, and then ran out of doors. Being found at

length, after a flood of tears, she was brought almost by force.

But I could not get one look, and hardly aword, from her.

She seemed to have no hope left : Yet she is not out of God's

reach.

I now inquired into the causes of that grievous decay in the

vast work of God, which was here two years since ; and I found

several causes had concurred: 1. Not one of the Preachers that

succeeded was capable of being a nursing-father to the new-born

children : 2. Jane Salkeld, one great instrument of the work,

marrying, was debarred from meeting the young ones ; and

there being none left who so naturally cared for them, they fell

heaps upon heaps: 3. Most of the liveliest in the society were

the single men and women ; and several ofthese in a little time

contracted an inordinate affection for each other ; whereby they

so grieved the Holy Spirit of God, that he in great measure

departed from them : 4. Men arose among ourselves, who under-

valued the work ofGod, and called the great work of sancti-

fication a delusion. By this they grieved some, and angered

others ; so that both the one and the other were much weak-

ened : 5. Hence, the love of manywaxing cold, the Preachers

June, 1774. ] 19

were discouraged; and jealousies, heart-burnings, evil-surmis-

ings, were multiplied more and more. There is now a little

revival : God grant it may increase !

Mon. 13. At eleven I preached in Teesdale, and at Swale-

dale in the evening. Tuesday, 14. We crossed over the enor-

mousmountain into lovely Wenaudale ; the largest by far of all

the Dales, as well as the most beautiful. Some years since,many

hadbeen awakened here, and joined together by Mr. Ingham

and his Preachers. But since the bitter dissension between

their Preachers, the poor sheep have all been scattered. A

considerable number of these have been gleaned up, and joined

together by our Preachers. I came into the midst of them at

Redmire. As I rode through the town, the people stood staring

on every side, as ifwe had been a company of monsters. I

preached in the street, and they soon ran together, young and

old, from every quarter. I reminded the elder, of their having

seen me thirty years before, when I preached in Wensley
church ; and enforced once more, "Believe in the Lord Jesus

Christ, and thou shalt be saved." When I rode back through

the town, it wore a new face. The people were profoundly

civil: They were bowing and courtseying on every side. Such

a change in two hours I have seldom seen.

Hence we hasted to Richmond, where I preached in a kind

of Square. All the Yorkshire Militia were there ; and so were

their Officers, who kept them in awe, so that they behaved

with decency. At six I preached at the end of our House in

Barnard-Castle. I was faint and feverish when I began ; but

the staying an hour in a cold bath (for the windwas very high

and sharp) quite refreshed me ; so that all my faintness was

gone, and I was perfectly well when I concluded.

Wed. 15. I went on by Durham to Sunderland. Saturday,

18, I preached at Biddick. It was fair while I was preaching,

but rained very hard both before and after. Sunday, 19. I

preached at the east end of the town, I think, to the largest

congregation I ever saw at Sunderland. Theraindid not begin

till I had concluded. At two I preached at the Fell, at five in

the Orphan-House.

Mon. 20. About nine I set out for Horsley, with Mr.

Hopper and Mr. Smith. I took Mrs. Smith and her two little

girls, in the chaise with me. About two miles from the town

just on the brow of the hill, on a sudden both the horses set

[June, 1774.

out, without any visible cause, and flew down the hill, like an

arrow out of a bow. In a minute John fell off the coach-box.

The horses then went on full speed, sometimes to the edge of

the ditch on the right, sometimes on the left. A cart came up

against them : They avoided it as exactly as if the man had

been on the box. A narrow bridge was at the foot of the hill,

They went directly over the middle of it. They ran up the

next hill with the same speed ; manypersons meeting us, but

getting out of theway. Near the top of the hill was agate,

which led into a farmer's yard. It stood open. They turned

short, and run through it, without touching the gate on one

side, or the post on the other. I thought, " However, the

gate which is on the other side of the yard, and is shut, will

stop them : " But they rushed through it as if it had been a

cobweb, and galloped on through the corn-field. The little

girls cried out, " Grandpapa, save us ! " I told them, " Nothing

will hurt you : Do not be afraid ;" feeling no more fear or care,

(blessedbeGod!) than if I had been sitting in my study. The

horses ran on, till they came to the edge of a steep precipice.

Just then Mr. Smith, who could not overtake us before, galloped

in between. They stopped in a moment. Had they gone on ever

so little, he and we musthave gone down together !

I am persuaded both evil and good angels had a large share

in this transaction : How large we do not know now ; but we

shall know hereafter.

I think some of the most remarkable circumstances were, 1 .

Both the horses, which were tame and quiet as could be, starting

out in amomentjust at the top of the hill, and running down

full speed. 2. The coachman's being thrown on his head with

such violence, and yet not hurt at all. 3. The chaise running

again and again to the edge of each ditch, and yet not into it.

4. The avoiding the cart. 5. The keeping just the middle of

the bridge. 6. The turning short through the first gate, in a

manner that no coachman inEngland could have turned them,

when in full gallop. 7. The going through the second gate as

if it had been but smoke, without slackening their pace at all.

Thiswould have been impossible, had not the end of the chariot-

pole struck exactly on the centre of the gate ; whence the whole,

by the sudden impetuous shock, was broke into small pieces.

8. That the little girl, who used to have fits, on my saying,

"Nothing will hurtyou," ceased crying, and was quite composed.

June, 1774. ] JOURNAL. 21

Lastly, that Mr. Smith struck in just then: In aminute more we

hadbeendown the precipice ; and had not the horses then stop-

ped at once, they must have carried him and us down together.

" Let those give thanks whom the Lord hath redeemed, and

delivered from the hand of the enemy ! "

Fri. 24. I read over Dr. Wilson's tract on the Circulation

of the Blood. What are we sure of but the Bible ? I thought

nothing had been more sure, than that the heart is the grand

moving power, which both begins and continues the circulation.

But I think the Doctor has clearly proved, that it does not

begin at the heart; and that the heart has quite another office,

only receiving the blood, which then moves on through its chan-

nels, on the mere principle of suction, assisted by the ethereal

fire, which is connected with every particle of it..

Sun. 26. In the morning I preached at the Ballast-Hills,

among the glassmen, keelmen, and sailors. As these had

nothing to pay, I exhorted them " to buy wine and milk with-

outmoney and without price."

Mon. 27.-I took my leave of this lovely place and people,

and about ten preached to a serious congregation at Durham.

About six I preached at Stockton-upon-Tees, on a text suited

to the congregation, " Where their worm dieth not, and the fire

is not quenched."

Tues. 28. This being my birth-day, the first day of my

seventy-second year, I was considering, How is this, that I find

just the same strength as I did thirty years ago ? That my

sight is considerably better now, andmy nerves firmer, than they

werethen ? That I have none of the infirmities of old age, and

have lost several I had in my youth ? The grand cause is, the

good pleasure of God, who doeth whatsoever pleaseth Him.

The chief means are, 1. My constantly rising at four, for about

fifty years. 2. My generally preaching at five in the morning ;

one of the most healthy exercises in the world. 3. My never

travelling less, by sea or land, than four thousand five hundred

miles in ayear.

In the evening I preached at Yarm ; about eleven the next

day at Osmotherley ; and in the evening at Thirsk. Thursday,

30. I preached at Hutton-Rudby, and found still remaining a

few sparks of the uncommon flame which was kindled there ten

years ago. Itwas quenched chiefly by the silly, childish con-

tentions of those who were real partakers of that great blessing.

[July, 1774.

Fri. JULY 1.-I preached in Stokesley at six ; and many

determined to set out anew. In Guisborough I was constrained

to preach abroad ; and the whole multitude was as silent as the

subject, Death ! I never before had such an opportunity at

this place. In the afternoon, through miserable roads, we at

length got to Whitby.

Sun. 3.-We had a solemn hour at five with the society only ;

and another at eight, while I enforced those words on a nume-

rous congregation, " How shall we escape, if we neglect so great

alvation ? " While we were at church, a poor man would needs

divert himself by swimming ; but he sunk, and rose no more. The

Minister preached in the afternoon a sermon suited to the occa-

sion, on, " Be ye likewise ready ; for ye know not the hour

when the Son of Man cometh." At five I preached in the

market-place, on, " Though I speak with the tongues of men

and angels," &c., " and have not charity, I am nothing." I

spoke exceeding plain, and the people were attentive : Yetfew

of them, I doubt, understood what was spoken. The society,

however, are well established, and adorn the doctrine of God

our Saviour.

Mon. 4. At eleven I preached in the little Square at Robin

Hood's Bay. At six I preached to a numerous congregation,

in the new House at Scarborough. It is plain ; andyet is one

of the neatest and most elegant preaching-houses in England.

Now let the people walk worthy of their calling, and there will

be a good work in this place.

Wed. 6.-I went on to Bridlington-Quay; and in the evening

preached in the town, to as stupid and ill-mannered a congregation

as I have seen for many years. Thursday, 7. I preached at

Beverley and Hull, where the House would not near contain the

congregation. How is this town changed since I preached on

the Car ! Saturday, 9. I preached at Pocklington and York.

Sun. 10. Some of Tadcaster informing me that the Minister

was willing I should preach in the church, I went thither in

the morning. But his mind was changed : So I preached in

the street, to a listening multitude, from the Lesson for the day,

on the righteousness which exceeds that of the Scribes and

Pharisees ; in the morning and evening at York.

Tuesday, 12, was the Quarterly Meeting. It was a busy,

and yet a comfortable, day. Many were refreshed, both at the

love-feast, and while I was describing the " hundred forty and

. 23
July, 1774. ] JOURNAL

four thousand," standing "with the Lamb on mount Sion."

Who is ambitious to be of that number ?

Thur. 14.-About nine I preached at Wakefield, and in the

evening at Doncaster. Here also God has a few names. Fri-

day, 15. About eleven I preached at Thorne, and in the even-

ing at Rotherham, to a people who both understand and love

the Gospel.

Sat. 16. I went to Epworth, and preached in the market-

place to a numerous and quiet congregation. Sunday, 17.

About eight I preached at Misterton. The sun shining in my

face was a little troublesome at first; but was soon covered with

clouds. We had an useful sermon at Haxey church. About

one I preached at Overthorpe ; and between four and five, the

rain being stayed, I began in Epworth market-place. Such a

congregation never met there before; and they did not meet in

vain.

Mon. 18.-I reached Brigg before eight ; and, by the request

of the chief persons in the town, preached at nine in the market-

place, to a large and attentive congregation. Hence I went on

to Tealby, and preached near the church to a multitude ofplain,

serious country-people : Very different from the wild, unbroken

herd, to whom I preached at Horncastle in the evening.

Tues. 19. I preached at Louth about noon, and at Grimsby

in the evening. At ten, on Wednesday, 20, I preached at

Wimberton. None of the hearers was more attentive than an

old acquaintance of my father's,-Mr. George Stovin, formerly

a Justice of the peace near Epworth, now as teachable as a little

child, and determined to know nothing save Christ crucified.

About two I preached in an open place at Scotter, and in the

evening at Owston. One ofmy audience here was Mr. Pinder,

acontemporary of mine at Oxford. But any that observed so

feeble, decrepid an old man, tottering over the grave, would

imagine there was a difference of forty, rather than two, years
between us !

On Friday and Saturday I made a little excursion into

Yorkshire. Sunday, 24. I preached at eight at Gringley-in-

the-Hill, to anhuge congregation, amongwhom I could observe

but one person that was inattentive. Here I received an invi-

tation from Mr. Harvey, to give him a sermon at Finningley.

I came thither a little before the service began; and the church

was filled, but not crowded. Between three and four I returned


to Epworth. The congregation there was large last Sunday;

but itwas nearly doubled now : And never hadwe, from the

beginning, a more solemn and affectionate parting.

Mon. 25. I went on to Sheffield, and on Tuesday met the

select society. But it was reduced from sixty to twenty ; and

but half of these retained all that they once received ! What a

grievous error, to think those that are saved from sin cannot

lose what they have gained ! It is a miracle if they do not ;

seeing all earth and hell are so enraged against them : While,

meantime, so very few, even of the children of God, skilfully

endeavour to strengthen their hands.

Wed. 27.-About one we reached Leek, in Staffordshire.

I could not imagine who the Quaker should be that had sent

me word he expected me to dinner ; and was agreeably surprised

to find that it was my oldfriend, Joshua Strongman, of Mount-

Mellick, in Ireland, whom I had not seen for many years. I

found he was the same man still ; of the same open, friendly,

amiable temper : And every thing about him was (not costly or

fine, but) surprisingly neat and elegant. Itbegan to rain soon

after we came in ; but the rain stayed while I was preaching ;

and it seemed the whole town, rich and poor, were gathered

together, and listened while I explained, " God is a Spirit, and

they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth."

I preached at Burslem in the evening ; and on Thursday, 28,

in the afternoon, came to Shrewsbury.

Sat. 30.-I went on to Madeley ; and in the evening preached

under a sycamore-tree, in Madeley-Wood, to a large congrega-

tion, goodpart of them colliers, who drank in every word. Surely

never were places more alike, than Madeley-Wood, Gateshead-

Fell, and Kingswood.

Sun. 31. The church could not contain the congregation,

either morning or afternoon ; but in the evening I preached

to a still larger congregation at Broseley ; and equally attentive.

I now learned the particulars of a remarkable story, which I

had heard imperfectly before:-Some time since, one of the

colliers here, coming home at night, dropped into a coal-pit,

twenty-four yards deep. He called aloud for help, but none

heard all that night, and all the following day. The second

night, being weak and faint, he fell asleep, anddreamed that his

wife, who had been some time dead, came to him, and greatly

comforted him. In the morning, a gentleman going a hunting,

Aug. 1774.]

anhare started up just before the hounds, ran straight to the

mouth ofthe pit, andwas gone ; no man could tell how. The

hunters searched all round the pit, till they heard a voice from

the bottom. They quickly procured proper help, and drew up
the man unhurt.

Mon. AUGUST 1.-I preached at Bewdley, in an open place

at the head of the town ; and in the evening at Worcester,

which still continues one of the liveliest places in England.

Here I talked with some who believe God has lately delivered

them from the root of sin. Their account was simple, clear,

and scriptural ; so that I saw no reason to doubt of their

testimony.

Tues. 2.-I preached at ten in the Town-Hall, at Evesham,

and rode on to Broadmarston. Thursday, 4. I crossed over

to Tewkesbury, and preached at noon in a meadow near the

town, under a tall oak. I went thence to Cheltenham. As it

was the high season for drinking the waters, the town was full

ofGentry : So I preached near the market-place in the evening,

to the largest congregation thatwas ever seen there. Some of

the footmen at first made a little disturbance ; but I turned to

them, and they stood reproved.

Sat. 6.-I walked from Newport to Berkeley-Castle. It is a

beautiful, though very ancient, building ; and every part of it

kept in good repair, except the lumber-room and the chapel ;

the latter of which, having been of no use for many years, is

now dirty enough. I particularly admired the fine situation,

and the garden on the top of the house. In one corner of the

castle is the room where poor Richard II. was murdered. His

effigy is still preserved, said to be taken before his death. If

hewas like this, he had an open, manly countenance, though

with a cast of melancholy. In the afternoon we went on to
Bristol.

The Conference, begun and ended in love, fully employed

me on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday ; and we observed

Friday, 12, as aday of fasting and prayer for the success of

theGospel.

Mon. 15. I set out for Wales, but did not reach Cardiff

till near eight o'clock. As the congregationwas waiting in the

Town-Hall, I went thither without delay ; and many, I believe,

did not regret the time they had waited there.

Tues. 16. I preached, about noon, in the great hall at

[Aug. 1774.

Llandaff, on, " It is appointed unto men once to die." Strange

doctrine, and not very welcome to the inhabitants ofpalaces !

Wed. 17. At eleven I preached in the Town-Hall, at Cow-

bridge : The neatest place of the kind I have ever seen. Not

only the floor, the walls, the ceiling, are kept exactly clean, but

every pane ofglass in the windows.

Hence I hasted on to Swansea, and at seven preached in the

Castle to a large congregation. The next morning I went on

to Llanelly ; butwhat a change was there! Sir Thomas Stepney,

the father of the poor, was dead: Cut down in the strength of

his years ! So the family was broke up, and Wilfred Colley, his

butler, the father of the society, obliged to remove. Soon after,

John Deer, who was next in usefulness to him, was taken into

Abraham's bosom. But just then Col. St. Leger, in the

neighbourhood, sent to Galway for Lieutenant Cook to come

and put his house into repair, and managehis estate. So ano-

ther is brought, just in time to supply the place of Wilfred

Colley. I preached at five near sister Deer's door, to a good

company of plain country-people ; and then rode over to the

old ruinous house, which Mr. Cook is making all haste to

repair. It is not unlike old Mr. Gwynne's house at Garth,

having a few large handsome rooms. It is also situated much like

that ; only not quite so low : For it has thecommand of a well-

cultivated vale, and of the fruitful side of the opposite mountain.

Fri. 19. We rode on to Larn-Ferry ; and seeing a person

just riding over the ford, we followed him with ease, the water

scarce reaching aboveour horses' knees. Between two and three

we came to Pembroke.

Sun. 21. At nine I began the service at St. Daniel's, and

concluded a little before twelve. It was a good time. The

power of the Lord was unusually present, both to wound and

to heal. Many were constrained to cry, while others were filled

with speechless awe and silent love.

After dinner I went over to Haverfordwest, but could not

preach abroad because of the rain. Both here and at Pembroke,

I found the people in general to be in acold, dead, languid

state. And no wonder, since there had been for several months

atotal neglect ofdiscipline. I did all I could to awaken them

once more, and left them full of good resolutions. Tuesday,

23. Iwent to the New Inn, near Llandilo ; and on Wednesday,

21, to Brecknock . 7

Sept. 1774.1 JOURNAL. 27

In the evening I preached in the Town-Hall to most of the

Gentry in the town. They behaved well, though I used great

plainness of speech indescribing the narrow way.

Thur. 25. At eleven I preached within the walls of the

old church at the Hay. Here and everywhere I heard the

same account ofthe proceedings at . The Jumpers (all

who were there informed me) were first in the court, and after-

wards in the house. Some of them leaped up many times, men

and women, several feet from the ground: They clapped their

hands with the utmost violence ; they shook their heads ; they

distorted all their features ; they threw their arms and legs to

and fro, in all variety of postures ; they sung, roared, shouted,

screamed with all their might, to the no small terror of those

that were near them. One gentlewoman told me, she had not

been herself since, and did not know when she should. Mean-

time the person of the house was delighted above measure, and

said, "Now the power ofGod is come indeed."

Sat. 27-. Being detained some hours at the Old-Passage, I

preached to a small congregation; and in the evening returned

toBristol.

Mon. 29. I set out for Cornwall, and preached at Collump-

ton in the evening. I spoke strong words to the honest, sleepy

congregation : Perhaps some may awake out of sleep. Tues-

day, 30. I preached to a far more elegant congregation at

Launceston ; but what is that unless they are alive to God ?

Wed. 31. The rain, with violent wind, attended us all the

way to Bodmin. A little company are at length united here.

At their request I preached in the Town-Hall, (the most dreary

one I ever saw,) to a mixed congregation of rich and poor.

All behaved well : And who knows but some good may be done

even at poor Bodmin ?

In the evening I preached at Redruth. Thursday, SEPTEM-

BER 1, after preaching at St. John's about noon, I went on to

Penzance. Whenthe people here were as roaring lions, we had

all the ground to ourselves ; now they are become lambs, Mr.

S-b and his friends step in, and take true pains to make a

rent in the society. But hitherto, blessed be God, they stand

firm in one mind and in one judgment ! Only a few, whom we

had expelled, they have gleaned up: Iftheycan do them good,

I shall rejoice. In the evening I took my stand at the end of

the town, and preached the whole Gospel to a listening multi


tude. I then earnestly exhorted the society to follow after

peace and holiness.

Fri. 2.-I preached in the market-place at St. Ives to almost

the whole town. I could not but admire the number of serious

children, as well-behaved as the eldest of the congregation.

This was a happy meeting : So was that of the society too,

when all their hearts were as melting wax.

Sat. 3.-We had the Quarterly Meeting at Redruth. This

is frequently a dull, heavy meeting ; but it was so lively a one

to-day, that we hardly knew how to part. About six I preached

at Treworgey, and applied closely to the Methodists, " What do

ye more than others ? " One cried out, "Damnable doctrine ! "

True ; it condemns all those who hear and do not obey it.

Sun. 4. The rain drove us into the House at St. Agnes.

At one it was fair ; so I preached in the street at Redruth.

But the glorious congregation was assembled at five, in the

amphitheatre at Gwennap. They were judged to cover four-

score yards, and yet those farthest off could hear.

To-day I received the following note :-

" THE sermon you preached last Thursday evening was, by

the grace of God, of great good to my soul. And when you

prayed so earnestly for backsliders, (ofwhomI am one,) an arrow

dipped in blood reached my heart. Ever since I have been

resolved, never to rest till I find again the rest that remains for

the people of God.

I am, dear Sir,

A vile backslider from the pure love of Jesus,

and from the society at Gwennap,

Mon. 5. I preached at Cubert ; Tuesday, 6, at Port-

Isaac. Wednesday, 7. Having preached at Camelford and

Launceston, I did not think of preaching at Tavistock ; but

finding a congregation waiting, I began without delay. I had

scarce half finished my discourse in the Square at Plymouth-

Dock, when the rain began. At first I did not regard it : But

as it grew heavier and heavier, I thought it best to shorten my

sermon .

It seems, after a long interval ofdeadness, God is again visit-

ing this poor people. The society is nearly doubled within this

year, and is still continually increasing. And many are athirst

for full salvation ; particularly the young men. Friday, 9. I set

Oct. 1774. ]

out early from the Dock ; and the next afternoon reached

Bristol.

Fri. 16. We had asolemn watch-night at Kingswood. It

seemed, every one felt thatGodwas there ; so that hardly any

went away till the whole service was concluded.

Inthe followingweek I visited manyofthe country societies.

At Frome I learned the remarkable case of sister Whitaker.

Last Sunday she met her class as usual ; and after saying, " I

know that my Redeemer liveth," dropped down, and in a few

minutes, without any struggle or pain, expired.

Tues. 27.-I preached at Freshford and Bradford ; Wed-

nesday, 28, at Bath, where many of the people seemed much

moved; chiefly those who had long imagined they were " built

on a rock," and now found they had been " building upon the
sand."

Thur. 29. I preached at Pill, on the "worm" that "diethnot,

and the fire " that " is not quenched : " If haply some of these

drowsy ones might awake, and escape from everlasting burnings.

Mon. OCTOBER 3, and on Tuesday and Wednesday, I exa-

mined the society.

Thur. 6.-I met those of our societywho had votes in the

ensuing election, and advised them, 1. To vote, without fee or

reward, for the person they judged most worthy : 2. To speak

no evil ofthe person they voted against: And, 3. To take care

their spirits were not sharpened against those that voted on the

other side.

Sun. 9-. The evening being fair and mild, I preached in the

new Square. It was a fruitful season :

Soft fell the word as flew the air ;

even " as the rain into a fleece of wool." Many such seasons we

havehad lately : Almost every day one and another has found

peace, particularly young persons and children. Shall not they

be a blessingin the rising generation ? In the evening we had a

solemn opportunity of renewing our covenant with God ; a

means of grace which I wonder has been so seldom used either

in Romish or Protestant churches !

Mon. 10.-I preached at Salisbury ; and on Tuesday, 11 , set

out for the Isle of Purbeck. Whenwe came to Corfe-Castle, the

evening being quite calm and mild, I preached in a meadow

near the town, to a deeply attentive congregation, gathered from


all parts of the island. I afterwards met the society, artless and

teachable, and full ofgood desires. But few of them yet have

got any farther, than to " see men as trees walking."

Wed. 12. I preached to a large congregation at five, who

seemed quite athirst for instruction. Afterwardswe took a walk

over the remains of the Castle, so bravely defended in the last

century, against all the power of the Parliament forces, by the

widow of the Lord Chief Justice Banks. It is one of the noblest

ruins I ever saw : The walls are of an immense thickness, defy-

ing even the assaults of time, and were formerly surrounded by

a deep ditch . The house, which stands in the middle, on the

very top of the rock, has been a magnificent structure. Some time

since the proprietor fitted up some rooms on the south-west side

ofthis, and laid outalittle garden, commanding a large prospect,

pleasant beyond description. For a while he was greatly de-

lighted with it : But the eye was not satisfied with seeing. It

grew familiar ; it pleased no more; and is now run all to ruin.

No wonder : What can delight always, but the knowledge and

love ofGod ?

About noon I preached at Langton, three or four miles from

Corfe-Castle, to a large and deeply serious congregation. Here

is likewise a little society ; but I did not find any among them

whoknew in whomtheyhad believed. In the evening I preached

inameadow, near Swanage, to a still larger congregation. And

here at length I found three or four persons, and all ofone family,

who seemed really to enjoy the faith of the Gospel. Few others

of the society (between thirty and forty in number) appeared
to be convinced of sin. I fear the Preachers have been more

studious to please than to awaken, or there would have been a

deeper work .

The Isle (or properly Peninsula) of Purbeck is nine or ten

miles broad, and perhaps twenty long, running nearly from

north-east to south-west. Two mountains run almost the whole

length, with valleys both between them and on each side, but

poorly cultivated. The people in general are plain, artless ,

good-natured, and well-behaved. If the labourers here are

zealous and active, they will surely have a plentiful harvest.

Thur. 13. I set out early, and reached Gosport, (seventy-

two miles,) not long after six. Finding a boat ready, I crossed,

and went straight to the Room. It was full enough ; so I

began without delay, and enforced our Lord's words, (one ofmy

. 31
Oct. 1774.] JOURNAL

favourite subjects,) " Myyoke is easy, andmyburden is light."

Friday, 14. I visited as many as I could, sick or well, and

endeavoured to settle those that had been shaken by those

bigots who are continually waiting to receive the weak " unto

doubtful disputations." I had intended, after preaching in the

evening, to meet the society alone; but the eagerness of the

people to stay, induced me to suffer a great part of them. Yet

itwas little to their satisfaction ; for when I warned our brethren

not to have " itching ears," they ran away in all haste.

Sat. 15-. Setting out (as usual) at two, I reached London

early in the evening. Monday, 17. I set out for Oxfordshire,

and preached at Wallingford in the evening. Tuesday, 18.

About nine I preached at Newnham; at noon, in the garden at

Oxford; and in the evening, at Finstock, (a village near Carn-

bury-house, built by the great Earl of Clarendon, but not inha-

bited by any of his descendants ! ) to a plain, artless people.

Wednesday, 29. I rode to Witney, and found more life than I

expected, both in the congregation and the society. Thursday,

20. I preached at Wattleton, at the front of Mr. Stonehill's

house. The whole congregation was seriously attentive. In

the evening I preached at High-Wycomb, to many more than

the Room would contain ; and I believe not in vain.

Fri. 21. I preached in Chesham, and on Saturday returned

to London.

Mon. 24. I set out for Northamptonshire, and received a

particular account of one that eminently adorned the Gospel :-

" 1. SUSANNAH SPENCER was born at Whittlebury, in the

year 1742. When she was young she contracted a very general

acquaintance, and was exceedingly beloved by them, having an

agreeable person, a good understanding, and much sweetness of

temper; and, being modest and decent in her whole behaviour,

she seemed, like others, to think she had religion enough.

" 2. In 1760, Thomas Grover came down, and preached

several times at Whittlebury and at Towcester. She went to

hear him, but with a fixed resolution, ' not to be catched,' as

she called it ; but her resolution was vain. In a sermon she

heard at Towcester, she was cut to the heart. Her convictions

grew deeper and deeper from that time, for about a year. She

was then hearing him preach, but felt her heart as hard as the

nether millstone. Yet at the love-feast which followed, it was

suddenly broke in pieces, and she was all melted into tears, by

32 [Oct. 1774.

those words applied to her inmost soul, in an inexpressible

manner,-

MyGod is reconciled,

His pardoning voice I hear !

He owns me for his child ;

I canno longer fear.

" 3. The day following, being exercised with strong tempta-

tion, she gave up her confidence; but the next night, wrestling

withGod in prayer, she received it againwith double evidence :

And though afterwards she frequently felt some doubts, yet it

never continued long ; but she had, in general, a clear, abiding

sense of the pardoning love ofGod.

"4. From that time she walked steadily and closely with

God, and was a pattern to all around her. She was particularly

exact in reproving sin, and lost no opportunity ofdoing it. In

her whole conversation she was remarkably lively, and yet gentle

towards all men. Her natural temper indeed was passionate,

but the grace ofGod left scarce any traces of it.

" 5. From the very time of her justification, she clearly saw

the necessity of being wholly sanctified ; and found an unspeak-

able hunger and thirst after the full image of God ; and in the

year 1772, God answered her desire. The second change was

wrought in as strong and distinct amanner as the first had been.

Yet she was apt to fall into unprofitable reasonings ; by which

her evidence was often so clouded, that she could not affirm she

was saved from sin, though neither could she deny it. But her

whole life bore witness to the work which God had wrought in

her heart. She was as a mother in Israel, helping those that

were weak, and tenderly concerned for all ; while she sunk

deeper into the love of God, and found more and more of the

mind that was in Christ.

" 6. In the summer, 1773, she took cold by lying in adamp

bed. This threw her into a violent fever, which not only brought

her very low, but fixed a deep cough upon her lungs, which no

medicine could remove. It quite wore her down ; especially

whenthere was added the loss ofboth her sisters and her mother,

who were all taken away within a little time of each other. She

had likewise a continual cross from her father, and was at the

same time tried by the falsehood of those friends in whom she

confided, and whom she tenderly loved. The following year,

1774, she had a presage of her death ; in consequence of which,

Oct. 1774.] JOURNAL. 33

shewas continually exhorting the young women, Betty Padbury

in particular, to fill up her place when God should remove her

fromthem.

" 7. In the beginning of winter I* understood, that, weak

as she was, she had not proper nourishment ; being unable to

procure it for herself, and having no one to procure it for her ;

so I took that charge upon myself; I worked with her in the

day, (for she would work as long as she could move her fingers,)

laywith her every night, and took care that she should want

nothing which was convenient for her.

" 8. For some time her disorder seemed at a stand, growing.

neither better nor worse ; but in spring, after she had taken a

quantity of the bark, she was abundantly worse. Her cough

continually increased, and her strength swiftly decayed ; so that

before Easter, she was obliged to take to her bed : And having

now a near prospect of death, she mightily rejoiced in the

thought, earnestly longing for the welcome moment ; only still

with that reserve, ' Not as I will, but as thou wilt.'

" 9. Mr. Harper (the Preacher) took several opportunities of

asking hermany questions. She answered them all with readi-

ness and plainness, to his entire satisfaction. She told him

abundance of temptations which she underwent from time to

time; but still witnessed, that the blood of Christ had cleansed

her from all sin. She often said to us,

The race we all are running now !

And if I first attain,

Ye too your willing heads shall bow ;

Ye shall the conquest gain !

" 10. Commonly, when I came into her room, I was not able

to speak for a time. She would then say, ' Why do not you

speak ? Why do not you encourage me ? I shall love you better

when we meet in heaven, for the help you give me now.'

" 11. In the last week or two, she was not able to speak

manywords at a time ; but as she could, with her feeble, dying

voice, she exhorted us to go forward. Yet one day, some of

her former companions coming in, her spirit seemed to revive ;

and she spoke to them, to our great surprise, for near an hour

together. They seemed deeply affected ; and it was some time

before the impression wore off.

•Elizabeth Padbury.


" 12. Her father now frequently came, sat by her bedside,

and expressed tender affection; weeping much, and saying he

should now be quite alone, and have no one left to whom he

could speak. She spoke to him without reserve. He received

every word, and has never forgotten it since.

" 13. A few days before she died, afterwe had been praying

with her, we observed she was in tears, and asked her the reason.

She said, ' I feel my heart knit to you, in a manner I cannot

express ; and I was thinking, if we love one another now, how

will our love be enlarged when we meet in heaven! Andthe

thought was too much for me to bear; it quite overcame me.'

" 14. On Friday she seemed to be just upon the wing : We

thought she was going almost every moment. So she continued

till Tuesday. We were unwilling to part with her,but seeing

the pain she was in,could not wish it should continue; and so

gave her up to God. I sat upwithher thatnight, and the next

day, June 7, she fell asleep."

Monday, 31, and the following days, Ivisited the societies

near London. Friday, NOVEMBER 5. In the afternoon John

Downes (who had preached with usmany years) was saying,

" I feel such a love to the people at West-Street, that I could

be content to die with them. I do not find myself very well ;

but I must be with them this evening." He went thither, and

began preaching, on, " Come unto me, ye that are weary and

heavy-laden." After speaking ten or twelve minutes, he sunk

down, and spake no more, till his spirit returned to God.

I suppose he was by nature full as great a genius as Sir
Isaac Newton. I will mention but two or three instances of

it :-When he was at school, learningAlgebra, he came oneday

to his master, and said, " Sir, I can prove this proposition a

betterway than it is provedinthe book." His master thought

it could not be ; but upon trial, acknowledged it to be so. Some

time after, his father sent him to Newcastle with a clock, which

was to bemended. He observed the clockmaker's tools, and the

manner how he took it in pieces, and put it together again ; and

whenhe came home, first made himself tools, andthenmade a

clock, which went as true as any in the town. I suppose such

strength of genius as this, has scarce been known in Europe

before.

Anotherproofof it was this:-Thirty years ago, while I was

shaving, he was whittling the top of a stick : I asked, "What

Nov. 1774.1 JOURNAL. 35

are you doing ? " He answered, " I am taking your face, which

I intend to engrave on acopper-plate." Accordingly, without

any instruction, he first made himself tools, and then engraved

the plate. The second picture which he engraved, was that

which was prefixed to the " Notes upon the New Testament."

Such another instance, I suppose, not all England, or perhaps

Europe, can produce.

For several months past, he had far deeper communion with

God, than ever he had had in his life; and for some days he

had been frequently saying, " I am so happy, that I scarce

know how to live. I enjoy such fellowship with God, as I

thought could not be had on this side heaven." And having

now finished his course of fifty-two years, after a long conflict

with pain, sickness, and poverty, he gloriously rested from his

labours, and entered into the joy of his Lord.

Tues. 8.-I baptized twoyoungwomen; one ofwhom found

adeep sense of the presence ofGodinhis ordinance ; the other

received a full assurance of his pardoning love, and was filled

withjoy unspeakable.

Sun. 13. After aday of much labour, at my usual time,

(half-hour past nine,) I lay down to rest. I told my servants,

" I must rise at three, the Norwich coach setting out at four."

Hearing one of them knock, though sooner than I expected, I

rose and dressed myself; but afterwards, looking at my watch,

I found itwas but half-hour past ten. While I was considering

what to do, I heard a confused sound of many voices below ;

and looking out at the window towards the yard, I saw it was as

light as day. Meantime, many large flakes of fire were con-

tinually flying about the house; all the upper part ofwhich was

built of wood, which was near as dry as tinder. A large deal-

yard, at a very smalldistance from us, was all in a light fire ;

fromwhich the north-west wind drove the flames directly upon

the Foundery; and there was no probability of help, for no

water could be found. Perceiving I could be of no use, I took

my Diary and my papers, and retired to a friend's house. I

had no fear ; committing the matter into God's hands, and

knowing He would do whatever was best. Immediately the

wind turned about from north-west to south-east ; and our pump

supplied the engines with abundance ofwater ; so that in a little

more than two hours, all the danger was over.

Mon. 14. In the evening I preached at Bury ; Tuesday,


15, about one at Loddon, to a people the most athirst for God

of any I found in the county. In the afternoon I went on to

Yarmouth. When was " confusion worse confounded? " Divi-

sion after division has torn the once-flourishing society all in

pieces. In order to heal the breach, in some measure, I enforced

those deep words, " Though I have all knowledge and all faith,

so as to remove mountains, and have not love, it profiteth me

nothing." One of our former Leaders being asked what he

thought of this, frankly answered, " It is damnable doctrine."

Thur. 16.-About noon I preached at Lowestoft, where the

little flock are remarkably lively. The evening congregation at

Yarmouth was all attention ; and truly the power of Godwas

present to heal them.

In the evening I returned to Norwich. Never was a poor

society so neglected as this has been for the year past. The

morning preaching was at an end; the bands suffered all to

fall in pieces ; and no care at all taken of the classes, so that

whether they met or not, it was all one ; going to church and

sacrament were forgotten; and the people rambled hither and

thither as they listed.

On Friday evening I met the society, and told them plain,

I was resolved to have a regular society or none. Ithen read

the Rules, and desired every one to consider whether he was

willing to walk by these Rules or no. Those in particular, of

meeting their class every week, unless hindered by distance or

sickness, (the only reasons for not meeting which I could allow,)

and being constant at church and sacrament. I desired those

who were so minded to meet me the next night, and the rest to

stay away. The next night we had far the greater part ; on

whom I strongly enforced the same thing. Sunday, 20. I

spoke to every Leader, concerning every one under his care ;

and put out every person whom they could not recommend to

me. After this was done, out of two hundred and four mem-

bers, one hundred and seventy-four remained. And these points

shall be carried, ifonly fifty remainin the society.

Mon. 21.-1 examined the society at Loddon. There are

near fifty ofthem, simple and teachable, all of one mind, and

many of them able to rejoice in God their Saviour. Tuesday,

22. I took a solemn and affectionate leave of the society at Nor-

wich. About twelve we took coach. About eight, Wednesday,

23, Mr. Dancer met me with a chaise, and carried me to Ely.

Νοv. 1774.] 37

Owhat want of common sense ! Water covered the high-road

for amile and a half. I asked, " How must foot-people come

to the town ? " " Why, they must wade through ! "

About two I preached in a house well filled with plain, lov-

ing people. I then took awalk to the cathedral, one of the

most beautiful I have seen. The western tower is exceeding

grand; and the nave of an amazing height. Hence we went

through a fruitful and pleasant country, though surrounded

with fens, to Sutton. Here many peoplehad latelybeen stirred

up: They had prepared a large barn. At six o'clock it was

well filled ; and it seemed as ifGod sent a message to every soul.

Thenextmorning and evening, though the weather was uncom-

monly severe, the congregation increased rather than diminished.

Fri. 25. I left them in much hope that they will continue

in this earnest, simple love.

I set out between eight and nine in aone-horse chaise, the

wind being high and cold enough. Much snow lay on the

ground, andmuch fell as we crept along over the fen-banks.

Honest Mr. Tubbs would needs walk and lead the horse

through water andmud up to his mid-leg, smiling and saying,

"We fen-men do not mind a little dirt. " When we had gone

about four miles, the road would not admit of a chaise. So I

borrowed a horse and rode forward; but not far, for all the

grounds were under water. Here therefore I procured a boat

full twice as large as a kneading-trough. I was at one end, and

aboy at the other,who paddled me safe to Erith. There Miss

L-waited for me with another chaise, which brought me to

St. Ives.

No Methodist, I was told, had preached in this town : So I

thought it high time to begin ; and about one I preached to a

very well-dressed and yet well-behaved congregation. Thence

my new friend (how long will she be such ? ) carried me to

Godmanchester, near Huntingdon. A large barn was ready, in

which Mr. Berridge and Mr. Vennused to preach. And though

the weather was still severe, it was well filled with deeply atten-

tive people. Saturday, 26. I set out early, and in the evening

reached London.

Mon. 28.-I paid a visit to the amiable family at Shoreham ,

and found the work of God there still increasing. Wednesday,

30. I crossed over to Ryegate, and had a larger congregation

thanever before.


Thur. DECEMBER 1.-I preached at Dorking, and was

much pleased with the congregation,who seemed to " taste the

good word." Friday, 2. I returned to London.

Mon. 5.-I preached at Canterbury ; and Tuesday, 6, at

Dover. As I was setting out thence on Wednesday morning,

awagon, jostling us, disabled our chaise. Our coachmanwent

back to procure another, saying, he would soon overtake us.

He did so after we had walked nine or ten miles, and brought

us safe to Canterbury, where I spent a day or two with much

satisfaction ; and on Saturday, returned home.

Mon. 12.-I opened the new House at Sevenoaks . Tuesday,

13. About noon I preached at Newbounds ; and in theevening

at Sevenoaks again, where our labour has not been in vain.

Wed. 14. I rode to Chatham, and found that James Wood,

one of our Local Preachers, who, being in a deep consumption,

had been advised to spend some time in France, had come back

thither two or three days before me. The day after he came

he slept in peace : And two days after, his body was interred,

all our brethren singing him to the grave, and praising God

on his behalf. I preached his funeral sermon to a crowded

audience, on the text which he had chosen : " Let me die the

death of the righteous; and let my last end be like his ! "

Monday,19, and the following days, I read with the Preachers

what I judged most useful: And we endeavoured to " provoke

one another to love andto good works."

Thur. 22-. I walked, with one that belongs to the family,

through the Queen's house. The apartments are nothing so

rich as those in Blenheim House,but full as elegant. Nor is

any thing in Blenheim itself more grandthan the staircase and

thesaloon. But I was quite disappointedin the Cartoons ; they

are but the shadow of what they were : The colours are so

entirely faded, that you can hardly distinguish what they were

once.

Sun. 25. I buried the bodyofEsther Grimaldi, whodied in

the full triumph of faith. "A mother in Israel " hast thou

been; andthy "works shall praise thee in thegates ! " During

the twelve festival days, we had the Lord's Supper daily ; a lit-

tle emblem of the Primitive Church. Maywe be followers of

them in all things, as they were of Christ !

Sun. JANUARY 1, 1775.-We had a larger congregation at

the renewal of the Covenant than we have had for many years :

Feb. 1775.1 JOURNAL. 39

And I do not know that ever we had a greater blessing. After-

wardsmanydesired to return thanks, either for a sense of par-

don, for full salvation, or for a fresh manifestation of his grace,

healing all their backslidings.

Tues. 10. I set out for Bedfordshire, and in the evening

preached at Luton. Wednesday, 11. I crept on through a

miserable road to Bedford, but was well rewarded by the beha-

viour of the congregation.

Thur. 12. We crossed over the country to Godmanchester.

The whole town seemed to be moved. The people flocked

together from all parts, so that the barnwould in nowise con-

tain them. I found great liberty of speech among them, and

could not doubt but God would confirm the word of his mes-

senger.

Fri. 13.-Even at poor, dead Hertfordwas such a concourse

of people, that the Room would notnear contain them. And

most of them were deeply attentive while I explained these

awfulwords, " I saw the dead,small andgreat, stand before God."

Sun. 29. Finding manywere much dejectedby the threat-

eningposture of public affairs, I strongly enforced our Lord's

words, "Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith ? " And of a

truth God spoke in his word. Many were ashamed of their

unbelieving fears; andmany enabled to " be careful for nothing,"

but simply to" make " all their "requests knownuntoGod with

thanksgiving."

Sun. FEBRUARY 5-. I saw a glorious instance of the power

of faith. Thomas Vokins, a man of a sorrowful spirit, used

always to hang downhis head like abulrush. But a few days

since, as he was dying without hope,God broke in upon his

soul; and from that timehehas beentriumphing over pain and

death, and rejoicing withjoy full ofglory.

Wed. 8-. I had a particularconversation with Mr. Ferguson

on some difficulties in philosophy: He seemed throughly satis-

fied himself; but he did not satisfyme. I still think both Mr.

Kennedy and Mr. Jones have fully proved their several points.

Wed. 22. I had an opportunity of seeing Mr. Gordon's

curious garden at Mile-end, the like of which I suppose is

hardly to be foundinEngland, if in Europe. One thing in

particular I learned here, the real nature of the tea-tree. I was

informed, 1. That the Green and the Bohea are of quite differ-

ent species. 2. That the Boheais much tendererthan the Green.

[March, 1775

3. That the Green is an evergreen ; and bears, not only in the

open air, but in the frost, perfectly well. 4. That the herb of

Paraguay likewise bears the frost, and is a species of tea. 5.

And I observed that they are all species ofbay or laurel. The

leaf ofGreen tea is both ofthe colour, shape, and size of abay

leaf: That of Bohea is smaller, softer, and of adarker colour.

So is the herb of Paraguay, which is of a dirty green ; and no

larger than our common red sage.

MARCH 1.-(BeingAsh-Wednesday.) I took a solemn leaveof

our friends at London; and on Thursday, 2, met our brethren at

Reading. Afew were awakened, and perhaps converted here,

by the ministry of Mr. Talbot. But as he did not take any

account of them, or join them together, we found no trace of

them remaining. A large room was presently filled, and all the

spaces adjoining. And I have hardly ever seen a people who

seemed more eager to hear.

Fri. 3. The mild weather changed into cold and blustering,

with heavy showers of rain ; notwithstanding which, we had a

very large congregation at Ramsbury Park. Saturday, 4. At

noon I preached to a stilllarger congregation, in the new House

at Seend: In the afternoon I went on to Bristol; whence, on

Monday, 13, I set out for Ireland.

Tues. 14. At noon I preached in Tewkesbury, now the live-

liest place in the Circuit. Many here have been lately convinced

of sin, andmany converted to God. Some have been made par-

takers of the greatsalvation,and their love and zeal have stirred

up others. So that the flame now spreads wider andwider. 0

let none be able to quench it !

In the evening I preached at Worcester. Here also the flame

is gradually increasing. While I was here, there was a very

extraordinary trial at the assizes. A boy being beaten by his

master, ran away ; and wandering about till he was half starved,

was then allowed to lie in the hay-loft ofan inn. In the night he

stole into the room wheretwo gentlemen lay ; (probably not very

sober ; ) and, without waking them, picked the money out ofboth

their pockets ; though their breeches lay under their head. In

themorning, having confessed the fact, he was committed to

gaol. Hemade no defence : So one of the Counsellors rose up,

and said, " My Lord, as there is none to plead for this poor boy,

I will do it myself," He did so, and then added, “ My Lord,

it may be this bad boymay make a good man. And I humbly

April, 1775.1 41

conceive, it might bebest to send him back to his master. I

will give him a guinea towards his expenses." "And I will

give him another," said the Judge. Which he did, with a mild

and serious reproof. Sohewas sent back full ofgood resolutions.

Fri. 17. In the evening, though it was cold, I was obliged

to preach abroad at Newcastle. One buffoon laboured much to

interrupt. But as he was bawling, with his mouth wide open,

some arch boys gave him such a mouthful of dirt as quite satis-

fied him.

On Saturday and Sunday I preached at Congleton andMac-

clesfield ; Monday, 20, at Stockport and Manchester. Tuesday,

21. I preached at Knutsford ; but the house would by nomeans

contain the congregation. The street too was filled ; and even

those which could not hear were silent. This is uncommon ;

especially in a town little accustomed to this strange way of

preaching : Those who cannot hear themselves usually taking

care to hinder others from hearing.

In the evening I opened the new House at Northwich, which

was sufficiently crowded both this night and the next. After

preaching at many places in the way, on Saturday, 25, I came

to Liverpool. The congregations here, bothmorning and even-

ing, were so large, and so deeply attentive, that I could not be

sorry for the contrary winds, which detained us till Thursday,

the 30th, when we went on board the Hawk. We were scarce

out of the river, when the wind turned against us, and blew hard-

er and harder. Arolling seamade my companions sick enough.

But so fine a ship I never sailed in before. She never shipped

one sea, and went more steady than I thought was possible.

On Friday morning it blew hard; but the next day we had a

fair, small wind. So about six, on Sunday, APRIL 2, we

landed at Dunleary; and between nine and ten reached White-

friar-Street.

On Monday and Tuesday I examined the society, in which,

two years ago, there were three hundred and seventy-six persons.

And I found three hundred and seventy-six still, not one more

or less. But I found more peace and love among them, than I

had done for many years.

Thur. 6. I visited that venerable man, Dr. Rutty, just tot-

tering over the grave; but still clear in his understanding, full

of faith and love, and patiently waiting till his change should

come. Afterwards I waited on Lady Moira; and was surprised

[April, 1775,

to observe, though not a more grand, yet a far more elegant

room, than any I ever saw in England. It was an octagon,

about twenty feet square, and fifteen or sixteen high ; having

one window, (the sides of it inlaid throughout with mother-of-

pearl,) reaching from the top of the room to the bottom. The

ceiling, sides, and furniture of the room, were equally elegant.

Andmust this too pass away like a dream !

Sun. 9. The good old Dean of St. Patrick's desired me to

come within the rails, and assist him at the Lord's Supper.

This alsowas a means of removing much prejudice from those

who were zealous for the Church. Monday, 10. Leaving just

four hundred members in the society, I began my tour through

the kingdom. I preached at Edinderry in the evening ; on

Tuesday and Wednesday, at Tyrrel's Pass. Thursday, 13.

Sending my chaise straight to Athlone, I rode to Mullingar ;

and thence, through miserable roads, to Longford. A large

number of people attended the preaching, both in the evening

and at eight in the morning, being Good-Friday. But I found

very little of the spirit which was here two years ago. About

eleven I preached at Loughan, and in the evening at Athlone.

On Easter-Day I would willingly have preached abroad; but

the weather would not permit. Monday, 17. I preached at

Aghrim ; and Tuesday-noon, at Eyre-Court. Afterwards I was

desired to walk down to Lord Eyre's. I was a little surprised

at the inscription over the door, " Welcome to the house of

liberty." Does it mean liberty from sin ?

It is a noble old house. The staircase is grand ; and so are
two or three of the rooms. In the rest of the house, as well as in

the ruinous outhouses, gardens, and fish-ponds, the owner seemed

to say to every beholder,"All this profiteth me nothing !"

I preached in the evening at Birr, with agood hope that God
would at length revive his work.

Wed. 19. About noon I preached in the market-place at

Clara. It was the market-day; but that did not lessen the

congregation. The poor people eagerly flockedfrom the market;
and there was no buying or selling till I concluded.

After preaching at Coolylough, Tullamore, and Portarlington,

(still " unstable as water,") Saturday, 22, I found, at Mount-

Mellick, a little company, who appeared to be better established.

I spent Saturday and Sunday comfortably among them, building them up in ourmost holy faith.

May,177 J
5.]

Mon. 24. The Minister of Maryborough inviting me to

preach in his church, I began reading Prayers about nine ; and

afterwards preached to a numerous congregation. For the pre-

sent, every one seemed affected. Will not some bring forth

fruit with patience ?

In the evening I was scandalized both at the smallness and

deadness of the congregation at Kilkenny. The next evening it

was a little mended, but not much. Of all the dull congrega-

tions I have seen, this was the dullest.

Wed. 26. I went on to Waterford, where the rain drove us

into the preaching-house, the most foul, horrid, miserable hole

which I have seen since I left England. The next day I got

into the open air, and a large congregation attended. I had

designed to set out early in the morning ; but doubting if I

should ever have such another opportunity, (the Major of the

Highland Regiment standing behind me, with several of his

Officers, many ofthe soldiers before me, and the centinel at the

entrance of the court,) I gave notice of preaching at ten the

next morning, and at four in the afternoon. I did so to a

well-behaved congregation, and in the evening went on to
Carrick.

Sat. 29. Early in the evening we reached Rathcormuck,

but found the inn filled with Officers. It is true they were but

five, and there were seven beds ; but they hadbespoke all, and

would not spare us one ! So we were obliged to go some miles

further. We drove this day just threescore (English) miles.

Sun. 30.-I came to Cork time enough to preach. The con-

gregation was not small, and it was not large: But it was very

large in George-Street at four in the afternoon, aswell as deeply

attentive. At six I preached in theRoom, and could not but

observe such singing as I have seldomheard inEngland. The

women, in particular, sang so exactly that it seemed but one

voice. Monday, MAY 1. I examined the society, and found it

in such order, so increased both in grace and number, as I

apprehend it had not been before, since the time of William

Pennington.

Wed. 3.-I rode to Bandon, and preached in the main street

to a very numerous congregation. All behaved well, except

three or four pretty gentlemen,who seemed to know just nothing
ofthematter.

I found this society likewise much established in grace, and

[May, 1775.

greatly increased innumber. So has God blessed the labours of

two plain men, who put forth all their strength in his work.

Sat. 6.-I returned to Cork, and in the evening preached at

Blackpool. It rained a little all the time Iwas preaching, but

the people regarded it not.

Sun. 7.-I was desired to preach on 1 John v. 7 : " There are

three that bear record in heaven." The congregation was

exceeding large ; but abundantly larger in the evening. I

never saw the House so crowded before. It was much the same

the next evening. Tuesday, 9. I preached my farewell sermon

in the afternoon ; and going to Mallow in the evening, went on

the next day to Limerick .

Sat. 13. I preached to a large congregation of Papists and

Protestants, in the yard of the Custom-House, where many could

hear within as well as without.

Mon. 15. Having waited for a chaise to go to Balligarane

as long as I could, I at length set out on horseback. But T.

Wride loitering behind, I might as well have spared my pains ;

for though I came to the town at the time appointed, I could

findneither man, woman, nor child, to direct me to the preaching-

house. After gaping and staring some time, I judged it best to

go to Newmarket, where I was to preach in the evening. I

began about six. The congregationwas deeply serious ; great

part of whom came again at five in the morning. And were it

only for this opportunity, I did not regret my labour.

Wed. 17.-1 examined the society at Limerick, containing

now an hundred and one persons, seven less than they were two

years ago. I a little wonder at this ; considering the scandal of

the cross is well nigh ceased here, through the wise and steady

behaviour of our brethren. But they want zeal ; they are not

fervent in spirit: Therefore, they cannot increase.

Thur. 18. In the evening I preached at Galway, in the

county Court-House, to a more civil and attentive congregation

that I ever saw there before.

Fri. 19. About one I preached at Ballinrobe, in the

assembly-room, and was agreeably surprised, both at the un-

usual number and seriousness of the hearers. I had purposed

to go on to Castlebar, but now thought it might be worth while

to stay a little longer. In the afternoon I took a view of the

Castle. Colonel Cuffe's father took great delight in this place,

laid out beautiful gardens, and procured trees of all sorts, from

May,1775.

all parts of the kingdom. Part of these placed on the slope of

the hill, (at the side of which runs the river,) form a lovely

wilderness, at the end whereof are regular rows of elms. But

the Colonel has no pleasure therein. So all is now swiftly run-

ning to ruin.

Ipreached again at six, to a large congregation, and the next

evening at Castlebar. Monday, 22. I spent two or three hours

in one ofthe loveliest places, and with one of the loveliest fami-

lies, in the kingdom. Almost all I heard put me in mind of

those beautiful lines of Prior,-

The nymph did like the scene appear,

Serenely pleasant, calmly fair !

Soft fell her words, as flew the air.
i

How willingly could I have accepted the invitation to spend a

few days here ! Nay, at present I must be about my Father's

business : But I trust to meet them in a still lovelier place.

Between Limerick and Castlebar, I read over the famous

controversy between Drs. Clarke and Leibnitz. And is this he

whom the King of Prussia extols, as something more than

human ? So poor a writer have I seldom read, either as to

sentiments or temper. In sentiment, he is a thorough fatalist ;

maintaining roundly, and without reserve, that God has abso-

lutely decreed from all eternity whatever is done in time ; and

that no creature can do more good, or less evil, thanGod has

peremptorily decreed. And his temper is just suitable to his

sentiments. He is haughty, self-conceited, sour, impatient of

contradiction, and holds his opponent in utter contempt ; though,

in truth, he is but a child in his hands.

Wed. 24. I reached Sligo. My old friend, Andrew Maben,

did not own me. However, a few did; to whom, with a toler-

able congregation, I preached at six in the barracks. The next

evening I preached in the market-house, to a far larger congre-

gation. We seem, by all the late bustle and confusion, to have

lost nothing. Here is a little company as much alive to God,

and more united together than ever.

Fri. 26. I preached at Manorhamilton, and the next even-

ing near the bridge at Swadlingbar. Knowing a large part of

the congregation to have " tasted of the powers of the world to

come," I spoke on the glory that shall be revealed ; and all

seemed deeply affected, except a few Gentry, so called, who

seemed to understand nothing of the matter.

[June,1775.

Sun. 28.-I preached at ten to a far larger congregation, on,

"God now commandeth all men everywhere to repent;" and

after church, to a still greater multitude, on, " It is appointed

unto men once to die."

Mon. 29. Being desired to give them a sermon at Belturbet,

about eight I preached in the Town-Hall. It was not in vain.

God opened, as it were, the windows of heaven, and showered

his blessing down.

I called afterwards at Ballyhays, and spent an hour with that

venerable old man, Colonel Newburgh. It does me good to

converse with those who havejust finished their course, and are

quivering over the great gulf. Thence I went on to Clones,-

that is its proper name ; not Clownish, as it is vulgarly called.

It is a pleasant town, finely situated on arising ground, in the

midst of fruitful hills ; and has a larger market-place than any

I have seen in England, not excepting Norwich or Yarmouth.

At six I preached in the old Danish fort, to the largest con-

gregation I have had in the kingdom. The next morning I

preached to a great part of them again; and again the word
sunk " as the rain into the tender herb. "

I preached at Roasky at noon, and Sydare in the evening.

Wednesday, 31. I hobbled on, through amiserable road, as far

as wheels could pass, and then rode on to Lisleen. After

dinner, we hastened to Dargbridge, and found a large congre-

gation waiting. They appeared, one and all, to be deeply

serious. Indeed there is a wonderful reformation spreading

throughout this whole country, for several miles round. Out-

ward wickedness is gone ; and many, young and old, witness

that the kingdom ofGod is within them.

Thur. JUNE 1.-I reached Londonderry : But I had so deep

an hoarseness, that my voice was almost gone. However,

pounded garlick, applied to the soles of my feet, took it away

before the morning. JUNE 4. (Being Whitsunday.) The Bishop

preached a judicious, useful sermon, on the blasphemy of the

Holy Ghost. He is both a good writer, and a good speaker ;

and he celebrated the Lord's Supper with admirable solemnity.

Hence I hastened to the New-Buildings. The sun was

intensely hot, as it was on Monday and Tuesday. Six such

days together, I was informed, have not been in Ireland for

several years.

Mon. 5.-I examined the society, growing in grace, and

June, 1775.] 47

increased in number, from fifty-two to near seventy. Tuesday,

6. The Bishop invited me to dinner ; and told me, “ I know you

do not love our hours, and will therefore order dinner to be on

table between two and three o'clock." Wehad a piece of boiled

beef, and an English pudding. This is true good breeding.

The Bishop is entirely easy and unaffected in his whole beha-

viour, exemplary in all parts of public worship, and plenteous

ingoodworks.

Wed. 7.-About noon I preached a few miles from Strabane ;

in the evening at Lisleen; and the next at Castle-Caulfield.

In the night the rain came plentifully through the thatch, into

my lodging-room. But I found no present inconvenience, and

was not careful for the morrow.

Fri. 9. I preached at eight to a numerous congregation, in

the market-place at Dungannon ; at eleven, and at five in the

afternoon, in the main street at Charlemount. I lodged at a

gentleman's, who showed me a flower, which he called a

Gummy Cystus. It blooms in the morning, with a large,

beautiful, snow-white flower ; but every flower dies in the even-

ing. New flowers blow and fall every day. Does not this

short-lived flower answer to that short-lived animal, the Ephe-

meron-fly ?

Sat. 10-. I preached at nine to a large congregation, at

Killeman. The rain began as soon as I concluded ; but it

ceased time enough forme to preach in Mr. M'Gough's avenue,

atArmagh.

JUNE 11.-(Being Trinity-Sunday.) I preached at nine on,

" So God created man in his own image;" and in the evening,

to an huge congregation. But I could not find the way to their
hearts.

Mon. 12. Having taken a solemn leave of Armagh, about

eleven I preached at Blackwater ; and in the evening at Clan-

main, where many seemed cut to the heart. O, why should

they heal the wound slightly !

Tues. 13. I was not very well in the morning, but sup-

posed it would soon go off. In the afternoon, the weather being

extremely hot, I lay down on the grass, in Mr. Lark's orchard,

at Cock-Hill. This I had been accustomed to do for forty

years, and never remember to have been hurt by it : Only I

never before lay on my face ; in which posture I fell asleep. I

waked a little, and but a little, out of order, and preached with


ease to amultitude of people. Afterwards I was a good deal

worse. However, the next day I went on a few miles to the

Grange. The table was placed here in such a manner, that,

all the time I was preaching, a strong and sharp wind blew full

on the left side ofmy head; and it was not without a good deal

ofdifficulty that I made an end of my sermon. I now found a

deep obstruction inmy breast : My pulse was exceeding weak

and low ; I shivered with cold, though the air was sultry hot ;

only now and then burning for a few minutes. I went early to

bed, drank a draught of treacle-and-water, and applied treacle

to the soles of my feet. I lay till seven on Thursday, 15, and

then felt considerably better. But I found near the same

obstruction in my breast: I had alow, weak, pulse ; I burned

and shivered by turns ; and, if I ventured to cough, it jarred

my head exceedingly. In going on to Derry-Anvil, I wondered

what was the matter, that I could not attend to what I was

reading ; no, not for three minutes together ; but my thoughts

were perpetually shifting. Yet, all the time I was preaching in

the evening, (although I stood in the open air, with the wind

whistling round my head,) my mindwas as composed as ever.

Friday, 16. In going to Lurgan, I was again surprised that I

could not fix my attention on what I read : Yet, while I was

preaching in the evening, on the Parade, I found my mind

perfectly composed ; although it rained agreat part of the time,

which did not well agree with my head. Saturday, 17. I was

persuaded to send for Dr. Laws, a sensible and skilful Physi-

cian. He told me I was in a high fever, and advised me to

lay by. But I told him that could not be done ; as I had

appointed to preach at several places, and must preach as long

as I could speak. He then prescribed a cooling draught, with

a grain or two of camphor, as my nerves were universally

agitated. This I took with me to Tanderagee : But when I

came there, I was not able to preach ; my understanding being

quite confused, andmy strength entirely gone. Yet I breathed

freely, and had not the least thirst, nor any pain, from head to
foot.

I was now at a full stand, whether to aim at Lisburn, or to

push forward for Dublin. But my friends doubting whether I

could bear so long a journey, I went straight to Derry-Aghy;

a gentleman's seat, on the side of a hill, three miles beyond

Lisburn. Here nature sunk, and I tookmy bed. But I could

July, 1775.]

no more turn myself therein, than a new-born child. My

memory failed, as well as my strength, andwell nigh my under-

standing. Only those words ran in my mind, when I saw Miss

Gayer on one side of the bed, looking at her mother on the

other:-

She sat, like Patience on a monument,

Smiling at grief.

But still I had no thirst, no difficulty of breathing, no pain,

from head to foot.

I cangive no account ofwhat followed for two or three days,

beingmore dead than alive. Only I remember it was difficult

for me to speak, my throat being exceeding dry. But Joseph

Bradford tells me I said on Wednesday, " It will be determined

before this time to-morrow ; " that my tongue was much swollen,

and as black as a coal ; that I was convulsed all over ; and that

for some time my heart did not beat perceptibly, neither was

any pulse discernible.

In the night of Thursday, 22, Joseph Bradford came to me

with a cup, and said, " Sir, you must take this." I thought,

" I will, if I can swallow, to please him; for it will do me

neither harm nor good." Immediately it set me a vomiting ;

myheart began to beat and my pulse to play again ; and from

that hour the extremity ofthe symptoms abated. The nextday

I sat up several hours, and walked four or five times across the

room. On Saturday I sat up all day, and walked across the

room many times, without any weariness ; on Sunday, I came

down stairs, and sat several hours in the parlour ; on Monday,

I walked out before the house ; on Tuesday, I took an airing in

the chaise, and on Wednesday, trusting in God, to the aston-

ishment of my friends, I set out for Dublin.
Idid notdetermine how far to go thatday, not knowing how

my strength would hold. But finding myself no worse at

Bannbridge, I ventured to Newry ; and, after travelling thirty

(English) miles, I was stronger than in the morning.

Thur. 29.-I went on to the Man-of-war, forty (Irish) miles

from the Globe, at Newry. Friday, 30. Wemet Mr. Simpson,

(with several other friends,) coming to meet us at Drogheda ;

who took us to his country seat at James-Town, about two

miles from Dublin .

Tues. JULY 4.-Finding myself a little stronger, I preached

for the first time ; and I believe most could hear. I preached


on Thursday again; and my voice was clear, though weak.

So on Sunday I ventured to preach twice, and found no weari-

ness at all. Monday, 10. I beganmyregular course ofpreach-

ing, morning and evening.

While I was in Dublin, Iread two extraordinary books, but

ofvery different kinds ;-Mr. Sheridan's " Lectures on Elocu--

tion," and " The Life of Count Marsay ;" andwasdisappointed

in both. There is more matterin the penny tract, " On Action

and Utterance," abundantly more, than in all Mr. S.'s book ;

Count
though he seems to think himself a mere Phenix.

Marsay was doubtless apious man, but a thorough enthusiast ;

guided, in all his steps, not by the written word, but by his own

imagination ; whichhe calls the Spirit.

Sun. 23. I again assisted at St. Patrick's in delivering the

elements ofthe Lord's Supper. In the evening I embarked in

the Nonpareil ; and, about ten on Tuesday morning, landed at

Park-Gate. Wednesday, 26. I found one relic of my illness,

-my hand shook, sothat Icould hardlywrite my name. But

after I had been well electrified, by driving four or five hours,

over veryrugged, brokenpavement, my complaint was removed,

andmy hand was as steady as when I was ten years old.

About noon I preached in the shell of the House at Wigan.

In the middle of the sermon, came an impetuous storm of

thunder, lightning, and rain, which added much to the solem-

nity of the occasion. Thursday, 27. Iwent on to Miss Bosan-

quet's, and prepared for the Conference. How willingly could

I spend the residue of a busy life in this delightful retirement !

But,

Manwas not born in shades to lie !

Up and be doing ! Labour on, till

Death sings a requiem to the parting soul.

Sun. 30.-I preached under Birstal-Hill, and the greater

part of the huge audience could hear while I enforced, " When

the breath ofman goeth forth, he turnethagain to his dust, and

then all his thoughts perish." I preached at Leeds in the even-

ing, and found strength inproportion tomy work.

Tues. AUGUST1.-Our Conferencebegan. Having received

several letters, intimating that many of the Preachers were

utterly unqualified for the work,having neither grace nor gifts

sufficient for it, I determined to examine this weighty charge

Aug. 1775.1 51

withall possibleexactness. Inorder to this,I read those letters

to all the Conference ; and begged that every one would freely

propose andenforcewhatever objectionhe hadto any one. The

objections proposed were considered at large: In two or three

difficult cases, Committees were appointed for that purpose. In

consequence of this, we were all fully convinced that the charge

advanced was without foundation; that God has really sent

those labourers into his vineyard, and has qualified them for

the work: And we were all more closely united together than

wehave been for many years.

Fri. 4.-I preached at Bradford,where the people are all

alive. Many here have lately experienced the great salvation,

and their zeal has been a general blessing. Indeed, this I

always observe, wherever awork of sanctification breaks out,

the whole work of God prospers. Some are convinced of sin,

others justified, and all stirred up to greater earnestness for

salvation.

I breakfasted at Great-Horton. Two or three of the neigh-

bours then came in to prayer. Quickly the house was filled ;

and, a few minutes after, all the space before the door. I saw

the opportunity, andwithout delaygot upon the horse-block, in

the yard. Abundance of children crowded roundme, and round

them a numerous congregation. So I gave them an earnest

exhortation, and then commended them to the grace ofGod.

Sun. 6. At one I proclaimed the glorious Gospel to the

usual congregation at Birstal, and in the evening at Leeds.

Then, judging it needful to pay a short visit to our brethren at

London, I took the stage-coach,with five of my friends, about

eight o'clock. Before nine, a gentleman in asingle-horse chaise

struck his wheel against one of ours. Instantly the weight of

the men at top overset the coach ; otherwise, ten times the

shock would not have moved it; but neither the coachman, nor

the men at top, norany within,were hurt at all. On Tuesday,

in the afternoon, wewere met at Hatfield bymany of our friends,

who conducted us safe to London.

Having spent a few days in town, on Monday, 14, I set out

for Wales; and Wednesday, 16, reached the Hay. Being

desired to give them one sermon at Trevecka, I turned aside

thither, and on Thursday, 17, preached at eleven to a numerous

congregation. What alovelyplace ! And what a lovely family !

still consisting of about sixscore persons. So the good "man


is turned again to his dust ! " But his thoughts do not

perish.

I preached at Brecon the next day, and on Saturday, 19,

went on to Carmarthen. How is this wilderness become a fruit-

ful field ! A year ago I knew no one in this town who had

any desire of fleeing from the wrath to come ; and now we have

eighty persons in society. It is true not many of them are

awakened ; but they have broke off their outward sins. Now

let us try, whether it be not possible to prevent the greater part

of these from drawing back.

About this time I received a remarkable letter, from one of

our Preachers at West-Bromwich, near Wednesbury. The

substance of it is as follows :-

"August 16, 1775.

"ABOUT three weeks since, a person came and told me,

Martha Wood, of Darlaston, was dying, and had a great desire

to see me. When I came into the house, which, with all that

was in it, was scarce worth five pounds, I found, in that mean

cottage, such a jewel as my eyes never beheld before. Her

eyes even sparkled with joy, and her heart danced like David

before the ark : In truth, she seemed to be in the suburbs of

heaven, upon the confines ofglory .

" She took hold of my hand, and said, ' I am glad to see

you; you are my father in Christ. It is twenty years since I

heard you first. It was on that text, Now ye have sorrow :

But I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and

your joy no man taketh from you. In that hour God broke

into my soul, delivered me from all sorrow, and filled my heart

with joy ; and, blessed be his name, I never have lost it, from

that hour to this.'

" For the first ten years, she was sometimes in transports of

joy, carried almost beyond herself; but for these last ten years,

she has had the constant witness that God has taken up all her
heart. He has filled me,' said she, ' with perfect love ; and

perfect love casts out fear. Jesus is mine ; God, and heaven,

and eternal glory, are mine. My heart, my very soul is lost,

yea, swallowed up, in God.'

" There were many of our friends standing by her bedside.

She exhorted them all, as one in perfect health, to keep close to

God. You can never,' said she, ' do too much for God :

When you have done all you can, you have done too little. O,

Aug. 1775.1

who that knows Him, can love, or do, or suffer too much for

Him!'

" Some worldly people came in. She called them by name,

and exhorted them to repent and turn to Jesus. She looked

at me, and desired I would preach her funeral sermon on those

words, ' I have fought the good fight ; I have finished my

course ; I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for

me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous

Judge, will give me at that day.'

" She talked to all round about her in as scriptural and

rational a manner as if she had been in her full strength, (only

now and then catching a little for breath,) with all the smiles of

heaven in her countenance. Indeed several times she seemed

to be quite gone ; but in a little while the taper lit up again,

and she began to preach, with divine power, to all that stood

nearher. She knew every person, and if any came into the

room whom she knew to be careless about religion, she directly

called them by name, and charged them to seek the Lord while

he might be found. At last she cried out, ' I see the heavens

opened ; I see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with numbers of the

glorified throng, coming nearer and nearer. They are just

come!' At that word, her soul took its flight, to mingle with

the heavenly host. We looked after her, as Elisha after Elijah ;

and I trust some of us have catched her mantle."

After making a little tour through Carmarthenshire, Pem-

brokeshire, and Glamorganshire, on Monday, 28, setting out

early from Cardiff, I reached Newport about eight ; and soon

after preached to a large and serious congregation. I believe it

is five-and-thirty years since I preached here before, to a people

who were then wild as bears. How amazingly is the scene

changed! O what is too hard for God !

We came to the New-Passage just as the boat was putting

off; so I went in immediately. Some friends were waiting for

me on the other side, who received me as one risen from the

dead. TheRoom at Bristol was throughly filled in the evening ;

and we rejoiced in Him that heareth the prayer. Having

finished my present business here, on Wednesday, 30, I set out

at three, and at twelve preached in the great Presbyterian

meeting-house in Taunton ; and indeed with such freedom and

openness of spirit as I did not expect in so brilliant a congrega-

tion. In the evening I preached in the dreary preaching-house


at Tiverton. The people appeared as dull as the place. Yet

who knows but that many of them may again hear the voice

that raiseth the dead?

On Thursday and Friday I preached at Launceston, Bod-

min, and Truro ; on Saturday, in the main street at Redruth,

to the usual congregation, on, " Happy are the people that
have the Lord for their God."

Sun. SEPTEMBER 3.-I preached at eight in St. Agnes

Church-town, on, " Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou

shalt be saved." Ayoung woman followed me into the house,

weeping bitterly, and crying out, " I must have Christ ; I will

have Christ. Give me Christ, or else I die! " Two or three of

us claimed the promise in her behalf. She was soon filled with

joy unspeakable, and burst out, "O let me die ! Let me go to

Him now! How can I bear to stay here any longer ?" We

left her full of that peace which passeth all understanding.

About eleven I preached at Redruth; at five in the evening in

the amphitheatre atGwennap. I think this is the most magnifi-

cent spectacle which is to be seen on this side heaven. And no

music is to be heard upon earth comparable to the sound of

many thousand voices, when they are all harmoniously joined

together, singing praises to God and the Lamb.

Mon. 4. I went on to our friends at St. Ives, many ofwhom

are now grey-headed, as well as me. In the evening I preached

in the little meadow above the town, where I was some years

ago. The people in general here (excepting the rich) seem

almost persuaded to be Christians. Perhaps the prayer of their

old Pastor, Mr. Tregoss, is answered even to the fourth genera-

tion.

Wed. 6.-About nine I preached at Cararack, and crossed

over to Cubert, where I found my good old friend Mr. Hos-

kins, quivering over the grave. He ventured, however, to the

Church-town, and I believe found ablessing under the preach-

ing.

Thur. 7.-About eleven I preached in the Town-Hall at

Liskeard, to a large and serious congregation. At Saltash some

of our brethren met me with aboat, which brought me safe to

Plymouth-Dock.

Understanding some of our friends here were deeply preju-

diced against the King and all his Ministers, I spoke freely and

largely on the subject at the meeting of the society. God

Oct. 1775.1 55

applied it to their hearts ; and I think there is not one of them

now who does not see things in another light.

Fri. 8.-I preached at noon on the quay in Plymouth ; in

the evening, in the new Square at the Dock. Many here

seemed to feel the application of those words, "O thou of little

faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?"

Sat. 9-. 1 preached in Exeter at four in the afternoon, and

about seven at Collumpton. Sunday, 10. I came to Welling-

ton in an acceptable time; for Mr. Jesse was ill in bed; so that

if I had not come, there could have been no Service, either

morning or evening. The church was moderately filled in

the morning : In the afternoon it was crowded in every corner ;

and a solemn awe fell on the whole congregation, while I

pressed that important question,"What is aman profited, if he

should gain the whole world, and lose his own soul ? ”

Mon. 11. I preached again in the new meeting at Taunton,

to such a congregation as I suppose was never there before. I

was desired to preach onthe same text as at Wellington ; and

it was attended with the same blessing. On Tuesday I went

on to Bristol. On Thursday and Friday, I preached at Keyns-

ham, Bradford, and Bath ; on Tuesday, 19, at Frome ; and

on Wednesday, at Pensford. Thence I went on to the lovely

family at Publow, a pattern for all the boarding-schools inEng-

land. Every thing fit for a Christian tolearn is taught here ;

but nothing unworthy the dignity of the Christian character. I

gave a short exhortation to the children, which they received

with eagerness. Many ofthem have the fear ofGod: Some of

them enjoy his love.

Thur. 21. At the earnest request of the prisoner, who was

to die next day, (and was very willing so to do ; for, after deep

agony of soul, he had found peace with God,) I preached at

Newgate to him, and a crowded audience ; many of whom felt

that God was there. Sunday, 24. I preached abroad in the

afternoon to a lovely congregation. Friday, 29, we observed

as a fast-day, meeting at five, nine, one, and in the evening :

Andmany found a strong hope, thatGod will yet be entreated

for aguilty land.

Sun. OCTOBER 1.-The weather favoured us again : I

preached once more abroad, and concluded at the point where I

begun, in opening and strongly applying those words, " Believe

on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved."


Mon. 2-. I set out early ; and, preaching at the Devizes,

Sarum, Winchester, and Portsmouth in my way, on Friday,

6, in the afternoon I returned to London.

Sun. 8.-I preached in Moorfields to a larger congregation

than usual. Strange that their curiosity should not be satisfied

yet, after hearing the same thing near forty years !

Mon. 9. I preached at Chesham, on the strait gate ;

and all that heard seemed affected for the present. Tuesday,

10. I went on to Wycomb, and was much refreshed by the

earnest attention of the whole congregation. Wednesday, 11. I

took awalk to Lord Shelburne's house. What variety, in so

small acompass ! A beautiful grove, divided by a serpentine
walk, conceals the house from the town. At the side of this

runs a transparent river, with a smooth walk on each bank.

Beyond this is a level lawn; then the house with sloping gardens

behind it. Above these is a lofty hill ; near the top of which is

a lovely wood, having a grassy walk running along, just within

the skirts of it. But can the owner rejoice in this paradise ?

No ; for his wife is snatched away inthe bloom ofyouth !

Thur. 12.-About noon I preached at Watlington ; and in

the evening at Oxford, in a large House formerly belonging to

the Presbyterians. But it was not large enough : Many could

not get in. Such a congregation I have not seen at Oxford,

either for seriousness, or number, for more than twenty years.

I borrowed here a volume of Lord Chesterfield's Letters,

which I had heard very strongly commended. And what did I

learn ? That he was aman of much wit, middling sense, and

some learning ; but as absolutely void of virtue, as any Jew,

Turk, or Heathen that ever lived. I say, not only void of all

religion, (for I doubt whether he believed there is a God, though

he tags most of his letters with the name, for better sound sake,)

but even of virtue, of justice, and mercy, which he never once

recommended to his son. And truth he sets at open defiance :

He continually guards him against it. Half his letters inculcate

deepdissimulation, as the most necessary of all accomplishments.

Add to this, his studiously instilling into the young man all the

principles of debauchery, when himself was between seventy and

eighty years old. Add his cruel censure of that amiable man,

the Archbishop of Cambray, (quantum dispar illi,)* as a

*What a vast disparity between the two !-EDIT,

.
Oct. 1775.] JOURNAL
mere time-serving hypocrite ! And this is the favourite of the

age ! Whereas, ifjustice and truth take place, ifhe is rewarded

according to his desert, his name will stink to all generations.

Sat. 14. I preached at Finstock. How many days should

I spend here if I was to do my own will ! Not so : I am " to do

the will of Him that sent me, and to finish his work." Therefore

this is the first day I ever spent here : And perhaps it may be
the last.

Sun. 15-. About eight I preached at Witney. I admired

the seriousness and decency of the congregation at church. I

preachedat five, on, " Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself;"

aword that is sufficient to convince all mankind of sin. In

meeting the select society, I was much comforted to find so few

of them losing ground, and the far greater part still witnessing

that " the blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin."

Mon. 16. We had a lovely congregation at five. About

nine I preached at Oxford ; in Newnham at one ; and in the

evening at Wallingford. Tuesday, 17. I went over the Downs

to Kingston-lodge ; a lone house ; yet we had a numerous as

well as serious congregation. In the evening I preached in the

large Room at the poorhouse in Ramsbury. The people flocked

together from every side ; and God gave us his blessing.

Wed. 18. I returned to Newbury. Some of our friends

informed me, there were many red-hot patriots here ; so I took

occasion to give a strong exhortation, to " fear God, and honour

the King."

Thur. 19. I preached at Reading ; and on Friday, returned

to London.

Mon. 23. I set out for Northamptonshire, and in the even-

ing preached at Towcester. Tuesday, 24. About noon we took

horse for Whittlebury in a fine day : But before we had rode

halfanhour, a violent storm came, which soon drenched us from

head to foot. But we dried ourselves in the afternoon, and were

no worse. Wednesday, 25. I preached at Northampton, and on

Thursday noon at Brixworth ; a little town about six miles

north of Northampton. I believe very few of the townsmen

were absent, and all of them seemed to be much affected. So

didmany at Northampton in the evening, while I described him

" that builds his house upon a rock." Friday, 27. I preached

about noon at Hanslop. In my way I looked over a volume

of Dr. Swift's Letters. I was amazed ! Was ever such trash


palmed upon the world, under the name of a great man? More

than half of what is contained in those sixteen volumes, would

be dear at twopence a volume ; being all, and more than all, the

dull things which that witty man ever said. In the evening I

preached at Bedford, and the next evening came to London.

Sun. 19. I visited one who was full of good resolutions,-

if he should recover. They might be sincere, or they might
not: But how far will these avail before God? He was not

put to the trial,how long they would last: Quickly after, God

required his soul of him.

Monday, and the following days, I visited the little societies

in the neighbourhood of London. Saturday, NOVEMBER 11 .

I made some additions to the " Calm Address to our American

Colonies." Need any one ask from what motive this was wrote ?

Let him look round : England is in a flame ! A flame of malice

and rage against the King, and almost all that are in authority

under him. I labour to put out this flame. Ought not every

true patriot to do the same ? If hircling writers on either side

judge ofme by themselves, that I cannot help.

Sun. 12.-I was desired to preach, in Bethnal-Green church,

a charity sermon for the widows and orphans of the soldiers that

were killed in America. Knowing how many would seek occasion of offence, I wrote down my sermon. I dined with Sir

John Hawkins and three other gentlemen that are in commission

for the peace; and was agreeably surprised at a very serious

conversation, kept up during the whole time I stayed.

Wed. 15. I preached at Dorking; the next evening at

Ryegate-place, I think, to the largest congregation that I have

seen there. But still I fear we are ploughing upon the sand :

We see no fruit ofour labours. Friday, 17. I crossed over to

Shoreham, the most fruitfulplace in all the Circuit, andpreached

in the evening to a people just ripe for all the Gospel promises,

on, " Now, why tarriest thou ? Arise, and wash away thy sins."

The next morning I returned to London.

Mon. 20. I went on to Robertsbridge, and preached to a

deeply attentive congregation. Tuesday, 21. Several were with

us in the evening at Rye, who had never heard a Methodist

sermon before. However, considering the bulk of the congre-

gation, more than an handful of Gentry, I earnestly besought

them not to " receive the grace of God in vain. " The next even-

ing I applied part of the thirteenth chapter ofthe First Epistle

Nov. 1775.1 59

to the Corinthians. Many were shaken when they weighed

themselves in that balance. May we not be found wanting in

that day!

Thur. 23. About noon I preached at Cranbrook, and in the

evening at Staplehurst. Friday, 24. I preached at Sevenoaks,

and on Saturday returned to London.

In some of my late little journeys I read Mr. Wraxal's

Travels, in which are several ingenious remarks. But the

account he gives of Count Struenzee is a mistake, from begin-

ning to end. Struenzee was as bad a man as most that ever

lived. He caused many horrid abuses ; but never reformed, or

desired to reform, one. And there was abundant proof of the

crime for which he suffered : Therefore, the behaviour of King

Georgewas exactly right.

Mon. 27. I set out for Norwich. That evening I preached at

Colchester ; Tuesday, at Norwich ; Wednesday, at Yarmouth.

About this time I published the following letter in Lloyd's

"Evening Post : "

" I HAVE been seriously asked, ' From what motive did

you publish your Calm Address to the American Colonies ?'

" I seriously answer, Not to get money. Had that been my

motive, I should have swelled it into a shilling pamphlet, and

have entered it at Stationers' Hall.

"Not to get preferment for myself, or my brother's children.

I am a little too old to gape after it for myself: And if my bro-

ther or I sought it for them, we have only to show them to the

world.

" Not to please anyman living, high or low. I know man-

kind too well. I know they that love you for political service,

love you less than their dinner ; and they that hate you, hate you

worse than the devil.

" Least of all did I write with a view to inflame any: Just

the contrary. I contributed my mite toward putting out the

flame which rages all over the land. This I have more oppor-

tunity of observing than any other man in England. I see with

pain to what an height this already rises, in every part of the

nation. And I see many pouring oil into the flame, by crying

out, How unjustly, how cruelly, the King is using the poor

Americans ; who are only contending for their liberty, and for

their legal privileges ! '


"Now there is no possible way to put out this flame, or hinder

its rising higher and higher, but to show that the Americans are

not used either cruelly or unjustly ; that they are not injured

at all, seeing they are not contending for liberty ; (this they

had, even in its full extent, both civil and religious ;) neither

for any legal privileges ; for they enjoy all that their charters

grant. But what they contend for, is, the illegal privilege of

being exempt from parliamentary taxation. A privilege this,

which no charter ever gave to any American colony yet ; which

no charter cangive, unless it be confirmed both by King, Lords,

and Commons ; which, in fact, our colonies never had ; which

they never claimed till the present reign : And probably they

would not have claimed it now, had they not been incited thereto

by letters from England. One of these was read, according to

the desire of the writer, not only at the continental Congress,

but likewise in many congregations throughout the Combined

Provinces. It advised them to seize upon all the King's Officers ;

and exhorted them, ' Stand valiantly, only for six months, and

in that time there will be such commotions in England that

you may have your own terms.'

" This being the real state of the question, without any

colouring or aggravation, what impartial man can either blame

the King, or commend the Americans ?

" With this view, to quench the fire, by laying the blame

where it was due, the ' Calm Address' was written. I am, Sir,

"Your humble servant,

" As to reviewers, newswriters, London Magazines, and all

that kind of gentlemen, they behave just as I expected they

would. And let them lick up Mr. Toplady's spittle still : A

champion worthy of their cause."

Thur. 30.-I preached at Lowestoft at noon, and Yarmouth

in the evening. Here a gentleman, who came with me from

London, was taken ill (he informed me) of the bloody flux.

This being stopped, I thought his head was disordered ; and

would fain have sent him back without delay, offering him my

chaise and my servant to attend him ; though I could ill spare

either one or the other. But he could not in anywise be

prevailed on to accept of the proposal. I afterwards heard, he

had been insane before he left London. However, I could now

only make the best of it.

Dec. 1775.1

Fri. DECEMBER 1.-After preaching at Loddon, I returned

to Norwich, and procured Mr. - a lodging in a friend's

house, where I knew he would want nothing. I now again

advised him to go straight to London inmy chaise ; but it was
lost labour.

Sat. 2-. I procured " the History of Norwich," published but

a few years since. The author shows, that it was built about

the year 418. But it increased in succeeding ages, till it was

more than double to what it is now, having no less than sixty

churches. Its populousness may be indisputably proved, by

one single circumstance :-The first time it was visited with the

sweating-sickness, (which usually killed in ten hours,) there died,

in about six months, upwards of fifty-seven thousand persons ;

which is a considerably greater number than were in the whole

city a few years ago. He remarks concerning this unaccounta-

ble kind of plague, 1. That it seized none but Englishmen ;

none of the French, Flemings, or other foreigners then in the

kingdom, being at all affected : 2. That it seized upon English-

men in other kingdoms, and upon none else : And, 3. That the

method at last taken was this, The patient, if seized in the

day-time, was immediately to lie down in his clothes, and to be

covered up; if in the night-time, he was to keep in bed ; and

if they remained four-and-twenty hours without eating or drink-

ing any thing, then they generally recovered.

In the evening a large mob gathered at the door of the

preaching-house, the captain of which struck many (chiefly

women) with a large stick. Mr. Randal going out to see what

was the matter, he struck him with it in the face. But he was

soon secured, and carried before the Mayor ; who knowing him

to be a notorious offender, against whom one or two warrants

were then lying, sent him to gaol without delay.

Tues. 5.-We set out a little before day, and reached Lynn

in the afternoon. In the evening, the new House would hardly

contain one half of the congregation: And those who could not

get in were tolerably patient, considering they could hear but a
fewwords.

Wed. 6.-About one, I heard a shrill voice in the street,

calling and desiring me to come to Mr. - Goingdirectly,

I found him ill in body, and in a violent agony of mind. He

fully believed he was at the point ofdeath ; nor could any argu-

ments convince him of the contrary. We cried to Him who


has all power in heaven and earth, andwho keeps the keys of

life and death. He soon started up inbed, and saidwith aloud

voice, " I shall not die, but live."

In the day I visitedmany of those that remained with us, and

those that had left us since they had learneda new doctrine. I

did not dispute, but endeavoured to soften their spirits, which

had been sharpened to a high degree. In the evening the

chapel was quite too small: And yet even those who could not

get in were silent: A circumstance which I have seldom

observed in any other part of England.

Thur. 7.-Mr.- -was so thoroughly disordered, that it

was heavy work to get him forward. At every stage, " he

could not possibly go any farther ; he must die there." Never-

theless we reached Bury in the afternoon. I preached at seven

to the largest congregation I ever saw there. We used to have

about a dozen at five in the morning. But on Friday, 8, I

suppose we had between forty and fifty. We set out between

six and seven, hoping to reach Burntwood in the evening. But

as we came thither some hours sooner than we expected, I

judged it most advisable to push on: And, the moon shining

bright, we easily reached London soon after six o'clock .

Sat. 9. In answer to a very angry letter, lately published in

" the Gazetteer," I published the following :-

"You affirm, 1. That I once ' doubted whether the measures

taken with respect to America could be defended either on the

foot of law, equity, or prudence.' I did doubt of these five

years, nay indeed five months, ago.

" You affirm, 2. That I declared,' (last year,) ' the Ameri-

cans were an oppressed, injured people.' I do not remember

that I did ; but very possibly I might.

" You affirm, 3. That I then ' strongly recommended an

argument for the exclusive right of the colonies to tax them-

selves. ' I believe I did; but I am now of another mind.

"You affirm, 4. You say in the Preface, I never saw that

book.' I did say so. The plain case was, I had so entirely

forgotten it, that evenwhen I saw it again, I recollected nothing

of it, till I had read several pages. If I had, I might have

observed that you borrowed more from Mr. P. than I did from

Dec.1775.1

Dr. Johnson. Though I know not whether I should have

observed it, as it does not affect the merits of the cause.

"You affirm , 5. ' You say, But I really believe he was told

80; ' and add, ' Supposing what I asserted was false, it is not

easy to conceive what reason you could have for believing I

was told so.' My reason was, I believed you feared God, and

therefore would not tell awilful untruth; so I made the best

excuse for you which I thought the nature of the thing would

admit of. Had you not some reasons to believe this of me ;

and therefore to say, (at least,) ' I hope he forgot it ? '

" " But at this time I was perfectly unknown to you.' No,

at this time I knew you wrote that tract ; but had I not, char-

itywouldhave induced me to hope this, even ofan entire stranger.

"You now have my ' feeble reply; and if you please to

advance any new argument, (personal reflections I let go,) you

may perhaps receive a farther reply from

Your humble servant,

" London, December 9 .

" I did not see your letter till this morning."

Mon. 11. I began a little journey into Kent. In the even-

ing I preached at Chatham, the next evening at Canterbury.

I know not that ever I saw such a congregation there before.

Tuesday, 12. I preached at Dover. As many as could, squeezed

into the House, and the rest went quietly away.

Thur. 14. I returned to Canterbury, and had a long con-

versation with that extraordinary man, Charles Perronet. What

a mystery of Providence ! Why is such asaint as this buried

alive by continual sickness ? In the evening we had a larger

congregation than before. I never saw the House thoroughly

filled till now : And I am sure the people had now a call from

God, whether they will hear or whether they will forbear.

Fri. 15. In the evening I preached at Chatham, and on

Saturday returned to London. In the evening Ipreached akind
of funeral sermon at Snowsfields, for that upright woman, Jane

Binknell. Formany years she was a pattern of all holiness ; and,

for the latter part of her life, of patience. Yet as she laboured

under an incurable and painful disorder, which allowed her little

rest, day or night, the corruptible body pressed down the soul,

and frequently occasioned much heaviness. But,before she went,

the clouds dispersed, and she died in sweet peace; but not in


such triumphant joy as did Ann Davis, two or three weeks

before. She died of the same disorder ; but had withal, for some

years, racking pains in herhead day and night, which in a while

rendered her stone-blind. Add to this, that she had a kind

husband; whowas continually reproaching her for living so long,

and cursing her for not dying out of the way. Yet in all this

she did not " charge God foolishly ;" but meekly waited till her

change should come.

To-day I read Dr. Beattie's Poems ; certainly one of the best

Poets of the age. He wants only the ease and simplicity of

Mr. Pope. I know one, and only one, that has it.

Mon. 18.-I took another little journey, and in the evening

preached at Bedford. Tuesday, 19. I dragged on, through

miserable roads, to St. Neot's, and preached in a large room to

a numerous congregation. Understanding that almost all the

Methodists, by the advice of Mr.-, had left the church, I

earnestly exhorted them to return to it. In the evening I

preached at Godmanchester.

Wed. 20. I preached at Luton ; the next evening, at Hert-

ford ; and on Friday morning, returned to London.

This day we observed as a day of fasting and prayer, and

were much persuaded God will yet be entreated.

Thur. 12.-I revised a volume of Latin Poems, wrote by a

gentleman of Denmark. I was surprised. Most of the verses

are not unworthy of the Augustan age. Among the rest, there

is a translation of two of Mr. Pope's Epistles, line for line.

And yet, in language, not only as pure as Virgil's, but as

elegant too.

Tues. JANUARY 2, 1776.-Being pressed to pay a visit to
our brethren at Bristol, some ofwhom had been a little unsettled

by the patriots, so called, I set out early ; but the roads were

so heavy, that I could not get thither till night. I came just

time enough, not to see, but to bury, poor Mr. Hall, my brother-

in-law, who died on Wednesday morning; I trust in peace ;

for God had given him deep repentance. Such another monu-

ment of divine mercy, considering how low he had fallen, and

fromwhat height of holiness, I have not seen, no, not in seventy

years ! I had designed to visit him in the morning ; but he did

not stay for my coming. It is enough, if, after all his wander-

ings, we meet again in Abraham's bosom.

JANUARY 1, 1776-.About eighteen hundred of us met

together in London, in order to renew our covenant with God;

and it was, as usual, a very solemn opportunity.

Tues. 2.-I set out for Bristol. Between London and

Bristol, I read over that elegant trifle, " The Correspondence

between Theodosius and Constantia." I observed only one

sentiment which I could not receive, that "youth is the only

possible time for friendship ; because every one has at first a

natural store of sincerity and benevolence ; but as in process of

time men find every one to be false and self-interested, they

conform to them more and more, till, in riper years, they have

neither truth nor benevolence left." Perhaps it may be so with

all that know not God; but they that do, escape " the corrup-

tion that is in the world;" and increase both in sincerity and in

benevolence, as they grow in the knowledge of Christ.

Sat. 6.-I returned to London ; and I returnedjust intime ;

for on Sunday, 7, the severe frost set in, accompanied with so

deep a snow, as made even the high road impassable. For

some days before the frost broke up, it was observed, by means

of the thermometer, that the cold was several degrees more

intense than that in the year 1741. But God then removed

the cup from us, by agentle, gradual thaw.

Sun. 14.-As I was going to West-Street chapel, one of the

chaise-springs suddenly snapped asunder ; but the horses instantly

stopping, I stepped out without the least inconvenience.

At all my vacant hours in this and the following week, I

endeavoured to finish the " Concise History of England." I

am sensible it must give offence, as in many parts I am quite

singular ; particularly with regard to those greatly injured cha-

racters, Richard III., and Mary Queen of Scots. But I must

speak as I think ; although still waiting for, and willing to

receive, better information.

[March, 1776.

Sun. 28.-I was desired to preach a charity sermon in All-

hallows church, Lombard-Street. In the year 1735, about

forty years ago, I preached in this church, at the earnest request

of the Churchwardens, to a numerous congregation, who came,

like me, with an intent to hear Dr. Heylyn. This was the first

time that, having no notes aboutme, I preached extempore.

Wed. FEBRUARY 14.-I preached at Shoreham. How is the

last become first ! No society in the county grows so fast as

this, either in grace or number. The chief instrument of this

glorious work is Miss Perronet, a burning and a shining light.

Fri. 23. I looked over Mr. Bolt's " Considerations on the

Affairs of India." Was there ever so melancholy a picture ?

How are the mighty fallen ! The Great Mogul, Emperor of

Hindostan, one of the mightiest Potentates on earth, is become

apoor, little, impotent slave to a Company of Merchants ! His

large, flourishing empire is broken in pieces, and covered

with fraud, oppression, and misery ! And we may call the

myriads that have been murdered happy, in comparison of those

that still groan under the iron yoke. Wilt not thou visit for

these things, O Lord ? Shall the fool still say in his heart, There
is no God?

Sun. 25-. I buried the remains of William Evans, one of

the first members of our society. Hewas an Israelite indeed,

open (if it could be) to a fault ; always speaking the truth from

his heart. Wednesday, 28. I looked over a volume of Lord

Lyttelton's Works. He is really a fine writer, both in verse

and prose, though he believed the Bible ; yea, and fearedGod!

Inmy scraps of time I likewise read over Miss Talbot's Essays ;

equal to any thing of the kind I ever saw. She was a woman

of admirable sense and piety, and a far better poet than the

celebrated Mrs. Rowe. But here too

Heaven its choicest gold by torture tried !

After suffering much, she died of a cancer in her breast.

Fri. MARCH 1.-As we cannot depend on having the Foun-

dery long, we met to consult about building a new chapel. Our

petition to the City for a piece of ground lies before their Com-

mittee; but when we shall get any farther, I know not : So I

determined to begin my circuit as usual; but promised to retur

whenever I should receive notice that our petition was granted

On Sunday evening I set out, and on Tuesday reached

March, 1776. ]

Bristol. In theway I read over Mr. Boëhm's Sermons, Chap-

lain to Prince George of Denmark, husband to Queen Anne.

Hewas a person ofvery strong sense, and, in general, sound in

his judgment. I remember hearing avery remarkable circum-

stance concerning him, from Mr. Fraser, then Chaplain to St.

George'sHospital. " One day," said he," I asked Mr. Boëhm,

withwhom I was intimately acquainted, 'Sir, when you are sur-

rounded by various persons, listening to one, and dictating to

another, does not that vast hurry of business hinder your com-

munion with God ?" He replied, ' I bless God, I have just

then as full communionwith him, as if I was kneeling alone at

the altar.'"

Wed. 6.-I went down to Taunton, and at three in the after-

noon opened the new preaching-house. The people showed

great eagerness to hear. Will they at length know the day of

their visitation ? Thursday, 7. I returned to Bristol ; which I

left onMonday, 11 ; and having visited Stroud, Painswick, and

Tewkesbury, on Wednesday, 20, came to Worcester. Thurs-

day, 21. I was much refreshed among this loving people ; espe-

cially by the select society, the far greater part of whom could

still witness that God had saved them from inward as well as

outward sin.

Sat. 23.-About noon I preached in the Town-Hall at Eves-

ham, to a congregation of a very different kind. Few of them,

I doubt, came from any other motive than to gratify their curi-

osity. However, they were deeply attentive ; so that some of

them, I trust, went away a little wiser than they came.
I had been informed that Mr. Weston, the Minister of

Campden, was willing I should preach in his church ; but,

before I came, he had changed his mind. However, the

Vicar of Pebworth was no weathercock ; so I preached in his

church, Sunday, 24, morning and evening; and, I believe, not

invain.

Mon. 25.-I went on to Birmingham. I was surprised to

hear that a good deal of platina was used there ; but, upon

inquiry, I found it was not the true platina, an original metal

between gold and silver, (being in weight nearest to gold, even

as eighteen to nineteen,) but a mere compound of brass and

spelter.

Wed. 27. I preached at Dudley, in the midst of Antino-

mians and backsliders, on , " We beseech you not to receive the


grace of God in vain." In the evening I preached to our old

flock at Wednesbury ; and the old spirit was among them.

Fri. 29.-About eight I preached to avery large congregation

even at Wolverhampton; and at six in the evening, to a mixed

multitude in the market-place at Newcastle-under-Lyne. All

were quiet now; the gentleman who made adisturbance when I

was here last having been soon after called to his account.

Sun. 31.I preached at Congleton. The Minister here

having much disobliged his parishioners, most of the Gentry in

thetowncame to the preaching, both at two in the afternoon,

and in the evening ; and it was an acceptable time : I believe

very few, rich or poor, came in vain.

Mon. APRIL 1.-I went on to Macclesfield. That evening

I preached in the House ; but it being far too small, on Tues-

day, 2, I preached on the Green, near Mr. Ryle's door. There

are no mockers here, and scarce an inattentive hearer. So

mightily has the word of God prevailed !

Wed. 3.-Having climbed over the mountains, I preached

at the New-Mills, in Derbyshire. The people here are quite

earnest and artless, there being no public worship in the town

but at our chapel: So that they go straight forward, knowing

nothing of various opinions, and minding nothing but to be

Bible-Christians .

Thur. 4.-I began anAnswer to that dangerous Tract, Dr.

Price's " Observations upon Liberty ; " which, if practised,

would overturn all government, and bring in universal anarchy.

On Easter-Day the preaching-house at Manchester contained

the congregation pretty well at seven in the morning ; but in

the afternoon I was obliged to be abroad, thousands upon thou-

sands flocking together. I stood inaconvenient place, almost

over against the Infirmary, and exhorted a listening multitude

to " live unto Him who died for them and rose again."

Tues. 9. I came to Chester, and had the satisfaction to find

an earnest, loving, well-established people.

Wed. 10. In the evening, the House at Liverpool was well

filled with people of all ranks.

Fri. 12.-I visited one formerly aCaptain,now a dying sinner. His eyes spoke the agony of his soul ; his tongue having

well nigh forgot its office. With great efforts he could but just

say, " I want-Jesus Christ ! " The next day he could not

utter aword ; but if he could not speak,Godcould hear.

April, 1776.1 71

Mon. 15-. About noon I preached in the new House at

Wigan, to a very quiet and very dull congregation. But con-

sidering what the townwas some years ago, wicked even to a

proverb, wemaywellsay,God hath done great things already.

Andwehope to see greater things than these. In the evening

Iwas obliged to preach abroad at Bolton, though the air was

cold, and the ground wet. Tuesday, 16. I preached about

noon at Chowbent, once the roughest place inall the neighbour-

hood. But there is not the least trace of it remaining: Such is

the fruit of the genuine Gospel.

As we were considering in the afternoon what we should do,

the rainnot suffering us to be abroad, one asked the Vicar for

the use of the church; to which he readily consented. I began

reading Prayers at half-hour past five. The church was so

crowded, pews, alleys, and galleries, as I believe it had not been

thesehundredyears ; andGod bore witness to his word.

Wed. 17. After preaching at Bury about noon, I went on

to Rochdale, and preached in the evening to a numerous and

deeply serious congregation. Thursday, 18. I clambered over

the horrid mountains to Todmorden, and thence to Heptonstall,

onthe brow of another mountain. Such acongregation scarce

evermet in the church before. In the evening I preached in

the Croft, adjoining to the new House at Halifax.

Fri. 19. I preached at Smith-House, for the sake of that

lovelywoman, Mrs. Holmes. It does me good to see her ; such

is her patience, or, rather, thankfulness, under almost continual

pain. Sunday, 21. After strongly insisting at Daw-Green on

family religion, which is stillmuch wanting among us, I hast-

ened to Birstal church,where we had asound, practical sermon.

At one I preached to many thousands at the foot of the hill,

and to almost as many at Leeds in the evening.

Mon. 22-. I had an agreeable conversation with that good

man, Mr.O. Othat he may be an instrument of removing

the prejudices which have so long separated chief friends !

Tues. 23. I preached in the press-yard at Rothwell, and

have seldom seen a congregation so moved. I then spoke

severally to the class of children, and found every one of them

rejoicing in the love of God. It is particularly remarkable, that

this work of Godamong them is broke out all at once ; they

have all been justified, and one clearly sanctified, within these
last sixweeks.

[April, 1776.

Wed. 24. I went on to Otley, where the word of God has

free course, and brings forth much fruit. This is chiefly owing

to the spirit and behaviour of those whom God has perfected

in love. Their zeal stirs up many; andtheir steady and uniform

conversation has a language almost irresistible. Friday, 26. I

preached in the new chapel at Eccleshall, to a peoplejust sprung

out of the dust, exceeding artless and exceeding earnest ; many

of whom seemed to be already saved from sin. O, why do we

not encourage all to expect this blessing every hour, from the

moment they are justified ! In the evening I preached at

Bradford, on the Wise Man that builds his house upon a rock ;

that is, who builds his hope of heaven on no other foundation

than doing these sayings contained in the Sermon on the Mount ;

although, in another sense, we build not upon his sayings, but

his sufferings.

Sat. 27. I preached in the church at Bingley ; perhaps not

so filled before for these hundred years. Sunday, 28. The

congregation at Haworth was far greater than the church could

contain. For the sake of the poor parishioners, few of whom

are even awakened to this day, I spoke as strongly as I possibly

could upon these words, " The harvest is past, the summer is

ended, and we are not saved."

The church at Colne is, I think, at least twice as large as that

at Haworth. But it would not in any wise contain the congre-

gation. I preached on, " I saw a great white throne coming

down from heaven." Deep attention sat on every face ; and, I

trust, God gave us his blessing.

Mon. 29. About two I preached at Padiham, in a broad

street, to a huge congregation. I think the only inattentive

persons were, the Minister and a kind of gentleman. I saw

none inattentive at Clough in the evening. What has God

wrought, since Mr. Grimshaw and I were seized near this place

by a furious mob, and kept prisoners for some hours ! The

sons of him who headed that mob now gladly receive our saying.

Tues. 30. In the evening I preached in akind of Square, at

Colne, to a multitude of people, all drinking in the word. I

scarce ever saw acongregation wherein men, women, and children

stood in such a posture : And this in the town wherein, thirty

years ago, no Methodist could show his head ! The first that

preached here was John Jane, who was innocently riding

through the town, when the zealous mob pulled him off his

May,1776.] 73

horse, and put him in the stocks. He seized the opportu-

nity, and vehemently exhorted them " to flee from the wrath to

come."

Wed. MAY 1.-I set out early, and the next afternoon reached

Whitehaven ; and my chaise-horses were no worse for travelling

near a hundred and ten miles in two days.

In travelling through Berkshire, Oxfordshire, Bristol, Glou-

cestershire, Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Staffordshire, Che-

shire, Lancashire, Yorkshire, Westmoreland, and Cumberland,

I diligently made two inquiries : The first was, concerning the

increase or decrease of the people ; the second, concerning the

increase or decrease of trade. As to the latter, it is, within

these two last years, amazingly increased ; in several branches

in such amanner as has not been known in the memory ofman :

Such is the fruit of the entire civil and religious liberty which

all England now enjoys ! And as to the former, not only in

every city and large town, but in every village and hamlet,

there is no decrease, but a very large and swift increase. One

sign of this is the swarms of little children which we see in every

place. Which, then, shall we most admire, the ignorance or

confidence of those that affirm, population decreases in England ?

I doubt not but it increases full as fast here, as in any province

of North America.

Mon. 6. After preaching at Cockermouth and Wigton, I

went on to Carlisle, and preached to avery serious congrega-

tion. Here I saw a very extraordinary genius, aman blind from

four years of age, who could wind worsted, weave flowered plush

on an engine and loom of his own making ; who wove his own

name in plush, and made his own clothes, and his own tools of

every sort. Some years ago, being shut up in the organ-loft at

church, he felt every part of it, and afterwards made an organ

for himself, which, judges say, is an exceeding good one. He

then taught himself to play upon it psalm-tunes, anthems, volun-

taries, or anything which he heard. I heard him play several

tunes with great accuracy, and a complex voluntary : I suppose

all Europe can hardly produce such another instance. His name

is Joseph Strong. But what is he the better for all this, ifhe

is still " without God in the world ? "

Tues. 7.-I went on to Selkirk. The family came to prayer

in the evening, after which the mistress of it said, " Sir, my

daughter Jenny would be very fond of having a little talk with

[May, 1776.

you. She is a strange lass ; she will not come down on the

Lord's day but to public worship, and spends all the rest of the

day inher own chamber." I desired she would come up ; and

found onethat earnestly longed to be altogether a Christian. I

satisfied her mother that she was not mad; and spent a little

time in advice, exhortation, and prayer.

Wed. 8-. We set out early, but found the air so keen, that

before noon our hands bled as if cutwith aknife. In the even-

ing I preached at Edinburgh ; and the next evening near the

river-side in Glasgow.

Fri. 10. I went toGreenock. It being their fast-daybefore

the sacrament, (ridiculously so called, for they do not fast at

all, but take their three meals, just as on other days,) the con-

gregation was larger thanwhen Iwas here before, and remark-

ably attentive. The next day I returned to Glasgow, and on

Sunday, 12, went in the morning to the high-kirk, (to show I

was no bigot,) and in the afternoon to the Church of England

chapel. The decency of behaviour here surprises me more and

more. I know nothing like it in these kingdoms, except among

the Methodists. In the evening the congregation by the river-

side was exceeding numerous ; to whom I declared " the whole

counsel ofGod." Monday, 13. I returned to Edinburgh, and

the next day went to Perth, where (it being supposed no house

would contain the congregation) I preached at six on the South-

Inch, though the wind was cold and boisterous. Many are the

stumbling-blocks which have been laid in the way of this poor

people. They are removed ; but the effects of them still con-

tinue.

Wed. 15. I preached at Dundee, to nearly as large a con-

gregation as that at Port-Glasgow. Thursday, 16. I attended

an Ordination atArbroath. The Service lasted about four hours ;

but it did not strike me. It was doubtless very grave ; but I

thought it was verydull.

Fri. 17. I reached Aberdeen in good time. Saturday, 18.

I read over Dr. Johnson's "Tour to the Western Isles." It is

a very curious book, wrote with admirable sense, and, I think,

great fidelity ; although in some respects, he is thought to bear

hard on the nation, which I am satisfied he never intended.

Sunday, 19. I attended the Morning Service at the kirk, full

as formal as any in England ; and no way calculated either to

awaken sinners, or to stir up the gift of God in believers. In

May, 1776.1 75

the afternoon I heard a useful sermon in the English chapel ;

andwas again delighted with the exquisite decency both of the

Minister and the whole congregation. The Methodist congre-

gations come the nearest to this ; but even these do not come

up to it. Our House was sufficiently crowded inthe evening ;

but some of the hearers did not behave like those at the chapel.

Mon. 20.-I preached about eleven at Old Meldrum, but

could not reach Banff till near seven in the evening. I went

directly to the Parade, and proclaimed to a listening multitude,

"the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ." All behaved well

but a few Gentry, whom I rebuked openly; and they stood
corrected.

After preaching, Mrs. Gordon, the Admiral's widow, invited

me to supper. There I found five or six as agreeable women

as I have seen in the kingdom ; and I know not when I have

spent two or three hours with greater satisfaction. In the

morning I was going to preach in the assembly-room, when the

Episcopal Minister sent and offered me the use of his chapel.

It was quickly filled. After reading prayers, I preached on

those words in the Second Lesson, " What lack I yet ? " and

strongly applied them to those in particular who supposed them-

selves to be " rich and increased in goods, and lacked nothing."
I then set out for Keith.

Banff is one of the neatest and most elegant towns that I have

seen in Scotland. It is pleasantly situated on the side of a hill,

sloping from the sea, though close to it ; so that it is sufficiently

sheltered from the sharpest winds. The streets are straight and

broad. I believe it maybe esteemed the fifth, if not the fourth,

town in the kingdom. The county quite from Banff to Keith

is the best peopled of any I have seen in Scotland. This is

chiefly, if not entirely, owing to the late Earl of Findlater. He

was indefatigable in doing good, took pains to procure indus-

trious men from all parts, and to provide such little settlements

for them as enabled them to live with comfort.

About noon I preached at the New-Mills, nine miles from

Banff, to a large congregation of plain, simple people. As we

rode in the afternoon the heat overcame me, so that Iwas weary

and faint before we came to Keith ; but I no sooner stood up in

the market-place than I forgot my weariness ; such were the

seriousness and attention of the whole congregation, though as

numerous as that at Banff. Mr. Gordon, the Minister of the

[May,1776.

parish, invited me to supper, and told me his kirk was at my

service. A little society is formed here already ; and is in a

fairway of increasing. But they were just now in danger of

losing their preaching-house, the owner being determined to sell

it. I saw but one way to secure it for them, which was to buy

it myself. So (who would have thought it ?) I bought an estate,

consisting of two houses, a yard, a garden,with three acres of

good land. But he told me flat, " Sir, I will take no less for it

than sixteen pounds ten shillings, to be paid, part now, part at

Michaelmas, and the residue next May."

Here Mr. Gordon showed me a great curiosity. Near the top

of the opposite hill, a new town is built, containing, I suppose,

ahundred houses, which is a town ofbeggars. This, he informed

me,was the professed, regular occupation of all the inhabitants.

Early in spring they all go out, and spread themselves over the

kingdom ; and in autumnthey return, and do what is requisite

for their wives and children.

Wed. 22. The wind turning north,we stepped at once from

June to January. About one I preached at Inverury, to a

plain, earnest, loving people, and before five came to Aberdeen.

Thursday, 23. I read over Mr. Pennant's " Journey through

Scotland ; " a lively as well as judicious writer. Judicious, I

mean, in most respects ; but I cannot give up to all the Deists

in Great Britain the existence of witchcraft, till I give up the

credit of all history, sacred and profane. And at the present

time, I have not only as strong, but stronger proofs of this,

from eye and ear witnesses, than I have of murder ; so that I

cannot rationally doubt of one any more than the other.

Fri. 24.-1 returned to Arbroath, and lodged at Provost

Grey's. So, for atime, we are in honour ! I have hardly seen

such another place in the three kingdoms, as this is at present.

Hitherto there is no opposer at all, but every one seems to bid

us God-speed ! Saturday, 25. I preached at Westhaven (a

town of fishermen) about noon ; and at Dundee in the evening.

Sunday, 26. I went to the new church, cheerful, lightsome, and

admirably well finished. A young gentleman preached such a

sermon, both for sense and language, as I never heard in North-

Britain before ; and I was informed his life is as his preaching.

At five we had an exceeding large congregation ; and the peo-

ple of Dundee, in general, behave better at public worship than

any in the kingdom, except the Methodists, and those at the

June, 1776.] 77

Episcopal chapels. In all other kirks the bulk of the people

are bustling to and fro before the Minister has ended his prayer.

In Dundee all are quiet, and none stir at all till he has pro-

nounced the blessing.

Mon. 27-. I paid a visit to St. Andrew's, once the largest

city in the kingdom. It was eight times as large as it is now,

and a place of very great trade : But the sea rushing from the

north-east, gradually destroyed the harbour and trade together :

In consequence of which, whole streets (that were) are now

meadows and gardens. Three broad, straight, handsome streets

remain, all pointing at the old cathedral ; which, by the ruins,

appears to have been above three hundred feet long, and pro-

portionably broad and high : So that it seems to have exceeded

York Minster, and to have at least equalled any cathedral in

England. Another church, afterwards used in its stead, bears

date 1124. A steeple, standing near the cathedral, is thought

tohave stood thirteen hundred years.

What is left of St. Leonard's College is only a heap of ruins.

Two Colleges remain. One ofthem has a tolerable Square ; but

all the windows are broke, like those of a brothel. We were

informed, the students do this before they leave the College.

Where are their blessed Governors in the mean time ? Are

they all fast asleep ? The other College is a mean building, but

has ahandsome library newly erected. In the two Colleges, we

learned, were about seventy students ; near the same number as

at Old-Aberdeen. Those at New-Aberdeen are not more

numerous : Neither those at Glasgow. In Edinburgh, I suppose

there are ahundred. So four Universities contain three hun-

dred and ten students ! These all come to their several Colleges

inNovember, and return home in May ! So they may study

fivemonths in the year, and lounge all the rest ! O where was

the common sense of those who instituted such Colleges ? In the

English Colleges, every one may reside all the year, as allmy

pupils did : And I should have thought myself little better

than ahighwayman, if I had not lectured them every day in the

year, but Sundays .

Wewere so longdetained at the Passage, that I only reached

Edinburgh time enough to give notice of my preaching the

nextday. After preaching at Dunbar, Alnwick, and Morpeth,

on Saturday, JUNE 1, I reached Newcastle.

Mon. 3. I visited Sunderland, where the society then con

[June,1776.

tained three hundred and seventy-two members. Thursday, 6.

I preached at Darlington, and Barnard-Castle : On Friday, in

Teesdale and Weardale. Here manyrejoicedwithjoyunspeak-

able, and seemed determined never to rest till they had reco-

vered that great salvation which they enjoyed some years ago.

Saturday, 8. As we rode to Sheep-Hill,we saw and heard at a

distance, much thunder, and rain, and lightning. The rainwas

before and behind, and on each side : But none fell upon us.

About six, I preached at Sheep-Hill. It rained hard very near

us; but not a drop came upon us. After eight, I reachedNew-

castle, thoroughly tired. But anight's rest set me up again.

On Monday and Tuesday I met the classes. I left three hun-

dred and seventy-four in the society, and I found about four

hundred: And I trust they are more established in the " faith

that worketh by love."

While I was here, I talked largely with a piouswoman,whom

Icould not well understand. I could not doubt of her being

quite sincere, nay, and much devoted to God : But she had fallen

among some well-meaning enthusiasts, who taught her so to

attend to the inward voice, as to quit the society, the preaching,
the Lord's Supper, and almost all outward means. I find no

persons harder to deal with than these. One knows not how to

advise them. They must not act contrary to their conscience,

though it be an erroneous one. And who can convince them

that it is erroneous ? None but the Almighty.

Mon. 17-. After preaching at Durham, I went on to Dar-

lington. The society here,lately consisting of nine members,

is now increased to above seventy ; many ofwhom are warm in

their first love. At the love-feast, many of these spoke their

experience with all simplicity. Here will surely be a plentiful

harvest, if tares do not grow up with the wheat.

Wed. 19.-I preached to my old, loving congregation at

Osmotherley ; and visited, once more, poor Mr. Watson, just

quivering over the grave.

Part of this week I read, as I travelled, a famous book, which

I had not looked into for these fifty years. It was Lucian's

" Dialogues." He has agood deal of humour, but wonderful

little judgment. His great hero is Diogenes, the Cynic ; just

such another brute as himself. Socrates (as one might expect)

he reviles and ridicules with all his might. I think there is

more sense in his " Timon," than in all his other Dialogues put

July, 1776.1 79

together : And yet, even that ends poorly, in the dull jest of

his breaking the heads of all that camenear him. How amaz-

ing is it, that such abook as this should be put into the hands

ofschool-boys !

Mon. 24. I went on to Scarborough. I think the preaching-

house here is the most elegant of any square Room which we

have inEngland; and wehad as elegant acongregation : But

they were as attentive as ifthey had been Kingswood colliers.

Tues. 25.-I visited apoor backslider, who has given great

occasion to the enemy to blaspheme. Some time since, he felt

a pain in the soles of his feet, then in his legs, his knees, his

thighs. Now it has reached his stomach, and begins to affect

his head. No medicines have availed at all. I fear he has

sinned a sin unto death ; a sin which God has determined to

punish bydeath.

Fri. 28-. I am seventy-three years old, and far abler to

preach than I was at three-and-twenty. What natural means

hasGod used to produce so wonderful an effect ? 1. Continual

exercise and change of air, by travelling above four thousand

miles in a year : 2. Constant rising at four : 3. The ability, if

ever Iwant, tosleep immediately : 4. The never losing a night's

sleep in my life : 5. Two violent fevers, and two deep consump-

tions. These, it is true, were rough medicines ; but they were

of admirable service; causing my flesh to come again, as the

flesh of a little child. May I add, lastly, evenness of temper ?

I feel and grieve ; but, by the grace of God, I fret at nothing.

But still " the help that is done upon earth, He doeth it him-

self. " And this he doeth in answer to many prayers.

Mon. JULY 1.-I preached, about eleven, to a numerous and

serious congregation at Pocklington. In myway from hence

to Malton, Mr. C (a man of sense and veracity) gave me

the following account :-His grandfather, Mr. H , he said,

about twenty years ago, ploughing up a field, two or three miles

from Pocklington, turned up a large stone, under which he per-

ceived there was a hollow. Digging on, he found, at a small

distance, a large, magnificent house. He cleared away the
earth ; and, going into it, found many spacious rooms. The

floors of the lower story were of Mosaic work, exquisitely

wrought. Mr. C- himself counted sixteen stones within an

inch square. Many flocked to see it, from various parts, as

long as it stood open: But after some days, Mr. P (he

"

[July, 1776.

knew not why) ordered it to be covered again ; and he would

never after suffer any to open it, but ploughed the field all over.

This is far more difficult to account for, than the subterraneous

buildings at Herculaneum. History gives us an account of the

time when, and the manner how, these were swallowed up.

The burning mountain is still assured, and the successive lavas

that flowed from it still distinguishable. But history gives no

account of this, nor of any burning mountains in our island.

Neither do we read of any such earthquake in England, as was

capable ofworking that effect.

Tues. 2.-I went to York. The House was full enough in

the evening, while I pointed the true and the false way of

expounding those important words, "Ye are saved through

faith. " Wednesday, 3. I preached about noon at Tadcaster,

with an uncommon degree of freedom ; which was attended

with a remarkable blessing. A glorious work is dawning here,

against which nothing can prevail ; unless the ball of contention

be thrown in among the plain people, by one or two that have

lately embraced new opinions. In the evening I preached at

York, on the fashionable religion, vulgarly calledmorality ; and

showed at large, from the accounts given of it by its ablest

patrons, that it is neither better nor worse than Atheism.

Thur. 4.-I met the select society, and was a little surprised

to find, that, instead of growing in grace, scarce two of them

retained the grace they had two years ago. All of them seemed

to be sincere ; and yet afaintness of spirit ran through them all.

In the evening I showed, to a still more crowded audience,

the nature and necessity of Christian love :-Aγαπη, vilely ren-

dered charity, to confound poor English readers. The word

was sharper than a two-edged sword, as many of the hearers

felt. God grant the wound may not be healed, till he himself

binds it up !

Fri. 5.-About eleven I preached at Foggathorp, a lone house,

a few miles from Howden. Abundance of people were gathered

together, notwithstanding heavy rain; and they received the

truth in the love thereof. I came to Howden a little before

three ; when a large congregationwas soon gathered. All were

serious ; the more so, because of a few claps of thunder that

rolled over our heads.

I preached at Swinfleet in the evening. These are the most

sensible and gentlemanlike farmers that I have seen anywhere ;

July, 1776.1 JOURNAL. 81

and many of them are " rooted and grounded in love," and

have adorned the Gospel many years .

Sat. 6.-I went on to Epworth, and found my old friend,

Mr. Hutton, in the deepest melancholy. I judged it to be

partly natural, partly diabolical ; but I doubt not he will be

saved, though as by fire.

Tues. 9.-I preached atBrigg in the morning. All behaved

well, but afew gentlemen, (so called,) who seemed to understand

no more of the matter, than if I had been talking Greek.

I went thence to Horncastle and to Spilsby, with Mr. Br .

While he was at Cambridge, he was convinced of sin, though

not by any outward means, and soon after justified. Coming

to Hull, he met with one of our Preachers. By long and close

conversation with him, he was clearly convinced it was his duty

to join with the people called Methodists. At first, indeed, he

staggered at Lay Preachers ; but, after weighing the matter

more deeply, he began preaching himself; and found a very

remarkable blessing, both on his own soul, and on his labours.

After visiting a few more places in these parts, on Saturday,

13, I returned to Epworth. Sunday, 14. I preached in the

morning at Gringley ; about one, at Ouston ; and at four, in

Epworth market-place ; where God " struck with the hammer

ofhis word, and broke the hearts of stone." We had afterwards

alove-feast at which a flame was soon kindled ; which was

greatly increased while Mr. Cundy related the manner how

God perfected him in love: A testimony which is always

attended with a peculiar blessing.

Mon. 15.-I preached at Doncaster, in one of the most

elegant Houses in England, and to one of the most elegant

congregations. They seemed greatly astonished ; and well they
might ; for I scarce ever spoke so strongly on, " Strait is the

gate, and narrow is the way, that leadeth unto life." Tuesday,

16. At Sheffield I talked at large with one whose case is very

peculiar. She never loses a sense of the love of God ; and yet

is continually harassed by the devil, and constrained to utter

words which her soul abhors ; while her body feels as if it was

in a burning flame. For this her father turned her out of

doors ; and she had no money, nor any friend to take her in.

To cut her off from everyhuman comfort, our wise Assistant

turned her out of society. Yet in all this she murmured not,

neither " charged God foolishly."


Wed. 17. Having been desired, by one of Chesterfield, to

give them a sermon in the way, I called there; but he did not

come to own me. So, after resting awhile at another house, I

stood at a small distance from the main street, and proclaimed

salvation by faith to a serious congregation. After preaching

at a few other places, on Thursday, 18, I preached at Notting-

ham ; and, having no time to lose, took chaise at noon, and the

next evening, Friday, 19, met the Committee at the Foundery.

Wed. 24.-I read Mr. Jenyns's admired tract, on the " Inter-

nal Evidence of the Christian Religion." He is undoubtedly a

fine writer ; but whether he is a Christian, Deist, or Atheist,

I cannot tell. If he is a Christian, he betrays his own cause

by averring, that " all Scripture is not given by inspiration

of God; but the writers of it were sometimes left to them-

selves, and consequently made some mistakes." Nay, if there

be any mistakes in the Bible, there may as well be a thousand.

If there be one falsehood in that book, it did not come from the

God of truth.

Sun. 28.-Perceiving the immense hurt which it had done,

I spoke more strongly than ever I had done before, on the sin

and danger of indulging " itching ears." I trust, here at least,

that plague will be stayed.

Fri. AUGUST 2.-We made our first subscription toward

building a new chapel ; and at this, and the two following

meetings, above a thousand pounds were cheerfully subscribed.

Sun. 4. Many of the Preachers being come to town, I
"Let

enforced that solemn caution, in the Epistle for the day,

him that standeth take heed lest he fall. " And God applied it

to many hearts. In the afternoon I preached in Moorfields to

thousands, on Acts ii. 32, " This Jesus hathGod raised up,

whereof we all are witnesses."

Tues. 6. Our Conference began, and ended on Friday, 9,

which we observed with fasting and prayer, as well for our own

nation as for our brethren in America. In several Conferences,

we have had great love and unity ; but in this there was, over

and above, such a general seriousness and solemnity of spirit as

we scarcely have had before. Sunday, 11. About half anhour

after four I set out ; and at half an hour after eleven on Mon-

day, came to Bristol.

I found Mr. Fletcher a little better, and proposed his taking

a journey with me to Cornwall ; nothing being so likely to

Aug. 1776. ] 83

restore his health, as a journey of four or five hundred miles ;

but his Physician would in nowise consent ; so I gave up the

point.

Tues. 13.-I preached at Taunton, and afterwards went

with Mr. Brown to Kingston. The large, old parsonage-house

is pleasantly situated close to the church-yard, just fit for a

contemplativeman. Here I found a Clergyman, Dr. Coke, late

Gentleman Commoner of Jesus College in Oxford, who came

twentymiles on purpose. I had much conversation with him ;

and an union then began, which I trust shall never end.

Wed. 14. I preached at Tiverton ; and on Thursday went

on to Launceston. Here I found the plain reason why the

work ofGod hadgained no ground in this Circuit all the year.

The Preachers had given up the Methodist testimony. Either

they did not speak of Perfection at all, (the peculiar doctrine

committed to our trust,) or they spoke of it only in general terms,

without urging the believers to " go on unto perfection," and to

expect it every moment. And wherever this is not earnestly

done, the work of God does not prosper.

Fri. 16.-I was going to preachin the market-placeat Camel-

ford, where a few are still alive to God, when a violent storm

drove us into the House ; that is, as many as could squeeze in.

The fire quickly kindled among them, and seemed to touch

every heart. My text was, " What doest thou here, Elijah ?"

AndGod himself made the application. Aflame was once

more raised in this town : May it never more be put out !

In the evening I preached in Mr. Wood's yard, at Port-

Isaac, to most of the inhabitants of the town. The same spirit

was here as at Camelford, and seemed to move upon every

heart. Andwehad all a good hope, that the days of faintness

and weariness are over, and that the work of God will revive

and flourish .

Sat. 17. We found Mr. Hoskins, at Cubert, alive ; but

just tottering over the grave. I preached in the evening,

on 2 Cor. v. 1-4, probably the last sermon he will hear from

me. I was afterwards inquiring, if that scandal of Cornwall,

theplundering of wrecked vessels, still subsisted. He said, " As

much as ever ; only the Methodists will have nothing to do

with it. But three months since a vessel was wrecked on the

south coast, and the tinners presently seized on all the goods;

and even broke in pieces a new coach which was on board, and


carried every scrap ofit away." Butis there no way to prevent

this shameful breach of all the laws both of religion and

humanity ? Indeed there is. The Gentry of Cornwallmay

totally prevent it whenever they please. Let them only see

that the laws be strictly executed upon the next plunderers ;

and after an example is made of ten of these, the next wreck

will be unmolested. Nay, there is a milderway. Let them

only agree together, to discharge any tinner or labourer that is

concerned in the plundering ofa wreck, and advertise his name,

that no Cornish gentleman may employ him any more ; and

neither tinner nor labourer will any more be concerned in that

bad work.

Sun. 18. The passage through the sands being bad for a

chaise, I rode on horseback to St. Agnes, where the rain con-

strained me to preach in the House. As we rode back to

Redruth, it poured down amain, and found its way throughall

our clothes. I was tired when I came in ; but after sleeping

quarter of an hour all my weariness was gone.

Mon. 19. I joined together once more the select society,

who are continually flying asunder, though they allacknowledge

the loss they have sustained thereby. At eleven I met fifty or

sixty children. How muchdepends upon these ! All the hope

of the rising generation. Tuesday, 20. In the evening I

preached at Helstone, where prejudice is at an end ; and all the

town, except a few Gentry, willingly hear the word ofsalvation.

Wed. 21. I preached at Penzancein a gentleman's balcony,

which commanded the market-place,to ahuge congregation, on,

"Without holiness no man shall see the Lord." The word fell

heavy, upon high and low, rich and poor. Such an opportunity

I never had at Penzance before.

Thur. 22.-I preached at six in the market-place at St.

Just's. Two or three well-dressed people walked by, stopped a

little, and then went on. So they did two or three times. Had

it not been for shame, they might have heard that which is able

to save their souls.

Fri. 23. The congregation, both morning and evening, was

large ; and great was our rejoicing in the Lord. Saturday, 24.

In the evening I preached in a meadow at St. Ives, to one of

the largest congregations I had seen in the county. Sunday,

25. I met the children ; the most difficult part of our office.

About five in the evening I began preaching at Gwennap, to

Sept. 1776.] JOURNAL. 85

full twenty thousand persons. And they were so commodiously

placed, in the calm, still evening, that every one heard distinctly.

Tues. 27-. About noon I preached in the piazza, adjoining

to the Coinage-Hall in Truro. I was enabled to speak exceed-

ing plain, on, " Ye are saved through faith." I doubt the

Antinomians gnashed on me with their teeth ; but I must

declare " thewhole counsel of God." In the evening I preached

in anopen space at Mevagissey, to most of the inhabitants of

thetown; where I saw avery rare thing,-men swiftly increasing

in substance, andyet not decreasing in holiness.

Wed. 28. The rain drove us into the House at St. Austle,

where I think some of the stout-hearted trembled. The next

evening I preached at Medros, and was pleased to see an old

friend, with his wife, his two sons and two daughters. I believe

God sent a message to their hearts, as they could not help

showing by their tears.

Sun. SEPTEMBER 1.-I got to Plymouth church a little

after the Service began. I admired the seriousness and decency

ofthecongregation : None bowed or courtesied, or looked about

them. And at the Lord's Supper, although both the Ministers

spoke so low in delivering the elements, that none who were not

very near could hear aword they said,yetwas the congregation

as still as if no one had been in the church. I was likewise

agreeably surprised at their number : When I was in the church

in Hull, I think we had six communicants, beside those that

came with me : Here I suppose were full three hundred.

Immediately after Service I went to the quay, and preached

on thosewords in the Epistle for the day, " The Scripture hath

concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus

Christ might be given to them that believe." I wondered at

the exquisite stupidity of the hearers, particularly the soldiers ;

who seemed to understand nomore of the matter than somany

oxen. So I told them in very plain terms ; and some of them

were ashamed.

Mon. 2.-In my way to Exeter, I read over an ingenious

tract, containing some observations which I never saw before.

In particular, that if corn sells for twice as much now as it did

at the time of the Revolution, it is in effect no dearer than it

was then, because we have now twice as much money ; that if
other things sell now for twice as much as they did then, corn

ought to do so too; that though the price of all things increases


as money increases, yet they are reallyno dearer than theywere

before ; and, lastly, that to petition Parliament to alter these

things, is to put them upon impossibilities, and can answer no

end but that of inflaming the people against their Governors.

Wed. 4.-I wasdesired to call at Ottery, alarge town, eleven

miles from Exeter. I preached in the market-house to abun-

dance of people, who behaved with great decency. At five, I

preached in the market-place atAxminster, to a still larger con-

gregation. I have seldomheard people speakwith more honesty

and simplicity than many did at the love-feast which followed.

I have not seen a more unpolished people than these ; but love

supplies all defects. It supplies all the essentials of good breed-

ing, without the help of a dancing-master.

Thur. 5.-I went on to Corfe-Castle, in the Isle of Purbeck.

At six I preached in the yard adjoining to the preaching-house.

It was a season both of conviction and consolation. Friday, 6.

I preached at the new House in Melcomb, to as many as itwould

well contain. Saturday, 7. About noon I stood upon the Cross,

at Bruton, and proclaimed " the grace of our Lord Jesus

Christ." Many seemed to be astonished ; all were quiet ; and

a few deeply affected.

In the evening I preached at Shepton-Mallet ; where the

people in general appeared to be more serious, ever since the

late terrible riot, in which two ofthem were killed. On Satur-

day I went on to Bristol.

Mon. 9.-I began, what I had long intended, visiting the

society from house to house, setting apart at least two hours in

aday for that purpose. I was surprised to find the simplicity

with which one and all spoke, both of their temporal and spiritual

state. Norcould I easily have known, by any other means, how

great a work God has wrought among them. I found exceeding

little to reprove ; but much to praiseGod for. And I observed

one thing, which I did not expect :-In visiting all the families,

without Lawford-Gate, by far the poorest about the city, I did

not find so much as one person who was out of work.

Another circumstance I critically inquired into, What is the

real number of the people ? Dr. Price says, (doubtless to

encourage our good friends, the French and Spaniards,) " The

people of England are between four and five millions ; supposing

them to be four, or four and a half, on an average, in one house."

I found, in the families which I visited, about six in a house.

Sept. 1776. ] JOURNAL. 87

But onewho has latelymade amore general inquiry, informs me,

there are, without Lawford-Gate, seven in a house. The same

information I received, from one who has lately made the

inquiry, concerningthe inhabitants of Redcliff. Now, if at four

in ahouse, we are four millions, must we not, at seven in a

house, be seven millions ?

But even this is far short of the truth; for a plain reason, the

houses are miscomputed. To give one instance :-The houses

without Lawford-Gate are computed to be a thousand. Now,

at the sitting of the Justices, some years since, there were two

hundred public-houses. Was then one house in five a public-

house? No, surely ; one in ten at the utmost. If so, there

were two thousand houses ; and, consequently, fourteen thousand

persons. I believe, there are now full twenty thousand. And

these are nothing near a quarter of the present inhabitants of

Bristol.

Wed. 11. I preached about one at Bath ; and about six, in

ameadow, near the preaching-house, in Frome, besought a listen-

ing multitude " not to receive the grace ofGod in vain."

Thur. 12. I spent about two hours in Mr. Hoare's gardens,

at Stourton. I have seen the most celebrated gardens in Eng-

land; but these far exceed them all: 1. In the situation ; being

laid out on the sloping sides of a semicircular mountain : 2. In

the vast basin of water inclosed between them, covering, I sup-

pose, sixty acres of ground: 3. In the delightful interchange of

shady groves and sunny glades, curiously mixed together.

Above all, in the lovely grottoes, two ofwhich excel everything

of the kind which I ever saw ; the fountain-grotto, made entirely

of rock-work, admirably well imitating nature ; and the castle-

grotto, into which you enter unawares, beneath a heap of ruins.

This is within totally built of roots of trees, wonderfully inter-

woven. On one side of it is a little hermitage, with a lamp, a

chair, a table, and bones upon it.

Others were delighted with the temples, but I was not : 1 .

Because several of the statues about them were mean : 2.

Because I cannot admire the images of devils ; and we know

the gods of the Heathens are but devils: 3. Because I defy all

mankind to reconcile statues with nudities, either to common

sense or commondecency.

Returning from thence through Maiden-Bradley, we saw the

elumsy house ofthe Duke ofSomerset ; and afterwards the grand

[Nov. 1776

and elegant one of Lord Weymouth, beautifully situated in a

lovely park .

Fri. 13. I went on to Midsummer-Norton, where the Rector,

being applied to, cheerfully granted me the use of his church,

and himselfmade one of the congregation. I preached on those

words in the Second Lesson, " O thou of little faith,wherefore

didst thou doubt ? " About two I preached in the new House,

at Paulton, to a plain, simple, loving people ; and spent the

evening at Kingswood, endeavouring to remove some little

offences, which had arisen in the family.

Wed. 18.-About one I preached at Bath, as usual, to a

crowded audience ; in the afternoon at Keynsham, where, at

length, we see some fruit ofour labours. Thursday, 19. Find-

ing few would come to the Room at Pill, I preached in the

market-place. Many attended, and I am persuaded, God cut

some of them to the heart. About six I preached at Pensford,

and spent the evening with the lovely family at Publow.

Sat. 21. I preached in the Paddock, at Bedminster. It is

plain (notwithstanding what some affirm) that the time of field-

preaching is not past, while the people flock to it from every

quarter.

Sun. 22. After reading Prayers, preaching, and administer-

ing the sacrament, at Bristol, I hastened away to Kingswood,

and preached under the trees to such a multitude as had not

been lately seen there. I began in King's Square a little before

five, where the word of God was quick and powerful. And I

was no more tired at night than when I rose in the morning.

Such is the power of God !

After settling all things at Bristol and Kingswood, and visit-

ing the rest of the societies in Somersetshire, Wiltshire, and

Hants, I returned, in October, to London with Mr. Fletcher.

Sun. NOVEMBER 10.-I was desired to preach at St. Vedast's

church, Foster-Lane, which contained the congregation tolerably

well. I preached on those words in the Gospel for the day,

(how little regarded even by men that fear God ! ) " Render to

Cæsar the things that are Cæsar's, and unto God the things

that are God's. "

Wed. 13. I set out with Mr. Fletcher to Norwich. I took

coach at twelve, slept till six, and then spent the time very

agreeably, in conversation, singing, and reading. I read Mr.

Bolt's account of the affairs in the East Indies : I supposemuch

Nov. 1776.] 89

the best that is extant. Butwhat ascene is here opened ! What

consummate villains, what devils incarnate, were the managers

there ! What utter strangers to justice, mercy, and truth ;

to every sentiment ofhumanity ! I believe no heathen history

contains a parallel. I remember none in all the annals of anti-

quity : Not even the divine Cato, or the virtuous Brutus, plun-

dered the provinces committed to their charge with such merciless

cruelty as the English have plundered the desolated provinces

of Indostan.

Whenwe came to Norwich, finding many of our friends had

been shakenby the assertors of the Horrible Decree, I employed

the three followingmornings in sifting the question to the bottom.

Manywere confirmed thereby ; and, I trust, will not again be

removed from the genuine Gospel.

Thur. 14. I showed in the eveningwhat the Gospel is, and

what it is to preach the Gospel. The next evening I explained,

at large, the wrong and the right sense of, " Ye are saved by

faith." Andmany saw how miserably they had been abusedby

those vulgarly called Gospel Preachers.

Sun. 17. In the morning we had about a hundred and fifty

communicants, and a remarkable blessing. In the afternoon

and in the evening we were crowded enough. Monday, 18.

We set out for Yarmouth. Here I knew not where to preach ;

theMayor refusing me the use of the Town-Hall. But the

Chamberlain gave me the use of a larger building, formerly a

church. In this a numerous congregation soon assembled, to

whom I describedthe " sect which is everywhere spoken against."

I believe all that were attentive will be a little more candid for

the time to come.

Tues. 19. I opened the new preaching-house at Lowestoft,

-a new and lightsome building. It was thoroughly filled with

deeply attentive hearers. Surely some of them will bear fruit

unto perfection. Wednesday, 20. Mr. Fletcher preached in the

morning, and I at two in the afternoon. It then blew athorough

storm, so that it washard to walk or stand, the wind being ready

to take us off our feet. It drove one of the boats, which were

on the strand, from its moorings out to sea. Three men were in

it, who looked for nothing every moment but to be swallowed

up. But presently five stout men put off in another open boat,

and, rowing for life, overtook them, and brought them safe to

land.

[Dec. 1776.

Thur. 21. I preached at Beccles. A duller place I have

seldom seen. The people of the town were neither pleased nor

vexed, as " caring for none of these things." Yet fifty or sixty

came into the house, either to hear or see. The people of

Loddon seemed in the evening of another spirit, resolved to

" enter in at the strait gate." Friday, 21. We had a solemn

parting with our friends at Norwich ; and on Saturday evening

I brought Mr. Fletcher back to London, considerably better

than when he set out.

Fri. 29. We considered the several plans which were offered

for the new chapel. Having agreed upon one, we desired a

Surveyor to draw out the particulars, with an estimate of the

expense. We then ordered proposals to be drawn up for those

who were willing to undertake any part ofthe building .

Mon. DECEMBER 2.-I set out for Bedford, in the diligence,

and came thither at four in the afternoon. I found great freedom

of speech in the evening, and perceived God was reviving his

work in this people.

Tues. 3.-I crossed over to St. Neot's, and had an hour's

friendly conversation with Mr. V. O that all men would sit

as loose to opinions as I do ; that they would think and

let think ! I preached in the evening to a numerous con-

gregation with much enlargement of spirit. Wednesday, 4.

I preached at Godmanchester, and on Thursday, returned to

London.

In the way, I read over Mr. Gray's Works, and his Life

wrote by Mr. Mason. He is an admirable poet,not much inferior

to either Prior or Pope ; but he does not appear, uponthe whole,

to have been an amiableman. His picture, I apprehend, expresses

his character;-sharp, sensible, ingenious; but, at the same time,

proud, morose, envious, passionate, and resentful. I was quite

shocked at the contempt with which he more than once speaks

of Mr. Mason ; one full as ingenious as himself, yea, full as

good a poet ; (as even " Elfrida " shows, as much as Mr. Gray

despises, or affects to despise it ;) and, over and above, possessed

ofthat modesty and humanity, whereinMr. Gray was sogreatly
deficient.

Friday, 13, was the national fast. It was observed not only

throughout the city, but (I was afterwards informed) throughout

the nation, with the utmost solemnity. I shall not wonder if

God should now interpose and send us prosperity, since, at

Jan. 1777. ] JOURNAL. 91

length, we are not too proud to acknowledge " there is a God

that judgeth the earth."

Mon. 16. I preached at Canterbury ; on Tuesday, at Dover;

Wednesday, about eleven, at poor, dry, dead Sandwich. But I

now foundmore hope for the poor people, than I had done for

many years. In the evening I preached at Margate, to a very

genteel, and yet very serious, congregation ; and I believe

(although it blew a storm) near a hundred were present in the

morning.

Thur. 19. I had another truly comfortable opportunity at

Canterbury. God lifted up the hands that hung down, and

gavemany a strong hope that they should yet see good days,

after all the days of darkness and heaviness. Friday, 20. I

returned to London ; and on Sunday, 22, buried the remains of

Elizabeth Duchesne ; a person eminently upright of heart, yet

for manyyears a child of labour and sorrow. For near forty

years shewas zealous of good works, and at length shortened her

days by labouring for the poor beyond her strength. But her

endwas peace. She now rests from her labours, and her works

follow her.

Tues. 31. We concluded the year with solemn praise to

God for continuing his great work in our land. It has never

been intermitted one year or one month, since the year 1738 ;

in which my brother and I began to preach that strange doctrine

ofsalvation by faith.

Wed. JANUARY 1, 1777.-We met, as usual, to renew our

covenant with God. It was a solemn season, wherein many

found his power present to heal, and were enabled to urge their

waywith strength renewed.

Thur. 2.-I began expounding, in order, the book of Eccle-

siastes. I never before had so clear a sight either of the mean-

ing or the beauties of it. Neither did I imagine thatthe several

parts of it were in so exquisite a manner connected together ;

all tending to prove that grand truth, that there is no happiness
out ofGod.

Wed. 8.-I looked over the manuscripts of that great and

goodman, Charles Perronet. I did not think he had so deep

communion with God. I know exceeding few that equal him ;

and hadhe had an University education, there would have been

few finer writers in England.

Mon. 13. I took the opportunity of spending an hour every


morning with the Preachers, as I did withmy pupils at Oxford.

And we endeavoured not only to increase each other's know

ledge, but " to provoke one another to love and to good works."

Wed. 15.-I began visiting those of our society who lived in

Bethnal-Green hamlet. Many ofthem I foundin such poverty

as few can conceive without seeing it. O why do not all the

rich that fear God constantly visit the poor? Can they spend

part of their spare-time better ? Certainly not. So they will

find in that day when " every man shall receive his own reward

according to his own labour."

Such another scene I saw the next day, in visiting another

part of the society. I have not found any such distress, no,

not in the prison ofNewgate. One poor manwasjust creeping

out of his sick-bed, to his ragged wife and three little children ;

who were morethan halfnaked, and thevery picture of famine ;

when one bringing in a loaf of bread, they all ran, seized upon

it, and tore it in pieces in an instant. Who would not rejoice

that there is another world ?

Mon. 20.-Mrs. T. gave us a remarkable account :-On

Saturday, the 11th instant, her little boy, a child of eminent

piety, between five and six years old, gave up his spirit to God.

She was saying to one in the house, " My son is gone toglory."

Ayouth standing by, cried out, " But I am going to hell."

He continued praying all Sunday and Monday ; but in utter

despair. On Tuesday he found ahope ofmercy, which gradually

increased. The next morning he rejoiced with joy unspeakable,

knowing his sins were blotted out ; and soon after Henry Terry

(the son ofmany tears to his poor mother) slept in peace.

Tues. 21. I dined at Mr. A.'s. A month or two ago he

had a trial worthy of a Christian. He saw his little son (between

four and five years old) crushed to death in a moment. But he

did not murmur: He could say, " The Lord gave, and the Lord

hath taken away."

Sun. 26. I preached again at Allhallows church, morning

and afternoon. I found great liberty of spirit ; and the congre-

gation seemed to be much affected. How is this ? Do I yet

pleasemen? Is the offence of the Cross ceased ? It seems,

after being scandalous near fifty years, I am at length growing

into an honourable man !

Thur. 30. I had a visit from Mr. B-, grown an old,

feeble, decrepid man; hardly able to face a puff ofwind, or to

March, 1777. ] JOURNAL. 93

creepup anddown stairs ! Such is the fruit of cooping one's

self in a house, of sitting still day after day !

Mon. FEBRUARY 3.-Hearing there was some disturbance at

Bristol, occasioned by men whose tongues were set on fire against

theGovernment, I went down in the diligence, and on Tuesday

evening strongly enforced those solemn words, " Put them in

mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to speak evil of

no man." I believe God applied his word, and convinced many

that they had been out of their way.

Finding the repeated attempts to set fire to the city had occa-

sioned a general consternation, on Wednesday, 5, I opened and

applied those words to a crowded audience, " Is there any evil

in the city, and the Lord hath not done it ?" On Thursday I

wrote "A calm Address to the Inhabitants of England." May

God bless this, as he did the former, to the quenching of that

evil fire which is still among us ! On Saturday I returned to

London.

Sat. 15.-At the third message, I took up my cross, and

went to see Dr. Dodd, in the Compter. I was greatly surprised.

He seemed, though deeply affected, yet thoroughly resigned to

the will of God. Mrs. Dodd likewise behaved with the utmost

propriety. I doubt not, God will bring good out of this evil.

Tuesday, 18. I visited him again, and found him still in a

desirable state of mind; calmly giving himself up to whatsoever

God should determine concerning him .

Wed. 23. I was desired to see one that, after she had been

filled with peace andjoy in believing, was utterly distracted. I

soon found it was a merely natural case ; atemporary disorder

common to women at that period of life.

Tues. 25. I spent an agreeable hour with Dr. Cs, a

deeply serious man, who would fain reconcile the Arminians and

Calvinists. Nay, but he must first change their hearts.

Sun. MARCH 2.-Being a warm sunshiny day, I preached in

Moorfields, in the evening. There were thousands upon thou-

sands ; and all were still as night. Not only violence and rioting,

but even scoffing at field-Preachers is now over.

To-day I received from an eye-witness a particular account

of a late remarkable occurrence. Captain Bell, a most amiable

man, beloved of all that knew him, and just engaged to one

which he tenderly loved, sailed from England last autumn. On

September 20 he was hailed by the Hawke, a small sloop, Cap


tain Arthur Crawford, Commander, who told him, he came from

Halifax, in His Majesty's service, eruising for American priva-

teers. Captain Bell invited him to breakfast, entertained him

with all kindness, and made him some little presents : But on

his cursing and swearing at the Americans, mildly reproved him,

and he desisted. Mr. M'Aness, the Supercargo, seeing him

walk round the ship, and diligently observe every thing in it,

told Captain Bell, " Be upon your guard, this is certainly an

enemy !" But the Captain answered, " It cannot be ; no man

canact sobase a part."

Captain Crawford returned to his own ship, and sailing under

the stern of the other, while Captain Bell and some others were

standing on the quarter-deck, ordered his men to fire at him.

They did so, and shot him in the belly, so that his bowels came

out. But he did not fall. He ordered them to fire again : He

fell ; and while his men were carrying him away, Crawford took
the vessel.

Captain Bell being conveyed into the cabin, sent and desired

to speak with Captain Crawford : But he would not come. He

then desired to speak with his own sailors, one by one. One

of them saying, " Sir, you have been basely murdered," he

replied, " Love your enemies ; pray for them that despitefully

use you. What are our sufferings to those which our Lord

endured for us ?" He then desired the account which St. John

gives of our Lord's sufferings to be read to him. He desired

his love to all that loved the Lord Jesus ; particularly to her

he was about to marry. Then bidding them all farewell, he died

in peace, about two hours after he received the second shot.

But what did Captain Crawford do amiss ? Have not the

English also taken American ships by surprise ? Yes ; but not

with such circumstances. For, 1. He hoisted no colours, nor ever

summoned the ship to yield : 2. He fired on men who thought

nothing of the matter, and pointed the men to Captain Bell in

particular. So it was a deliberate murder. Such is the mercy,

such the gratitude, ofAmerican rebels !

Mon. 10. In the evening I preached at Reading. How

manyyears were we beating the air at this town ! Stretching out

our hands to a people as stupid as oxen ! But it is not so at

present. That generation is passed away, and their children are

of a more excellent spirit. After preaching at Newbury and

Ramsbury in the way, on Wednesday, 12, I went on to Bristol.

April, 1777. ] JOURNAL. 95

Sun. 16. I preached at St. Werburgh's, the first church I

ever preached in at Bristol. I had desired my friends not to

come thither, but to leave room for strangers. By this means

the church was well filled, but not over much crowded ; which

gives occasion to them that seek occasion, as it is a real incon-

venience to the parishioners.

Fri. 21. I preached at Bath. I often wonder at this, our

chapel stands in the midst of all the sinners, and yet, going or

coming to it, I never heard an immodest word, but prayers and

blessings in abundance.

Sun. 23. I preached at St. Ewin's church, but not upon

Justification by Faith. I do not find this to be a profitable

subject to an unawakened congregation. I explained here, and

strongly applied, that awful word, " It is appointed unto men

once to die."

Mon. 24. I left Bristol, and preaching at Ramsbury, Wit-

ney, Oxford, and High-Wycomb, in my way, on Thursday

came to London ; whence I cannot be long absent while the new

chapel is building. Friday, 28. I received an affectionate message

from agreat man.--But I shall not wonder if the wind changes.

Sun. 30.-Easter-day was a solemn and comfortable day,

whereinGodwas remarkably present with his people. During

the Octave I administered the Lord's Supper every morning,

after the example of the Primitive Church. Sunday, APRIL 6.

I began ajourney through some of our societies, to desire their

assistance towards the expense of the new chapel. I preached

at Birmingham on Monday, 7 ; in Congleton, on Tuesday ; and

on Wednesday went on to Macclesfield. The new church here

is far the most elegant that I have seen in the kingdom. Mr.

Simpson read Prayers, and I preached on the first verse of the

Second Lesson, Heb. xi. And I believe many felt their want of

the faith there spoken of. The next evening I preached on

Heb. xii. 14 : " Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. "

I was enabled to make a close application, chiefly to those that

expected to be saved by faith. I hope none of them will here-

after dream of going to heaven by any faith which does not

produce holiness .

Fri. 11.-I preached at Stockport about ten, and at Man-

chester in the evening. Monday, 14. I preached about noon

at Warrington, and in the evening at Liverpool ; where many

large ships are now laid up in the docks, which had been


employed for many years in buying or stealing poor Africans,

and selling them in America for slaves. The men-butchers

have now nothing to do at this laudable occupation. Since the

American war broke out, there is no demand for human cattle.

So themen ofAfrica, as well as Europe, may enjoy their native

liberty.

Wed. 16.-About noon I preached at Wigan ; in the even-

ing, at the new House in Bolton, crowded within and without,

on the " wise man" who " built his house upon a rock." Many

here are following his example, and continually increasing both

in the knowledge and love of God.

Thur. 17.-I called upon Mr. Barker, at Little-Leigh, just

tottering over the great gulf. Being straitened for time, I

rode from thence to Chester. I had not for some years rode so

far on horseback, but it did me no hurt. After preaching, I

took chaise, and came to Middlewich, a little before the Liver-

pool coach, in which I went on to London.

I have now finished Dr. Gell's " Essay toward an Amend-

'ment of the last Translation of the Bible." This part only

takes in the Pentateuch ; but many other texts are occasionally

explained. Surely hewas amanmighty in the Scriptures, and

well acquainted with the work of God in the soul : And he

plainly shows that the Antinomians and Anti-Perfectionists were

just the same then, as they are now.

Monday, 2, was the day appointed for laying the foundation

of the new chapel. The rain befriended us much, by keeping

away thousands who purposed to be there. But there were still

such multitudes, that it was with great difficulty I got through

them, to lay the first stone. Upon this was aplate of brass,

(covered with another stone,) on which was engraved, " This

was laid by Mr. John Wesley, on APRIL 1, 1777." Probably

this will be seen no more, by any human eye ; but will remain

there, till the earth and the works thereof are burned up.

Sun. 27.-The sun breaking out, I snatched the opportunity

of preaching to many thousands in Moorfields. All were still

as night, while I showed how " the Son of God was manifested

to destroy the works of the devil."

Mon. 28. At one I took coach, and on Wednesday evening

preached at Newcastle-upon-Tyne. I love our brethren in the

southern counties ; but still I find few among them that have

the spirit of our northern societies. Saturday, MAY 3. I went

May, 1777.] 97

to Sunderland, and strongly enforced, "Render unto Cæsar

the things that are Cæsar's."

Mon. 5.-Having finished my business in these parts, I set

my face southward again ; and after preaching at Durham,

about eleven went on to Darlington. I have not lately found

so lively a work in any part ofEngland as here. The society is

constantly increasing, and seems to be all on fire for God.

There is nothing among them but humble,simple love ; no dis-

pute, no jar of any kind. They exactly answer the description

that David Brainerd gives of his Indian congregation. I par-

ticularly desired both the Preachers and Leaders to have an

especial care over them, and, if possible, to prevent either the

devil or his agents from poisoning their simplicity. Many of

them already know, that "the blood of Jesus Christ " hath

" cleansed them from all sin . "

Wed. 7.-I went to Yarm. There I found a lovely young

woman, in the last stage of a consumption ; but such a one as

I never read of, nor heard any Physician speak of, but Dr..

Wilson. The seat of the ulcers is not in the lungs, but the

wind-pipe. I never yet knew it cured. My housekeeper died

ofit last year. This young woman died in a few wecks.

Thur. 8.-About eleven I preached at Osmotherley. I found

my old friend Mr. Watson, who first brought me into this

country, was just dead, after living a recluse life near fifty years .

From one that attended him, I learned, that the sting of death

was gone, and he calmly delivered up his soul to God.

Fri. 9.-I went to Malton, hoping to meet Miss R-y

there : But instead of her, I found a letter which informed me

that she was on the brink of the grave ; but added, " Surely

my Lord will permit me to see you once more in the body." I

would not disappoint the congregation ; but as soon as I had

done preaching, set out, and about four in the morning came to

Otley. I minutely inquired into the circumstances of her illness. She is dropped suddenly into the third stage of a consump-

tion, having one or more ulcers in her lungs, spitting blood,

having a continual pain in her breast, and a constant hectic

fever, which disables her from either riding on horseback, or

bearing the motion of a carriage. Meantime, she breathes

'nothingbut praise and love. Short-lived flower, and ripe for
abetter soil !

Sat. 10. After travelling between ninety and a hundred

[May, 1777.

miles, I cameback to Malton ; and,having rested an hour, went

on to Scarborough, and preached in the evening. But the flux

which I had had for a few days so increased, that at first I

found it difficult to speak. Yet the longer I spoke the stronger

I grew. Is not God a present help ?

Sun. 11. I experienced a second time what one calls, febris

ex insolatione.* The day was cold; but the sun shone warm

on my back, as I sat in the window. In less than half an hour

I began to shiver, and soon after had a strong fit of an ague.

I directly lay down between blankets, and drank largely of

warm lemonade. In ten minutes the hot fit came on, and

quickly after I fell asleep. Having slept half an hour, I rose

up and preached. Afterwards I met the society ; and I found

no want of strength, but was just as well at the end as at the

beginning.

Mon. 12. I preached atBridlington ; Tuesday, 13, in the
morning at Beverley; and in the evening at Hull, on, "Narrow

is theway that leadeth unto life. " And yet, blessed be God,

there are thousands walking in it now, who a few years since

thought nothing about it.

Wed. 14. At eleven I preached at Pocklington, with an eye

to the death of that lovelywoman, Mrs. Cross. Agayyoung

gentleman, with a young lady, stepped in, stayed five minutes,

and went out again,with as easy anunconcern as if they had

been listening to a ballad-singer. I mentioned to the congrega-

tion the deep folly and ignorance implied in such behaviour.

These pretty fools never thought that for this very opportunity

they are to give an account before men and angels !

In the evening I preached at York. Iwould gladly have

rested the next day, feeling my breast much out of order. But

notice having been given of my preaching at Tadcaster, I set

out at nine in the morning. About ten the chaise broke down.

I borrowed a horse ; but as hewas none of the easiest, in riding

three miles I was so thoroughly electrified, that the pain inmy

breastwas quite cured. I preached in the evening at York ; on

Friday took the diligence ; and on Saturday afternoon came

to London.

MAY 18.-(Being Whit-Sunday.) Our Service at the Foun-

dery began as usual at four. I preached in West-Street chapel

*Afever produced by an incautious exposure to the sun. EDIT.

May, 1777.1 JOURNAL. 99

in the forenoon ; and at the Foundery in the evening. In the

afternoon I buried the body of Joseph Guilford, a holy man,

and a useful Preacher. Surely never before did a man of so

weak talents do so much good ! He died, as he lived, in the

full triumph of faith, vehemently rejoicing and praising God.

Tues. 20.-I met the Committee for building, which indeed

was my chief business at London. We consulted together on

several articles, and were confidently persuaded, that He who

had incited us to begin, would enable us to finish .

Sat. 24. Mybrother and I paid another visit to Dr. Dodd,

and spent a melancholy and useful hour. He appears, so far

as man canjudge, to be a true, evangelical penitent.

To ease myjourney, I went to Stevenage, on Sunday even-

ing. Monday, 26. I went on to Witham-Common; and on

Tuesday reached Sheffield. The next day I went to Leeds ;

and, after preaching in the evening, pushed on to Otley. Here I

found E- R- weaker and happier than ever. Her life seemed

spun out to the last thread. I spent half an hour with her, to

Teach her, at once, and learn ofher, to die.

I then rested two or three hours ; and took chaise at two, on

Thursday, 29, hoping to reach Whitehaven in the evening ;

but I could only get to Cockermouth. Friday, 30. I went on

to Whitehaven, where I found a little vessel waiting for me.

After preaching in the evening, I went on board about eight

o'clock, and before eight in the morning landed at Douglas, in

the Isle of Man.

Douglas exceedingly resembles Newlyn in Cornwall ; both in

its situation, form, and buildings ; only it is much larger, and

has a few houses equal to most in Penzance. As soon as we

landed, I was challengedby Mr. Booth, who had seen me in

Ireland, and whose brother has been for many years a member

of the society in Coolylough. A chaise was provided to carry

me to Castletown. I was greatly surprised at the country.

Alltheway from Douglas to Castletown it is as pleasant and as

well cultivated as most parts ofEngland, withmany gentlemen's

seats. Castletown a good deal resembles Galway ; only it is

not so large. At six I preached near the Castle, I believe, to

all the inhabitants of the town. Two or three gay youngwomen

showed they knew nothing about religion ; all the rest were

deeply serious. Afterwards I spent an hour very agreeably

[June, 1777.

at Mrs. Wood's, the widow of the late Governor. I was much

pressed to stay a little longer at Castletown; butmytimewasfixed.

Sun. JUNE 1.-At six I preached in ourown Room ; and, to

my surprise, saw all the gentlewomen there. Young as well as

old were now deeply affected, and would fain have had me

stayed, were it but an hour or two ; but I was forced to hasten

away, in order to be at Peeltown before the Service began.

Mr. Corbett said, he would glady have asked me to preach,

but that the Bishop had forbidden him ; who had also forbidden

all his Clergy to admit any Methodist Preacher to the Lord's

Supper. But is any Clergyman obliged, either in law or con-

science, to obey such a prohibition? By no means. Thewill

even of the King does not bind any English subject, unless it

be seconded by an express law. How much less the will of a

Bishop ? " But did not you take an oath to obeyhim ?" No,

nor any Clergyman in the three kingdoms. This is a mere

vulgar error. Shame that it should prevail almost universally.

As it rained, I retired after Service into a large malt-house.

Most of the congregation followed, and devoured the word.

It being fair in the afternoon, the whole congregation stopped

in the church-yard'; andthe word of Godwas with power. It

was ahappy opportunity.

Mon. 2. The greater part of them were present at five in

the morning. Amore loving,simple-hearted people than this I
never saw. And no wonder, for they have but six Papists,

and no Dissenters, inthe island. It is supposed to contain near

thirty thousand people, remarkably courteous and humane.

Ever since smuggling was suppressed, they diligently cultivate

their land : And they have a large herring fishery, so that the

country improves daily.

The old Castle at Peel (as well as the cathedral built within

it) is only a heap of ruins. It was very large and exceeding

strong, with many brass guns ; but they are now removed to

England.

I set out for Douglas in the one-horse chaise, Mrs. Smyth

riding with me. Inabout anhour, in spite of all I could do,

the headstrong horse ran the wheel against a large stone : The

chaise overset in amoment ; but we fell so gently on smooth

grass, that neither of us was hurt at all. In the evening I

preached at Douglas to near as large acongregation as that at

Peel, but not near so serious. Before ten we went on board,

ג

June, 1777.1 JOURNAL. 101

and about twelve on Tuesday, 3, landed at Whitehaven. I

preached at five in the afternoon ; and hastening to Cocker-

mouth, found a large congregation waiting in the Castle-yard.

Between nine and ten I took chaise ; and about ten on Wednes-

day, 4, reached Settle. In the evening I preached near the

market-place, and all but two or three gentlefolks were seriously

attentive. Thursday, 5. About noon I came to Otley, and

foundE-R-just alive, but all alive to God. In the

evening it seemed as if the departing saint had dropped her

mantle upon the congregation ; such an awe was upon them,

while I explained and applied, " They were all filled with the

HolyGhost."

Fri. 6-. I preached at Bradford, where a blessed work has
increased ever since William Brammah was here. "Hath not

Godchosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise ?"

Sun. 8.-About one I took my stand at Birstal : Thousands

upon thousands filled the vale and the side of the hill ; and all,

I found, could hear. Such another multitude assembled near

Huddersfield in the evening. Many of these had never heard

a Methodist Preacher before ; yet they all behaved well.

Mon. 9. I spent one hour more at Otley. Spectaculum Deo

dignum ! * I have not before seen so triumphant an instance of

the power offaith. Though in constant pain, she has no com-

plaint : So does the glory ofGod overshadow her, and swallow

up her will in his ! She is indeed

All praise, all meekness, and all love.

Wed. 11. I had appointed to preach in the new preaching-

house at Colne. Supposing it would be sufficiently crowded, I

went a little before the time ; so that the galleries were but half

full when I came into the pulpit. Two minutes after, the whole

left-handgallery fell at once, with a hundred and fifty or two

hundred persons. Considering the height, and the weight of

people, one would have supposed many lives would have been

lost. But I did not hear of one. Does not God give his angels

charge over them that fear him ? When the hurry was a little

over, I went into the adjoining meadow, and quietly declared

the whole counsel ofGod.

On Thursday and Friday I preached at Halifax, Daw-Green,

Asight worthy ofGod himself. EDIT.

[June,1777.

Horbury, and Wakefield. On Saturday I wrote " Thoughts

upon God's Sovereignty." To a cool man, I think the whole

matter will appear to rest on a single point:-As Creator, he

could not but act according to his own sovereign will : But

as Governor he acts, not as a mere Sovereign, but according to

justice and mercy.

Mon. 16. I met the class of children at Rothwell. This

consisted last year of elevenyoung maidens. They are increased

to twenty. I think, seventeen or eighteen of them are now

rejoicing in the love of God. And their whole behaviour is

suitable thereto, adorning the doctrine of God our Saviour.

Afterwards I went on to Rotherham, and was glad to find,

that the society is not discouraged by the death of that good

man, William Green, who had been as a father to them from the

beginning. He never started either at labour or suffering ; but

went on calm and steady, trusting Godwith himselfand his eight

children, even while all the waves and storms went over him.

Hedied, as he lived, in the full assurance of faith, praisingGod
with his latest breath.

Tues. 17.-I preached in the market-place at Chesterfield,

on, " It is appointed unto men once to die." Although the con-

gregation was numerous, yet I did not observe any either trifling

or inattentive hearers. In the evening I preached at Derby.

It was supposed the people would be afraid to come, as part of

the roof had lately fallen in. (Indeed it fell an hour before the

congregation met : Otherwise many must have been hurt.)

But they were not afraid : The House was well filled : And

even the rich attended with seriousness .

Wed. 18. I preached at Nottingham, to a serious, loving

congregation. There is something in the people of this town,

which I cannot but much approve of; although most of our

society are of the lower class, chiefly employed in the stocking-

manufacture, yet there is generally an uncommongentleness and

sweetness in their temper, and something of elegance in their

behaviour, which, when added to solid, vital religion, makethem

an ornament to their profession.

Thur. 19-. 1 did not reach Leicester till the congregation

had waited some time: So I began immediately to enforce,

" Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved."

I had designed not to call here at all, supposing it would be lost

labour. But the behaviour ofthe whole congregation convinced

July, 1777.1

me that I hadjudgedwrong. They filled the House at five in

the morning, and seemed determined to " stir up the gift of

Godwhichwas in them." Saturday, 21. I returned to London.

Wed. 25. I saw Dr. Dodd for the last time. He was in

exactly such a temper as I wished. He never at any time

expressed the least murmuring or resentment at any one ; but

entirely and calmly gave himself up to the will of God. Such

aprisoner I scarce ever saw before, much less such acondemned

malefactor. I should think, none could converse with him

without acknowledging thatGod is with him.

Thur. 26. I read the truly wonderful performance of Mr.

RowlandHill. I stood amazed ! Compared to him,Mr. Toplady

himself is a very civil, fair-spoken gentleman ! Friday, 27. I

wrote an answer to it : "Not rendering railing for railing ; "

(I have not so learned Christ;) but " speaking the truth in love."

Sat. 28. I have now completed my seventy-fourth year ; and

by the peculiar favour ofGod, I find my health and strength,

and allmy faculties of body and mind, just the same as they

were at four-and-twenty.

Mon. 30.-I set out for Northamptonshire, and preached in

the evening at Stony-Stratford. Mr. Canham had prepared a

large and commodious place ; but it would not contain the

congregation. However, all without, as well as within, except

one fine lady, were serious and attentive.

Tues. JULY 1.-I preached in the evening at Marton, near

Buckingham ; the thunder, attended with heavy rain, waslikely

to rob us ofour whole congregation. We cried to God. The

thunder and rain ceased, and we had a fair sunshiny evening.

Alarge number ofpeople flocked together, some of whom came

twelve or fourteen miles : And they didnot lose their labour ; for

God accompanied his word with the demonstration of his Spirit.

Wed. 2.-'The House was more thanfilled at five, and chiefly

with genteel young women ; ofwhom (I learned) there is a large

number in this village, remarkable both for sense and serious-

ness. After dinner we went on to Oxford, where also we had a

very serious congregation. So all the seed sown here has not

fallen either on stony or thorny ground.

In the afternoon I went to Witney ; and, the evening being

fair and mild, preached on Wood-Green, to afar larger congre-

gation than the House could have contained. I spent the rest

of the evening profitably and agreeably, with afew of the excellent

[July, 1777.

ones of the earth. I was ready to say, " It is good for me to

be here." No ! Go thou and preach the Gospel.

Thur. 3.-Iwas much comforted at Stroud among anearnest,

serious, loving people. Friday, 4. I preached in dull Glouces-

ter at ten, and at six in the new House at Tewkesbury. Satur-

day, 5. I sent my chaise straight to Worcester, andmyself took

horse for Bengeworth : The churchwas tolerably filled. After-

wards I went down with Mr. Beale to his house; the same in

which Mr. Benjamin Steward lived three or four and forty years

ago. In the evening I preached in the little chapel at Broad-

marston.

Sun. 6. I preached in Pebworth church morning and after-

noon, and at Bengeworth in the evening. The church, large

as it is, was well filled ; and many, for the present, were much

affected. I preached there once more at eight in the morning,

and then rode on to Worcester. On Tuesday evening the Rec-

tor of the parish was at the preaching; acandid, sensible man.

He seemed much surprised, having neverdreamed before that

there was such a thing as common sense among the Methodists !

The society here, by patient continuance in well-doing, has

quite overcome evil with good; even the beasts of the people

are now tame, and opennot their mouths against them. They

profitedmuch when thewaves and storms went over them : May

they profit as much by the calm !

Wed. 9. I went through a delightful vale to Malvern-Wells,

lying on the side of a high mountain, and commanding one of

the finest prospects in the world; the whole vale of Evesham.

Hitherto the roads were remarkably good; but they grew worse

and worse till we came to Monmouth. Much disturbance was

expected here ; but we had none: All were deeply attentive.

About six in the evening, on Thursday, 10, I preached on

the bulwarks at Brecon. Friday, 11. I called upon Mr.

Gwynne, just recovering from a dangerous illness. But he is

not recovered from the seriousness which it occasioned. May

this be a lasting blessing !

Sat. 12. We dined at Llandeilo ; after dinner we walked in

Mr. Rees's park, one of the pleasantest I ever saw ; it is so

finely watered by the winding river, running through and round

the gently rising hills. Near one side of it, on the top of a high

eminence, is the old Castle ; a venerable pile, at least as old as

William the Conqueror, and "majestic though in ruins."

July, 1777. ] JOURNAL. 105

In the evening I preached to a large congregation in the

market-place at Carmarthen. I was afterwards informed, the

Mayor had sent two Constables to forbid my preaching there.

But if he did, their hearts failedthem, for they said not one word.

Sun. 13. We had a plain, useful sermon from the Vicar,

though some said, " Hedid not preach theGospel." He preached

what these menhavegreat need to hear, lest they seek death in

the error of their life .

In the evening I explained to ahuge congregation, who it is

that builds his house upon a rock. I believe many had ears

to hear, even of the young and gay; towhom I made a particu-

lar application.

Mon. 14. I reached Llingwair about noon. In the even-

ing Mr. Pugh read Prayers, and I preached, at Newport. This

is the only town in Wales which I had then observed to
increase.

In riding along on the side of Newport-Bay, I observed on

the ground a large quantity of turfs. These are found by

removing the sand above the high-water mark, under which

there is a continued bed of turf, with the roots of trees, leaves,

nuts, and various kinds ofvegetables. So that it is plain the

sea is an intruder here, and now covers what was once dry land.

Such probably was the whole Bay a few centuries ago. Nay,

it is not at all improbable, that formerly it was dry land

from Aberystwith to St. David's Point.

Tues. 15. Mr. Bowen carried me in his chaise to Cardigan.

This is the second town I have seen in Wales, which is continu-

ally increasing both in buildings and in number of inhabitants.

I preached atnoon ; five or six Clergymen being present, with a

numerous congregation ; and amore attentive one I have not

seen : Many likewise appeared deeply affected. If our Preachers

constantly attended here, I cannot think their labour would be

invain.

Wed. 16. About nine I preached again in Newport church ;

and found much liberty amongthat poor, simplepeople. Wedined

withAdmiral Vaughan, at Tracoon ; one of the most delightful

spots that can be imagined. Thence we rode to Haverford-

west; but theheat and dust were as much as I could bear : I

was faint for a while : But it was all gone as soon as I came

into the congregation; and after preaching, and meeting the

society, I was as fresh as at six in the morning.

[July, 1777.

Thur. 17.-I preached at Roach, and took a view of the old

Castle, built on a steep rock. A gentleman wisely asked Mr.

S-, " Pray is this natural or artificial ? " He gravely

replied, " Artificial, to be sure ; I imported it from the north of

Ireland."

Fri. 18. The more I converse with the society at Haverford,

the more I am united to them. Saturday, 19. About eleven

I preached at Howton, two miles short of the Ferry. There

was anuncommon blessing among the simple-hearted people.

At Pembroke, in the evening, we had the most elegant congre-

gation I have seen since we came into Wales. Some of them

came in dancing and laughing, as into a theatre ; but theirmood

was quickly changed, and in a few minutes they were as serious

as my subject,-Death. I believe, if they do not take great

care, they will remember it-for a week !

Sun. 20. The congregation at St. Daniel's was more than

the church could contain. After reading Prayers, I preached

an hour, (an uncommon thing with me,) on, " Not every one

that saith unto me, Lord ! Lord! " Many were cut to the

heart ; and at the Lord's Supper, many were wounded and

many healed. Surely now, at least, if they do not harden their

hearts, all these will know the day of their visitation.

Mon. 21. Having beenmuch pressed to preach at Jatterson,

a colliery, six or seven miles from Pembroke, I began soon after

seven. The House was presently filled, and all the space about

the doors and windows ; and the poor people drank in every word.

Ihad finished my sermon, when agentleman, violentlypressing

in, bade the people get home and mind their business. As he

used some badwords, mydriver spake to him. He fiercely said,

" Do you think I need to be taught by a chaise-boy ?" Thelad

replying, " Really, Sir, I do think so," the conversation ended.

In the evening I preached in the market-place at Carmarthen,

to such another congregation as I had there before ; and my

heart was so enlarged towards them, that I continued preaching

a full hour. Tuesday, 22. I preached at Llanelly about one,

and at Swansea in the evening.

Wed. 23. I preached in Swansea at five ; inNeath, between

eight and nine ; and about one, at Margam. In the road

between this and Bridge-End, we had the heaviest rain I ever

remember to have seen in Europe: Andlit savedJohn Prickard's

life ; for presently man and beast were covered with a sheet of

Aug. 1777.] 107

lightning; but as he was thoroughly wet, it did him no harm.

In the evening I preached in Oldcastle church, near Bridge-

End.

Thur. 24. I preached to a large and serious congregation ,

in the Town-Hall as Cowbridge. Friday, 25. About eleven I

read Prayers, and preached in Lantwyt church, to a very

numerous congregation. I have not seen either so large or so

handsome a church since I left England. It was sixty yards

long ; but one end of it is now in ruins. I suppose it has been

abundantly the most beautiful, as well as the most spacious,

church in Wales.

In the evening I preached at Mrs. Jones's house in Fonte-

gary. For the present, even the genteel hearers seemed affected ;

and God is able to continue the impression.

Sat. 26. I breakfasted at Fonmon Castle, and found a

melancholy pleasure in the remembrance of past times. About

noon I preached at Penmark, and in the evening in that memo-

rable old Castle at Cardiff.

Sun. 27-. I preached in the Town-Hall ; and again in the

afternoon, to a crowded audience, after preaching in a little

church at Caerphilly. In the evening I preached in Mr.

M's hall at Llandaff; andGod applied his word (I think)

to every heart. Monday, 28. I preached at Newport, and in

the evening reached Bristol.

Wed. 30.-I spent an hour or two with Mr. Fletcher, restored

to life in answer to manyprayers. How many providential ends

have been answered by his illness ! And perhaps still greater

will be answered by his recovery.

Fri. AUGUST 1.-I desired asmany as could tojoin together

in fasting and prayer, that God would restore the spirit of love

and of a sound mind, to the poor deluded rebels in America.

In the evening we had awatch-night at Kingswood ; and I was

agreeably surprised to observe that hardly any one went away

till the whole service was concluded.

Tues. 5. Our yearly Conference began. I now particu-

larly inquired (as that report had been spread far and wide)

of every Assistant, " Haveyou reason to believe, from your own

observation, that the Methodists are a fallen people ? Is there

a decay or an increase in the work ofGod where you havebeen ?

Are the societies in general more dead, or more alive to God,

than they were some years ago ? " The almost universal answer

[Aug. 1777.

was, " Ifwe must know them by their fruits, there is no decay

in the work of God, among the people in general. The societies

are not dead to God: They are as much alive as they have been

for many years. And we look onthis report as a mere device of

Satan, to make our hands hang down."

"But how can this question be decided ?" You, and you,

can judge no farther thanyou see. You cannotjudge of one

part by another ; of the people of London, suppose,by those of

Bristol. And none but myself has an opportunity of seeing

them throughout the three kingdoms.

But to come to a short issue. Inmost places, the Methodists

are still a poor, despised people, labouring under reproach, and

many inconveniences ; therefore, wherever the power of Godis

not, they decrease. By this, then, you may form a surejudgment. Do the Methodists in general decrease in number ?

Then they decrease in grace ; they are a fallen, or, at least, a

falling people. But theydonot decrease in number ; they con-

tinually increase : Therefore, they are not a fallen people.

The Conference concluded on Friday, as it began, in much

love. But there was one jarring string : John Hilton told us,

he must withdraw from our Connexion, because he saw the

Methodists were a fallen people. Some would have reasoned

with him, but it was lost labour ; so we let him go in peace.

Mon. 11.-I returned to London. Thursday, 14. I drew

up proposals for the " Arminian Magazine." Friday, 15. The

Committee for the buildingmet, which is now readyfor the roof.

Hitherto God has helped us !

Sun. 17.-In the calm, fair evening, I took the opportunity

to preach in Moorfields. The congregation was at least as large

as I ever saw there. As yet I do not see any sign ofthe decay

of the work ofGod in England.

Mon. 18. I went down to Bristol again, and read in the way

Dr. M'Bride's " Practice of Physic." Undoubtedly it is an

ingenious book ; yet it did not answer my expectation. Several

things I could contradictfrom my own experience ; e. g., he says,

"All fevers are attended with thirst and vigilia." Nay, in two

violent fevers I had no thirst at all, and slept rather more than

when I was in health.

Tues. 19.-I went forward to Taunton, with Dr. Coke, who,

being dismissed from his Curacy,has bid adicu to his honourable

name, and determined to cast in his lot with us. In the evening

Oct. 1777.1 JOURNAL. 109

I endeavoured to guard all who love or fear God against that

miserable bigotry which many of our mistaken brethren are

advancing with all their might.

Wed. 20. I preached at Tiverton ; Thursday, 21, at Laun-

ceston ; Friday, 22, about ten, in Bodmin. Thence I went

on to Cubert ; and found that venerable old man, Mr. Hoskins,

calmly waiting for his discharge from the body, Saturday, 23.

At noon, I preached in Redruth ; and in the evening, on the

Cliff of St. Ives. In the following week I visited most of the

western societies ; and on Saturday, 30, had the Quarterly

Meeting. I now inquired particularly, whether the societies

were increasing or decreasing. I could not hear of a decrease in

any; but several were swiftly increasing ; particularly those of

St. Just, Penzance, and Helstone.

Sun. 31. I preached in the morning at St. Agnes ; in the

evening to the huge congregation at Gwennap ; larger (it was

supposed) by fifteen hundred or two thousand, than ever it had

beenbefore.

Sat. SEPTEMBER 27.-Having abundance of letters from

Dublin, informing me that the society there was in the utmost

confusion, by reason of some of the chief members, whom the

Preachers had thought it needful to exclude from the society ;

and finding all I could write was not sufficient to stop the grow-

ing evil ; I saw but one way remaining, to go myself, and that

as soon as possible. So the next day I took chaise with Mr.

Goodwin, and made straight for Mr. Bowen's, at Llyngwair, in

Pembrokeshire ; hoping to borrow his sloop, and so cross over to

Dublin without delay. I came to Llyngwair on Tuesday, 30.

The next day, OCTOBER 1, the Captain of a sloop at Fishgard,

a small sea-port town, ten or twelve miles from Llyngwair, sent

meword he would sail for Dublin in the evening ; but he did

not stir till about eight the next evening. We had asmall, fair

wind. From Fishgard to Dublin is about forty leagues. We

had run ten or twelve, till, atabout eight in the morning, Friday,

3, it fell dead calm. The swell was then such as I never felt

before, except in the Bay of Biscay. Our little sloop, between

twenty and thirty tons, rolled to and fro witha wonderful motion.

Aboutnine, the Captain, finding he could not get forward, would

have returned, but he could make no way. About eleven I

desired we might go to prayer. Quickly after the wind sprung

up fair; but it increased, till, about eight at night, it blew a

[Oct. 1777.

storm, and it was pitch dark ; so that,having only the Captain

and a boy on board, we had much ado to work the vessel.

However, about ten, though we scarce know how, we got safe

into Dublin Bay.

Sat. 4.-Between seven and eight I landed at Ring's End.

Mr. M'Kenny met me, and carried me to his house. Our friends

presently flocked from all quarters, and seemed equally surprised

and pleased at seeing me. I moved no dispute, but desired a

few of each side tomeet me together at tenon Mondaymorning.

In the evening, although on so short a warning, we had an

exceeding large congregation ; on whom (waiving all matter of

contention) I strongly enforced those solemn words, " I must

work the works of Him that sent me, while it is day; the night

cometh, when no man can work."

Sun. 5.-I was much comforted at St. Patrick's, where an

uncommon awe seemed to rest on the whole assembly. In the

evening I preached on Eph. iv. 30, &c., being the conclusion of

the Epistle for the day. Nothing could be more seasonable, and

I read it as a presage of good.

Mon. 6.-At ten I met the contending parties ; the Preachers

on one hand, and the excluded members on the other : I heard

them at large, and they pleaded their several causes with earnest-

ness and calmness too. But four hours were too short to hear

the whole cause ; so we adjourned to the next day : Meantime,

in order to judge inwhat statethe society reallywas, I examined

them myself ; meeting part of them to-day, and the rest on

Tuesday and Wednesday. Four-and-thirty persons, I found,

had been put out of, or left, the society : But, notwithstanding,

as there were last quarter four hundred and fifty-eightmembers,

so there are just four hundred and fifty-eight still. At the

desire of the members lately excluded, I now drew up the short

state of the case; but I could in nowise pacify them : They

were all civil, nay, it seemed, affectionate to me ; but they could

never forgive the Preachers that had expelled them : So that I

could not desire them to return into the society ; they could only

remain friends at a distance.

Thur. 9.-I was desired by some of our friends to clear up

the point of Imputed Righteousness : Idid so, by preaching on,

"Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righte-

ousness." In opening these words, I showed what that faith

was, which was imputed to him for righteousness, viz. , faith in

Oct.1777-1

God's promise to give him the land of Canaan; faith in the

promise that Sarah should conceive ason; and the faith whereby

he offered up Isaac on the altar. But Christ is not in any of

these instances the direct or immediate object of Abraham's

faith; whereas he is the direct, immediate object of that faith

which is imputed to us for righteousness.

Sat. 11. I visited many,sick and well, and endeavoured to

confirm them in their love towards each other. I was more and

more convinced that God had sent me at this time to heal the

breach of his people.

Sun. 12. We had alovely congregation in the morning, to

whom I closely applied St. Peter's words : " I exhort you, as

strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly desires which war

against the soul." To the mixed multitude in the evening, I

applied our Lord's words : "All things are ready ; come unto

the marriage." I then took a solemn and affectionate leave of

the society, and cheerfully commended them to the Great Shep-

herd ; more in number, and, I am persuaded, more established in

grace, than they had been for twenty years .

Mon. 13. In the morning we went onboard ; but the wind

being right a-head, and blowing hard, we made but little way,

till night; and the sea was so rough, that I could not sleep till

midnight. Tuesday, 14. After beating up and down several

hours more, the Captain thought best to run under the Carnar-

vonshire shore. About noon we put out to sea again, but the

storm increased, and about four carried away our bowsprit, and

tore one of the sails to tatters. But the damage was soon

repaired; and before six, by the good providence of God, we

landed at Holyhead.

Wanting to be in London as soon as possible, I took chaise

at seven, and hastened to Bangor Ferry. But here we were at

afull stop : They could not, orwould not, carry us over till one

the next day ; and they then gave us only two miserable horses,

although I had paid beforehand (fool as I was) for four. At

Conway Ferrywe were stopped again: Sothat with all the speed

we could possibly make, evenwith a chaise and four, we travelled

eight-and-twenty miles yesterday, and seventeen to-day. Thurs-

day, in the afternoon, we reached Chester : Friday morning,

Lichfield ; and on Saturday morning, London.

Mon. 20.-I went on to High-Wycomb ; but good Mr.

James having procured a drummer to beat his drum at the


window of the preaching-house, I only prayed and sungby turns,

from six to seven ; and many ofthe people were much comforted.

In the rest of the week I visited the societies at Oxford, Witney,

Finstock, and Wallingford ; and hadreason to believe that many

received the seed inhonest and goodhearts.

Mon. 27. I preached at Stony-Stratford. The congregation

was large and attentivé : So it always is ; yet I fear they receive

little good, for they need no repentance. Tuesday, I preached

at Towcester ; on Wednesday, at Whittlebury ; and on Thurs-

day, at Northampton ; and some of even that heavy congregation

seemed to feel, " The night cometh,when no man canwork."

Mon. NOVEMBER 3.-I began visiting the classes in London,

in which I was fully employed for seven or eight days ; after-

wards I visitedthose in the neighbouring towns, and foundreason

to rejoice over them.

Sun. 16.-I was desired to preach a charity sermon in St.

Margaret's church, Rood-Lane. In the morning I desired my

friends not to come ; in the afternoon it was crowded sufficiently,

and I believe many of them felt the word of God sharper than

any two-edged sword.

Mon. 17.-I went to Norwich, and preached there in the

evening. The House was far too small, the congregation being

lately increased very considerably. But I place no dependence

in this people; they wave to and fro, like the waves of the

sea.

Wed. 19. I went over to Loddon,and preached at one to a

much more settled congregation. In the evening I preached at

Norwich, and afterwards administered the Lord's Supper to the

society ; and I was almost persuaded, that they will no longer

be tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine.

Thur. 20.-Abundance of people were present at five, and

wehad a solemn parting. Iwent to Lynn the same day ; and

Saturday, 22, taking chaise soon after twelve, reached London

in the afternoon .

Sun. 23. I preached in Lewisham church for the benefit of

the Humane Society, instituted for the sake of those who seem

to be drowned, strangled, or killed by any sudden stroke. It is

a glorious design ; in consequence of which many have been

recovered, that must otherwise have inevitably perished.

Mon. 24.-I spent the afternoon at Mr. Blackwell's with the

Bof His whole behaviour was worthy of a Chris

Dec. 1777.1 JOURNAL. 113

tianBishop ; easy, affable, courteous ; and yet all his conversa-

tion spoke the dignity which was suitable to his character.

Having been many times desired, for near forty years, to

publish a Magazine, I at length complied, and now began to

collect materials for it. If it once begin, I incline to think it

will not end but with my life.

Mon. DECEMBER 1.-I spent some hours, both morning and

afternoon, in visiting the sick at the west end of the town ; but

I could not see them all. Wednesday, 3. I visited as many as

I could on the north-east part of the town. Ispent the even-

ing at Newington, with Mr. Fletcher, almost miraculously reco-

vering from his consumption ; and on Thursday, 4, he set out

with Mr. Ireland for the south of France.

Tues. 9. I visited the chief societies in Bedfordshire and

Huntingdonshire, and returned by Hertford ; where (for once)

I saw a quiet and serious congregation. Wehad a larger con-

gregation at Barnet, in the evening, than ever , and a greater

number of communicants. Will this poor, barren wilderness

at length blossom and bud as the rose ?

Sat. 13-. Being strongly urged to lay the first stone of the

House whichwas going to be built at Bath, on Sunday, 14,

after preaching at West-street chapel in the morning, and at

St. Paul's, Shadwell, in the afternoon, I went to Brentford. I

preached at six ; and, taking chaise at twelve, on Monday, 15,

easily reached Bath in the afternoon. Tuesday, 16. I paid a

short visit to Bristol ; preached in the evening and morning

following, Wednesday, 17 ; and at one laid the foundation of

the new chapel at Bath. The windwas piercing cold ; yet

scarce any of the congregation went away before the end of the

sermon. After preaching at the Room in the evening, I took

chaise, and the next afternoon reached London.

Just at this time there was a combination amongmany ofthe

post-chaise drivers on the Bath road, especially those that drove

in the night, to deliver their passengers into each other's hands.

One driver stopped at the spot they had appointed, when

another waited to attack the chaise. In consequence of this,

many were robbed; but I had a good Protector still. I have

travelled all roads, byday andby night, for these forty years,

and never was interrupted yet.

Thur. 25. I buried the remains of Mr. Bespham, many

ycars Master of a man-of-war. From the time he received the

[Jan. 1778.

truth in love, he was a pattern to all that believe. His faith

was full ofmercy and good fruits : His works shall praise him

inthe gates.

Sat. 27. Afew days since, my Assistant, Mr. Baynes, by

far the strongest person in our family, was taken ill of a fever.

He was immediately attended both by an Apothecary and a

Physician ; but their labour was in vain : This morning God

called him into the world of spirits. I had no desire to part

with him ; but God knew what was best both for him and me.

Wed. 31. We concluded the old year, and began the new,

with prayer and thanksgiving. Four or five of the Local

Preachers assisted me. Iwas agreeably surprised ; their man-

ner of praying being so artless andunlaboured,and yet rational

and scriptural, both as to sense and expression.

Thur. JANUARY 1, 1778.-We had a very solemn opportu-

nity of renewing our covenant with God. Tuesday, 6. I spent

an agreeable and a profitable hour with three German gentle-

men, two of them Lutheran Ministers, and the third, Professor

of Divinity at Leipsig. I admired both their good sense, seri-

ousness, and good breeding. How few of our Clergy exceed or

equal them !

Mon. 19. I went over to Tunbridge-Wells, and preached

inthe large Dissenting meeting, to a numerous congregation;

and deep attention sat on every face. Tuesday, 20. I went on,

through miserable roads, to Robertsbridge ; where an unusually

large congregation was waiting. Thence we went on to Rye,

where the Housewas sufficiently crowded, as usual. How large

a society would be here, could we but spare them in one thing !

Nay, but then all our labour would be in vain. One sin allowed

would intercept the whole blessing.

Mr. Holman's widow being extremely desirous I should lodge

at Carborough, two miles from Rye, I ordered my chaise to take

me up at the preaching-house immediately after the service.

She had sent a servant to show me the way ; which was aroad

dirty and slippery enough, cast up between two impassable

marshes. The manwaited awhile, and then went home, leav-

ing us to guide ourselves. Many roughjourneys I have had;
but such a one as this I never had before. Itwas one of the

darkest nights I ever saw : It blew a storm, and yet poured

downwith rain. The descent, in going out of the town, was

near as steep as the ridge of a house. As soon as we had

Feb. 1778.1 JOURNAL. 115

passed it, the driver, being a stranger, knew not which way to

turn. Joseph Bradford, whom I had taken into the chaise,

perceiving how things were, immediately got out and walked at

the head of the horses, (who could not possibly keep their eyes

open, the rain so violently beating in their faces,) through rain,

wind,mud, andwater ; till, in less than an hour, he brought us

safe to Carborough .

Wed. 21. I went back to Shoreham. Mr. P. , though in his

eighty-fifth year, is still able to go through the whole Sunday

Service. How merciful is God to the poor people of Shoreham !

Andmany ofthem are not insensible of it.

Mon. FEBRUARY 2.-I had the satisfaction of spending an

hourwith that real patriot, Lord -. What an unheard-of

thingit is, that even in a Court, he should retain all his sincerity !

He is, indeed, (what I doubt Secretary Craggs never was,)

Statesman, yet friend to truth.

Perhaps no Prince in Europe, besides King George, is served

by two of the honestest, and two of the most sensible, men in

his kingdom.

This week I visited the society, and founda surprising differ-

ence in their worldly circumstances. Five or six years ago, one

inthree, among the lower ranks of people, was out of employ-

ment; and the case was supposed to be nearly the same through

all London and Westminster. I did not now, after all the

tragical outcries of want of trade that fill the nation, find one in

ten out of business ; nay, scarce one in twenty, even in Spitalfields.

Sun. 15. I buried the remains ofRichard Burke, afaithful

labourer in our Lord's vineyard : Amore unblamable charac-

ter I have hardly known. In all the years that he has laboured

with us, I do not remember that he ever gave me occasion to

find fault with him in any thing. He was a man of unwearied

diligence and patience, and " his works do follow him."

Tues. 17. I wrote " A Serious Address to the Inhabitants

ofEngland," with regard to the present state ofthe nation,-so

strangely misrepresented both by ignorant and designing men,-

to remove, if possible, the apprehensions which have been so

diligently spread, as if it were on the brink ofruin.

Thur. 26. I committed to the earth the remains of George

Parsons. He has left very few like him ; so zealously, so hum-
[March, 1778.

bly, so unreservedly devoted to God. For some time his profit-

ing has appeared to allmen. He ripened apace for eternity.

Hewas as a flame of fire, wherever he went ; losing no occasion

of speaking or working forGod. So he finished his course in

the midst of his years, and was quickly removed into the garner.

Friday, 27, was the day appointed for the national fast ; and

it was observed with due solemnity. All shops were shut up ;

all was quiet in the streets ; all places of public worship were

crowded ; no food was served up in the King's house till five

o'clock in the evening. Thus far, at least, we acknowledge

Godmay direct our paths.

Sun. MARCH 1.-I preached at Brentford in the evening ;

Monday, 2, at Newbury ; and the next evening at Bath. Wed-

nesday, 4, I went onto Bristol. I found the panic had spread

hither also, as ifthe nation were on the brink ofruin. Strange

that those who love God should be so frightened at shadows !

I can compare this only to the alarm which spread through the

nation in King William's time, that on that very night the

Irish Papists were to cut the throats ofall the Protestants in

England.

Mon. 9. On this and the followingdays I visited the society,

and found a good increase. This year I myself (which I have

seldom done) chose the Preachers for Bristol , and these were

plain men; and likely to do more good than has beendone in

one year, for these twenty years.

Fri. 13.-I spent an hour with the children at Kingswood,

many ofwhom are truly desirous to save their souls.

Mon. 16. I took a cheerful leave of our friends at Bristol,

and set out once more for Ireland. After visiting Stroud,

Gloucester, and Tewkesbury, on Wednesday, 18, I went over

to Bewdley, and preached about noon at the upper end of the
-town, to most of the inhabitants of it .

Thur. 19. I preached to a large congregation, in the church

at Bengeworth, and spent a little time very agreeably with the
Rector, a pious, candid, sensible man. In the evening I

preached at Pebworth church ; but I seemed out ofmy element.

Along anthem was sung ; but I suppose none beside the singers

could understand one word of it. Is not that " praying in an

unknown tongue ? " I could no more bear it in any church of

mine, than Latin prayers.

Fri. 20.-I preached at Birmingham. Saturday, 21. Call-

April, 1778.1 117

ing at Wolverhampton, I was informed that, some time since,

a large, old house was taken, three or four miles from the town,

which receives all the children that come, sometimes above four

hundred at once. They are taught, gratis, reading, writing,

and Popery; and, when at age, bound out apprentices.

In the evening I preached in the shell of the new House, at

Newcastle-under-Lyne ; and thence hastened forward, through

Burslem, Congleton, Macclesfield, and Stockport, to Manches-

ter. I found it needful here also, to guard honest Englishmen

against the vast terror which had spread far and wide. I had

designed going from hence to Chester, in order to embark at

Parkgate ; but a letter from Mr. Wagner informing me that a

packetwas ready to sail from Liverpool, I sent my horses for-

ward, and followed them in the morning. But before I came

thither, the wind turned west : So I was content.

Sun. 22-. I was much refreshed by two plain, useful sermons,

at St. Thomas's church ; as well as by the serious and decent

behaviour of the whole congregation. In the evening I exhorted

all of our society who had been bred up in the Church, to con-

tinuetherein.

Tues. 31. We went on board the Duke of Leinster, and fell

down the river with a small side-wind : But in the morning,

after a dead calm, acontrarywind arose, and blew exceeding

hard. Wednesday, APRIL 1. The sea was rough enough.

However, I went to sleep about my usual time, and in the

morning found myself in Dublin Bay ; and about seven we

landed at the quay.

I was soon informed, that one of our friends, a strong, lively,

healthyman, Mr. Ham, had died theday before. From the

time he was taken ill, he was a mere self-condemned sinner,

deeply convinced of his unfaithfulness to God, and declaring,

I give up ev'ry plea beside,

Lord, I amdamn'd ; but thou hast died.

" When my wife dies," said he, " let her be carried to the

Room. She has been anhonour to her profession. But I will

not ; I am not worthy ; I have been no credit to you. " He con-

tinued full of self-condemnation, till, after a week's illness, his

spirit returned to God.

I daily conversed with many of the society, and had the

satisfaction to find them both more united together, and more


alive to God, than they had been for someyears. Saturday. I

beganmeeting the classes, and was agreeably surprised. I had

heard, that near a hundred persons had left the society : On

strict inquiry, I found about fortywere wanting ; the present

number being about four hundred and sixty ; and therefore were

more loving and unanimous than I ever knew them before.

Sun. 5.-Meeting the society in the evening, I largely

explained the reasons of the late separation, and strongly

exhorted all our brethren not to " render railing for railing."

Tues. 7-. I set out for the country, and reached Tyrrel's

Pass. It being amild evening, I preached to a numerous congre-

gation. The next evening it was larger still ; and the power of

the Lord was present to heal.

Thur. 9.-Between eight and nine I preached in the Court-

House at Mullingar, to a more serious congregation than I ever

saw there before. In the evening I preached in the Court-

House at Longford, to a far more numerous, and equally serious,

congregation.

Fri. 10.-About eleven I preached at Abydarrig ; and
before one set out for Athlone. The sun shone as hot as it

uses to do at midsummer. We had a comfortable time, both

this evening and the next day ; all being peace and harmony.

Sunday, 8. God spake in his word, both to wound and to heal.

Oneyoung woman came to mejust after service, who then first

rejoiced in God her Saviour.

Mon. 13. About noon I preached at Balinasloe to a large

congregation ; some of whom seemed to be much affected ; so

did many at Aghrim in the evening. Tuesday, 14. I went on

to Eyre-Court. The wind was now piercing cold, so that I

could not preach abroad : And there was no need ; for the Min-

ister not only lent me his church, but offered me a bed at his

house ; but I was obliged to go forward. At six in the evening

I preached at Birr, to a congregation ofdeeply attentive hearers.

Wed. 15. I met many ofmy old friends at Coolylough, and

had anumerous congregation in the evening. Thursday, 16.

I preached in the riding-house in Tullamore. The Command-

ing Officer ordered all the soldiers to be present, and attended

himself, with the rest of the Officers, while I explained, " Ren-

der unto Cæsar the things that are Cæsar's ; and unto God the

things that are God's."

APRIL 17.-(Being Good-Friday.) I preached at Tullamore

April, 1778.] JOURNAL. 119

in the morning, and Mount-Mellick in the evening. Saturday,

18. I preached at Portarlington in the evening ; and about

eight in the morning to a very genteel, yet attentive, audience,

on, " Acquaint thyself now with him, and be at peace." I

returned to Mount-Mellick before the church began, at which

I would always be present, if possible. I would fain have

preached abroad in the afternoon, but the weather would not

permit; sowe made all the room we could in the House, and

had asolemn and comfortable meeting.

Mon. 20. Mr. Jenkins, the Vicar of Maryborough, read

Prayers, and I preached on, " Repent, and believe the Gospel."

The congregationwas far larger than when I was here before,

and abundantlymore attentive. Several Clergymen were present,

and several gentlemen ; but they were as serious as the poor.

Tues. 21. We found the election for Parliament-men had

put all Kilkenny in anuproar. In consequence of this, we had

a small, dead congregation. But another cause of this was,

the bitter and perpetual quarrels between the chief members of

the society. I talked largely with the contending parties, and

they promised better behaviour for the time to come.

Wed. 22.-I went on to Clonmell, where, our Room being

small, and the weather unfavourable for preaching abroad, we

procured the largest room in the town, which was in the Qua-

kers' workhouse. I had scarce sat down when a young man

came and said, " My father and mother send their kind respects,

andwould be glad of thy company this evening." His mother

(now Mrs. Dudley) was myold acquaintance, Molly Stokes. I

went at four, and spent an hour very agreeably. But much

company coming in, Mr. Dudley desired I would call again in

the morning. I then told him what his wife was reported to

say ofme: He answered me, it was an utter mistake ; that she

had never spoke a disrespectful word concerning me.
Thur. 23. Several of our brethren from Cork met at Rath-

cormic. I was glad to find Mr. Rankin with them, just arrived

from America. When we came to Cork, the congregation was

waiting; so I began without delay.

Sun. 26. I earnestly exhorted a numerous congregation at

eight, to" abstain from fleshly desires ; "-a necessary lesson in

every place, and no where more so than in Cork. At St. Peter's

church I saw a pleasing sight, the Independent Companies,

raised by private persons associating together, without any


expense to the Government. They exercised every day ; and,

ifthey answer no other end,at least keep the Papists in order;

who were exceedingly alert, ever since the army was removed to

America.

Mon. 27. In going to Bandon, I readAbbéRaynal's " His-

tory of the Settlements and Trade of the Europeans in the

Indies." I would be glad to propose a few queries. I ask, 1.

Is not this " Philosophical History" (so called) in many parts

profoundly dull; exactly fitted to spread a pleasing slumber over

the eyes of the gentle reader ? 2. Are there not several pas-

sages quite obscure ? Is this the fault of the author or the trans-

lator? 3. Are there not several assertions which are false in

fact ? Such as that of the healthiness of Batavia, one of the

unhealthiest places in the known world. 4. Do not many of

his assertions so border upon the marvellous, that none but a

disciple of Voltaire could swallow them ? As the account of

milk-white men, with no hair, red eyes, and the understanding

of amonkey. 5. Is not Raynal one of the bitterest enemies of

the Christian Revelation, that ever set pen to paper ? Far more

determined, and less decent, than Voltaire himself? As, where he

so keenly inveighs against that horrid superstition, the depriv-

ing men of their natural liberty ofwhoredom ! Doeshenot take

every opportunity ofwounding Christianity through the sides of

superstition or enthusiasm ? Is notthe whole laboured panegyric

on the Chinese and the Peruvians, a blow at the root of Chris-

tianity ; insinuating all along, that there are no Christians in

the world so virtuous as these Heathens ? Prove this fact, and it

undeniably follows that Christianity is not of God. But who

canprove it ? Not all the baptized or unbaptized Infidels in the

world. From what authentic history of China is that account

taken? From none that is extant ; it is pure romance, flowing

from the Abbé's fruitful brain. And from what authentic his-

tory ofPeru is the account ofthe Peruvians taken ? I suppose

from that pretty novel of Marmontel, probably wrote with the

same design. 6. Is not Raynal one of the most bitter enemies

of Monarchy that ever set pen to paper ? With what acrimony

does he personally inveigh against it, as absolutely, necessarily,

essentially subversive, not only of liberty, but of all national

industry, all virtue, all happiness ! And who can deny it ?

Who ? The Abbéhimself? He totally confutes his own favour-

ite hypothesis : For was not Atabalipe a Monarch ? Yea, a far

May, 1778.]

more absolute one than the King of France? Andyet was not

Peru industrious, virtuous, andhappy under this very Monarch ?

So the Abbé peremptorily affirms, as it were on purpose to con-

fute himself. And is not the Emperor of China, at this day, as

absolute a Monarch as any in Europe? And yet who so indus-

trious, according toRaynal,who so virtuous, so happy, as his sub-

jects ? So that he must totally give up either his argument against

Christianity, or that against Monarchy. If the Peruvians were,

and the Chinese are, the most industrious, virtuous, and happy

men, then Monarchy is no way inconsistent with the industry,

virtue, and happiness of apeople. But if the Peruvians were,

in these respects, and the Chinese are, no better than other men,

(which is the very truth,) then the argument against Christianity

falls to the ground.

From the largeness and the seriousness of the congregations

here, I should have imagined the work of God was much

increased; but, upon inquiry, I found just the contrary : Near

one third of those were wanting whom I left in the society three

years ago. Yet those who remained seemed much in earnest.

In the evening God clothed his word with power ; few appeared

to be unaffected ; and I was sorry I could not spend a little

more time, where the fields were so white to the harvest.

Wed. 29.-I returned to Cork, and met the classes. O when

will even the Methodists learn not to exaggerate ? After all

the pompous accounts I had had of the vast increase of the

society, it is not increased at all; nay, it is a little smaller than

it was three years ago: And yet many of the members are alive

to God. But the smiling world hangs heavy upon them.

Sun. MAY 3.-I was a little surprised at a message from the

Gentlemen of the Aghrim Society, (a company of Volunteers so

called,) that, if I had no objection, they would attend at the new

Room in the evening. They did so, with another Independent

Company,who were just raised : (The True Blues:) A body of

so personable men I never saw together before. The gentlemen

in scarlet filled the side gallery ; those in blue the front gallery :

But both galleries would not contain them all: Some were

constrained to stand below. All behaved admirably well, though

I spoke exceeding plain on, " We preach Christ crucified." No

laughing, no talking ; all seemed to hear as for life. Surely

this is a token for good.

Mon. 4. I went to Kilfinnan, in the neighbourhood of which


there is a considerable revival of the work of God. The rain

continuing, I preached in alarge empty house ; and again at

five in the morning. Probably I shall see that no more in the

present world. We then went on, through abundance of rain,

to Limerick.

I felt in the evening the spirit of the congregation, the same

as many years ago; but in one circumstance I observed a

considerable change: I used to have large congregations atmy

first coming to Limerick ; but from the first day they gradually

decreased. It was not so now; but poor and rich, Protestants

and Papists, flocked together, from the beginning to the end.

Had they a presage, that they should see my face no more?

Thur. 7.-I preached once more to the loving, earnest,

simple-hearted people of Newmarket. Two months ago, good

Philip Geier fell asleep, one of the Palatines that came over and

settled in Ireland, between sixty and seventy years ago. He

was a father both to this and the other German societies, loving

and cherishing them as his own children. He retained all his

faculties to the last, and after two days' illness went to God.

Fri. 8.-Finding the poor people at Balligarane,whom I had

not seen these five years, were very desirous to see me once

more, I went over in the morning. Although the notice was

exceeding short, yet a large number attended.

Sat. 9.-1 wrote a" Compassionate Address to the Inhabit-

ants of Ireland." Through which, as well as through England,

the mock patriots had laboured to spread the alarm, as though

we were all on the very brink of destruction.

Sun. 10. I examined the society, and have not known them

for many years so much alive to God ; and I do not remember

to have ever found them so loving before: Indeed the whole

city seemed to breathe the same spirit. At three in the after-

noon I preached my farewell-sermon, on 1 Cor. xiii. 13 ; and set-

ting out immediately, reached Snegborough before eight o'clock.

Tues. 12.-Setting out early, I intended to lodge at Clare-

Galway ; but we found there was nolodging to be had. However,

they told us there was agood inn at Shreuil, notmany miles

farther : And there we found a house ; but it afforded no food

either for man or beast ; so we were obliged to push on for

Ballinrobe, which we reached about eleven o'clock. We came

this day sixty-eight (English) miles : A good day's work for a

pair of horses.

May, 1778.1

Wed. 13. I preached in the evening to a large congregation ;

but most of them dead as stones. The next morning I crossed

over to Holly-Mount, and preached to more than the House

would contain. In the afternoon we came to Castlebar, and

had alively congregation in the evening. Here we found the

same spirit as at Limerick, and solemnly rejoiced in God our

Saviour.

Sun. 17. Although the weather was rough and boisterous,

the people flocked at nine from all quarters, Papists and

Protestants; and God sent down a gracious rain, especially upon

the backsliders. In the evening the Court-House was exceed-

ingly crowded, and the fire of love ran from heart toheart. One

eminent backslider, who had drank in iniquity like water, was

utterly broken in pieces, and resolved to cut off the right hand

at once, and to be altogether a Christian.

Whenwe came into the house, I told them, " God has more

work to do in this family." Two of John Carr's sons, and four

of his daughters, were present. I prayed for them in faith : They

were all soon in tears ; their hearts were broken, and I left them

mere sinners.

Mon. 18. There were two roads to Sligo, one of which was

several miles shorter, but had some sloughs in it. However,

having agood guide, we chose this. Two sloughs we got over

well. On our approaching the third, seven or eight countrymen
presently ran to help us. One of them carried me over on his

shoulders ; others got the horses through ; and some carried the

chaise. We then thought the difficulty was past ; but in half

anhour we came to another slough : Being helped over it, I

walked on, leaving Mr. Delap, John Carr, Joseph Bradford,

and Jesse Bugden, with the chaise, which was stuck fast in the

slough. As none of them thought of unharnessing the horses,

the traces were soon broke: At length they fastened ropes to

the chaise, and to the stronger horse ; and the horse pulling,

and the men thrusting at once, they thrust it through the slough

to the firm land. In an hour or two after we all met at Ballin-

acurrah.

While I was walking, a poor man overtook me, who appeared

to be in deep distress : He said, he owed his landlord twenty

shillings rent, for which he had turned him and his family out

of doors ; and that he had been down with his relations to beg

their help, but they would do nothing. Upon my giving him

[May, 1778.

a guinea, he would needs kneel down inthe road to pray for

me; and then cried out, " O, I shall have a house ! I shall

have a house over my head!" So perhaps God answered that

poor man's prayer, by the sticking fast of the chaise in the slough!

Tues. 19. In the evening I preached at Sligo, in the old

Court-House, an exceeding spacious building : I know not that

ever I saw so large a congregation here before ; nor (considering

their number) so well behaved. Will God revive his work

even in this sink of wickedness, and after so many deadly

stumbling-blocks ?

Upon inquiry, I found, there had been for some time a real

revival of religion here. The congregations have considerably

increased, and the society is nearly doubled. We had in the

evening a larger congregation than before, among whom were

most of the Gentry of the town: And all but one or two young

gentlemen (so called) were remarkably serious and attentive.

I now received an intelligible account of the famous massacre

at Sligo. A little before the Revolution, one Mr. Morris, a

Popish gentleman, invited all the chief Protestants to an enter-

tainment ; at the close of which, on a signal given, the men he

had prepared fell upon them, and left not one of them alive.

As soon as King William prevailed, he quitted Sligo. But

venturing thither about twenty years after, supposing no one

then knew him, he was discovered, and used according to his

deserts.

Thur. 21. I went on to Peter Taylor's, near Swadlingbar.

At six I preached in a large room in the town, designed for an

assembly ; where rich as well as poor behaved with the utmost

decency.

Fri. 22. We went through a lovely country to Belturbet ;

once populous, now greatly decayed. At eleven I preached in

the Armoury, a noble room, to a very large and very serious

congregation. At six I preached in the Court-House at Cavan,

to a larger congregation than at Belturbet.

Sat. 23. I was desired to preach once more at Coote-Hill,

which I had not seen for many years. The use of the Presby-

terian meeting-house being procured, I had a very extraordinary

congregation. To many Church-people were added Seceders,

Arians, Moravians, and what not: However, I went straight

forward, insisting that "without holiness no man shall see the

Lord."

June, 1778.1

After dinner we went on to Clones, finely situated on the top

of a hill, in the midst of a fruitful and well-cultivated country ;

and the people seemed as sprightly as the place. I preached in

the Green-Fort near the town, to abundance of people, but no

triflers . Sunday, 24. I preached there again at nine, to a still

larger congregation ; but the far largest of allwasin the evening;

the people coming in from all parts of the country.

There is something very peculiar in this people: They are

more plain, open, and earnest, than most I have seen in the

kingdom. Indeed, some of our Irish societies, those in Athlone,

Limerick, Castlebar, and Clones, have much of the spirit of our

old Yorkshire societies.

Mon. 25. I went through a pleasant country to Aughalan.

Avery large congregation was soon assembled ; and the rich

seemed to be as attentive as the poor. So they were also in the

evening at Sidare.

Tues. 26. We went on to Loghean. Wednesday, 27. I

received a very remarkable account from Mrs. Brown, a gentle-

woman in the neighbourhood. She said, " Six years ago my

daughterJane, then seventeenyears old, was struck raving mad ;

she would strike any one she could, particularly her father ;

she cursed and swore horribly ; she never slept ; and let her

hands be bound ever so fast over night, they were loose in the

morning. The best Physicians were consulted, and all means

used ; but to no purpose. On Thursday, December 28, last,

she violently struck her father on the breast ; the next day,

Friday, 29, she was perfectly well, without using any means at

all ; and she has continued ever since, not only in her senses,

but full of faith and love."

Thur. 28. Between nine and ten I preached at a village

called Magharacolton, to a large and serious congregation ; and

in the evening, at Londonderry. Considering the largeness and

seriousness of the congregations, I wonder no more good is done

here.

Mon. JUNE 1.-I went over to the New-Buildings, and took

myhonourable post in the Mill. Deep attention sat on every

face. So it usually does, when the poor have the Gospel

preached. I preached at Londonderry in the evening, on, " I

am not ashamed ofthe Gospel of Christ. " How happy would

many of those be, if they had but thoroughly learned this lesson !

Wed. 3. I took an account of the present society, a little


smaller than it was three years ago. Thursday, 4. I took my

leave of this affectionate people, and about eleven preached at

New-Town, Limavaddy. In the afternoon I went on to Kilrea,

andwas cordially received by Mr. Haughton, once a Travelling

Preacher, now a Magistrate, and Rector of a parish. But the

church wherein it was at first proposed I should preach, is, as I

found, amereheap of ruins : So I preached in the new meeting-

house ; a very large and commodious building. Abundance of

people flocked together ; some of them seemed not a little

affected ; and all were seriously attentive : Surely some will

bring forth good fruit.
Fri. 5. We went on to Coleraine. As the barracks here

are empty, we hired one wing, which, by laying several rooms

into one, supplied us with a spacious preaching-house ; but it

would not contain a third of the congregation; but standing at

the door, I had them all before me in the barrack-square.

Sat. 6.-I was desired to take a ride to the celebrated Giant's

Causeway. It lies eleven English miles from Coleraine. When

we came to the edge of the precipice, three or four poor boys

were ready to hold our horses, and show us the waydown. It

being dead low water, we could go any where, and see every

thing to the best advantage. It is doubtless the effect of subter-

raneous fire. This manifestly appears from many of the stones

which composed the pillars that are now fallen down : These

evidently bear the mark offire, being burnt black on one or the

other surface. It appears likewise from the numerous pumice-

stones scattered among the pillars : Just such pillars and pumices

are found in every country which is, or ever was, subject to

volcanoes.

In the evening I sawa pleasing sight. A few days ago a

young gentlewoman, without the knowledge of her relations,

entered into the society : She was informed this evening that

her sister was speaking to me upon the same account. As soon

as we came into the room, she ran to her sister, fell upon her

neck, wept over her, and could just say, " O sister, sister !"

before she sunk down upon her knees to praiseGod. Her sister

could hardly bear it; she was in tears too, andsowere all in the

room. Such are the first fruits at Coleraine. May there be a

suitable harvest !

Sun. 7-. I breakfasted with Mr. Boyd, the twin-soul, for

humility and love, with Mr. Sh , of Staplehurst. I read

June, 1778.1 127

Prayers for him, and administered the sacrament to such a

number of communicants as I suppose never met there before.

Alittle before the time of preaching, the rain ceased, andwe had

awonderful congregation in the barrack-yard in the evening.

Many of them were present at five in the morning, when I left

them full oflove and good desires. About nine I preached in

the Town-Hall at Ballimannely ; about twelve, at anotherlittle

town; and in the evening, at Ballymena.

Tues. 9. We rode through a small village, whereinwas a

little society. One desiring me to step into a house there, it was

filled presently ; and the poor people were all ear, while I gave

a short exhortation, and spent a few minutes in prayer. In the

evening as the Town-Hall at Carrickfergus could not contain

the congregation, I preached in the market-house, on, "Fear

God, and keep his commandments ; for this is the wholeofman."

The people in general appeared to be more serious, and the

society more earnest, than they had been for many years.

Thence we went to Belfast, the largest town in Ulster, said

to contain thirty thousand souls. The streets are well laid out ;

are broad, straight, and well-built. The poor-house stands on an

eminence, fronting the main street, and having a beautiful

prospect on every side, over the whole country : The old men,

the old women, the male and the female children, are all

employed according to their strength ; and all their apartments

are airy, sweet, and clean, equal to any thing ofthe kind I have

seeninEngland.

I preached in the evening on one side of the new church, to

farthe largest congregation I havescen in Ireland; but I doubt

the bulk of them were nearly concerned in mytext, " And Gal-

lio caredfor none of these things. "

Thur. 11. About nine I preached to five or six hundred

people in the old church at Newtown, Clannibois. The sight of

these vast buildings and large gardens running to decay, through

the extinction of the family that lately ownedthem, (so success-

ful was the scheme of those wretches who purposely educated

poor Mr. C.-, the last of the family, in such a manner as to

insure his not living long, and his dying without issue,) always

makes me pensive; but still our comfort is, " There is aGodthat

judgeth in the earth."

About twelve I preached at Kirkhubly: Thence we went to

Port-a-ferry, and foundaready passage to Strangford. I stood

[June, 1778.

on the point of a rock, which projected into a large circular

cavity, that contained inthe hollow, and round the edge of it,

all the multitude who flocked together. I spoke longer than I

used to do ; and was no more weary when I had done, than I

was at six it the morning. After servicewe went to Down-

patrick, where I slept in peace.

Fri. 12-. I walked through the town ; I suppose one of the

most ancient in Ulster. Iwas informed, itwas once abundantly

larger than it is now ; consisting ofthe Irish town, then inhab-

ited by none but Roman Catholics; and the English town,

encompassed with a wall, and a deep ditch filled with water.

At the head of the English town stands the Abbey, on a hill

which commands allthe country. It is a noble ruin, and is far

the largest building that I have seen in the kingdom. Adjoin-

ing to it is one ofthe most beautiful groves which I ever beheld

with my eyes: It covers the sloping side of the hill, and has

vistas cut through iteveryway. In the middle of it is a circular

space, twenty or thirtyyards in diameter. Iwould have preached

there, but the raindrove into the House asmany as could crowd

together.
Sat. 13. I took my standinthe middle of the Grove ; the

people standing before me on the gradually rising ground, which

formed a beautiful theatre : The sun just glimmered through

the trees, but did not hinder me at all. It was a glorious

opportunity : The whole congregation seemed to drink into one

spirit.

Sun. 14. I preached at Dunsford in the morning. In the

evening the congregation in the Grove exceeded even that at

Belfast ; and I verily believe all ofthem were almost persuaded
to be Christians.

Mon. 15.-I left Downpatrick with much satisfaction ; andin

the evening preached in the Linen-Hall at Lisburn, to near as

large a congregation as that in the Grove ; butnot nearso much

affected. Afterwards I went to my old lodging at Derry-Aghy,

one of the pleasantest spots in the kingdom ; and I could relish

it now ! How does God bring us down to the gates of death,

and bring us up again!

Tues. 16. I preached at eight to a lively congregation, under

the venerable old yew, supposed to have flourished in the reign

ofKing James, if not of Queen Elizabeth.

Wed. 17. At eleven our brethren flocked to Lisburn from

June, 1778. ] 129

all parts, whom I strongly exhorted, in the Apostle's words, to

"walk worthy ofthe Lord." At the love-feast which followed,

we were greatly comforted ; many ofthe country people declar-

ing with all simplicity, and yet with great propriety both of sen-

timent and expression,what God had done for their souls.

Thur. 18. I preached at Ballinderry, (in my way to Lur-

gan,)where many flocked together, though at a very short warn-

ing. We had four or five times as many in the evening at

Lurgan; but some of them wild as colts untamed. However,

they all listened to that great truth, " Narrow is the way that

leadeth unto life ."

Fri. 19. I preached about noon to a serious company at

Derry-Anvil ; and thenwent on to Cockhill. I preached here

at the bottom of the garden ; the tablewas placed under a tree,

and most of the people sat on the grass before it ; and every

thing seemed to concur with the exhortation, " Acquaint thyself

now with him, and be at peace."

Sat. 20.-I travelled through adelightful country to Charle-

mont, where Captain Tottenham was the Commanding Officer.

We lodged with himin the castle, which stands on aneminence,

and commands the country on all sides. A tent was set up in

the castle-yard, where all the soldiers were drawn up at eleven,

with abundance of people from many miles round, who were

all attention. In the evening their number was considerably

enlarged; but still all heard as for life.

Sun. 21. I preached at nine in the avenue at Armagh, to

a large and serious congregation. It was increased four-fold at

six in the evening; but manywere there who behaved as if they

had been in a bear-garden.

Mon. 22. I took a walk to the Primate's ; andwent through

the house, and all the improvements. The house is neat and

handsome, but not magnificent ; and is elegantly, but not splen-

didly, furnished. Thedomain is beautifully laid out in meadow-

ground, sprinkled with trees ; on one side of which is a long hill

covered with a shrubbery, cut into serpentine walks. On each

side of the shrubbery is a straight walk, commanding a beautiful

prospect. Since this Primate came, the town wears another face :

He has repaired and beautified the cathedral, built a row of

neat houses for the Choral-Vicars, erected a public Library

and an Infirmary, procured the Free-School to be rebuilt of

the size of a little College, and a new-built horse-barrack, toge-

[June, 1778.

ther with a considerable number of convenient and handsome

houses; so that Armagh is at length rising out of its ruins into

a large and populous city. So much good may any man of a

large fortune do, if he lays it out to the best advantage !

Tues. 23.-I went on to Tanderagee, one of the pleasantest

towns in Ireland. As itwas afair, calm evening, I had designed

to preach in the avenue to the Castle ; but being desired to

preach in the court-yard, I took my place under a tall spread-

ing tree, in the midst of a numerous congregation, who were

still as night. There could not be devised a more pleasing

scene : The clear sky, the setting sun, the surrounding woods,

the plain, unaffected people, were just suitable to the subject,

"My yoke is easy, and my burden is light."

Wed. 24. For exactly two months, we have had only two

days without rain. In the evening I preached in the same

lovely place. I dined, supped, and lodged at Dr. Lesley's, the
Rector ; a well-bred, sensible, and I believe a pious man. We

had family prayers before supper, which he read with admirable

propriety and devotion; and I know not that I have spent a

more agreeable evening since I came into the kingdom.

Thur. 25. I walked round Dr. Lesley's domain : A plea-

santer spot I never saw. It lies on the top of a fruitful hill, at

a small distance from the town ; and commands the whole view

of a lovely country, east, west, north, and south ; and it is laid

out with the finest taste imaginable. The ground I took for a

park I found was an orchard, tufted with fruit-trees, and

flowering-shrubs ; and surrounded with a close, shady walk. I

spent another hour with the amiable family this morning; and it

was an hour I shall not soon forget : But it will never return !

For one, if not more, ofthat lovely company, are since removed

to Abraham's bosom. In the evening I preached to a large

congregation at Newry ; and on Saturday morning returned to

Dublin.

I had now just finished Xenophon's Κυρε Παιδεια ; some

parts of which I think are exceeding dull, particularly his

numerous speeches, and above all the tedious dialogue between

Cyrus and Cambyses. Butwhat a beautiful picture does he

draw of Cyrus ! What an understanding ! andwhat tempers !

Did ever a Heathen come up to this ? Not since the world

began. Few, exceeding few, even of the best-instructed Christians have attained so unblamable a character.

July, 1778.1

Sun. 28.-I am this day seventy-five years old; and I do not

findmyself, blessedbe God, any weaker than I was at five-and-

twenty. This also hath God wrought !

All this week I visited asmany as I could, and endeavoured

to confirm their love to each other; and I have not known the

society for many years so united as it is now.

Sat. JULY 4.-A remarkable piece was put into my hands ;

the " Life of Mr. Morsay : " And I saw no reason to alter the

judgment which I had formed ofhim forty years ago. He was

amanofuncommonunderstanding, and greatlydevoted to God.

But hewas a consummate enthusiast. Not the word of God,

buthis own imaginations, which he took for divine inspirations,

were the sole rule both of his words and actions. Hence arose

his marvellous instability, taking such huge strides backwards

and forwards ; hence his frequent darkness ofsoul : For when

hedeparted from God's word, Goddeparted from him. Upon

the whole, I do not know that ever I read a more dangerous

writer; one who so wonderfully blends together truth and false-

hood; solid piety, andwild enthusiasm .

Tues. 7. Our little Conference began, at which about twenty

Preachers were present. On Wednesday we heard one of our

friends at large, upon the duty of leaving the Church ; but after

afull discussion of the point, we all remained firm in our judg-

ment, that it is ourduty not to leave the Church, whereinGod

has blessed us, and does bless us still.

Sun. 12.-After I had several times explained the nature of

it, we solemnly renewed our covenant with God. Itwas a time

never to be forgotten ; God poured down upon the assembly

" the spirit of grace and supplication ; " especially in singing

that verse of the concluding hymn,--

To us the covenant blood apply,

Which takes our sins away ;

And register our names on high,

Andkeep us to that day.

This afternoon, Mr. Delap, one of our Preachers, walking

through the city, met a crowd of people running from amad

dog,who had bit several persons : He walked on, took up a

large stone, struck thedog on the head, and knocked him down ;

he then leaped upon him, and dispatched him ; while the people

crowded round, and gave him abundance of thanks.

On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I visited many of

[July, 1778.

those who had left the society ; but I found them so deeply

prejudiced, that, till their hearts are changed, I could not advise
them to return to it .

Thur. 16. I went with a few friends to Lord Charlemont's,

two or three miles from Dublin. It is one of the pleasantest

places I have ever seen : The water, trees, and lawns, are so

elegantly intermixed with each other; having a serpentine walk

running through a thick wood on one side, and an open prospect

both of land and sea on the other. In the thickest part of the

wood is the Hermitage, a small room, dark and gloomy enough.

The Gothic temple, at the head of a fine piece of water, which

is encompassedwith stately trees, is delightful indeed. But the

most elegant of all the buildings is not finished : The shell of it

is surprisingly beautiful, and the rooms well contrived both for

use and ornament. But what is all this, unless God is here ?

Unless he is known, loved, and enjoyed? Not only vanity,

unable to give happiness, but vexation of spirit.

Sun. 19. In the evening I went on board the Prince of

Orange; but, the wind failing, we soon struck upon a sand-

bank. We got clear of it about five in the morning, and set sail.

All the day before there had been a strong north-east wind;

this had raised the sea to an uncommon degree, which affected

me full as much as a storm. However, lying down at four in

the afternoon, I fell asleep, and slept most of the time till four

in the morning. About six we landed on Liverpool quay, and

all my sickness was over.

Tues. 21. We had, as usual, a very numerous and very

serious congregation. Wednesday, 22. I went on to Bolton.

The new House here is the most beautiful in the country. It

was well filled in the evening ; and I believe many of the audi-

ence tasted largely of the powers of the world to come, while

I enlarged upon our Lord's words, " Neither can theydie any

more ; for they are equal to angels, and are the children of God,

being the children of the resurrection."

Fri. 24. I preached at Bury and Rochdale, and the next

evening at Halifax. Sunday, 26. The House was tolerably

well filled at eight. Understanding there was great need of it,

I preached on, " Render unto Cæsar the things that are Cæsar's ;

and unto God the things that are God's." I spoke with all

plainness, and yet did not hear that any one was offended.

At one I preached on those words in the Gospel for the day,

Aug. 1778.] JOURNAL . 133

" Reckon ye yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive

unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord." Such a time I have

notknown for some years : The House was extremely crowded;

but I believe there was not only no inattentive but no unaffected

hearer. In the evening I preached at Bradford, to such a con-

gregation as I have notseen since I left London.

Sat. AUGUST 1.-I was desired to take a view of Mr. Bus-

field's improvements near Bingley. His house stands on the top

of a hill clothed with wood, opposite to another which is covered

with tall oaks. Between the hills runs the river. On the top, at

the bottom, through the midst, and along the side of his woods,

hehasmade partly straight, partly serpentine, walks ; some of

which command a lovely prospect. He is continually making

new improvements : But will not that thought frequently

intrude,-

Must I then leave thee, Paradise ? Then leave

These happy shades and mansions fit for Gods ?

Sun. 2-. At one I preached at the foot of Birstal-hill, to the

largest congregation that ever was seen there. It was supposed

therewere twelve or fourteen thousand ; but there were some

thousands more at Leeds : I think it was the largest congrega-

tion that I have seen for manyyears, except that at Gwennap,
inCornwall.

Tues. 4. Our Conference began: So large a number of

Preachers never met at a Conference before. I preached,

morning and evening, till Thursday night : Then my voice

beganto fail ; so I desired two of our Preachers to supply my

place the next day. On Saturday the Conference ended.

Sun. 9. I preached at eight in the market-place at Dews-

bury, to somethousands of serious people ; as Mr. Pawleywould

not permit me to preach in the church, because it would give
offence!

After visiting Bradford and Halifax, I struck across to Man-

chester and Stockport ; and went on by moderate journeys to

London. Having soon finished my business there, on Monday,

17, Dr. Coke, my brother, and I, took coach for Bristol ; and

early on Thursday, 20, I set out for Cornwall. I preached at

Taunton that evening ; Friday, 21, at Exon ; and on Saturday
reached the Dock.

Sun. 23. At seven I preached in ourRoom, and at one on

the quay, at Plymouth. The common people behaved well ;

[Aug. 1778.

but I was shocked at the stupidity and ill-breeding of several

Officers, who kept walking and talking together all the time

with themost perfect unconcern. We had no such Gallios in

the evening at theDock, though the congregation was four times

as large. Surely this is an understanding people : May their

love be equal to their knowledge !

Mon. 24. In the way to Medros, Mr. Furz gave me a

strange relation, which was afterwards confirmed by eye and

ear witnesses :-In July, 1748, Martin Hoskins, of Sithney,

being in a violent passion, was struck raving mad, and obliged

to be chained down to the floor. Charles Sk went to see

him. He cried out, " Who art thou ? Hast thou faith ? No;

thou art afraid." Charles felt an inexpressible shock, and was

raving mad himself. He continued so for several days, till some

agreed to keep a day of fasting and prayer. His lunacy then

ended as suddenly asitbegan. But whatwas peculiarly remark-

able was, whilehewas ill, Martin was quite well : As soon as he

was well, Martin was as ill as ever.

Thence I went on to Redruth, Helstone, and Penzance. On

Thursday, 27, in the evening I preached in the market-place,

at St. Just. Very few ofour old society are now left : The far

greater part of them are in Abraham's bosom. But the new

generation are of the same spirit ; serious, earnest, devotedtoGod;

and particularly remarkable for simplicity and Christian sincerity.

Fri. 28. The Stewards of the societies met at St. Ives,-а

company ofpious, sensible men. I rejoiced to find that peace

and love prevailed through the whole Circuit. Those who styled

themselves My Lady's Preachers, who screamed, and railed, and

threatened to swallow us up, are vanished away. I cannot learn

that they havemade one convert ;-a plain proof that God did
not send them.

One was mentioning to-day a wonderful oration, which Mr.

Rowland H. had lately made. I thoughtMr. Toplady hadnot
left behind him his fellow ; but see !-

-Primo avulso, non deficit alter

Aureus, et simili frondescit virga metallo.*

Sat. 29. I found the venerable old man at Cubert pale,

*The following is Dryden's translation of these lines :-

The first thus rent, a second will arise :

And the same metal the same room supplies. EDIT.

Sept. 1778.1

thin, and scarce half alive. However, he made shift to go in a

chaise to the preaching, and, deaf as he was, to hear almost

every word. He had such a night's rest as he had not had for

many months, and in the morning seemed hardly the same

person. It may be God will give him a little longer life, for

thegood ofmany.

Sun. 30.-About five I preached in the amphitheatre at

Gwennap, it was believed, to four-and-twenty thousand. After-

wards I spent a solemn hourwith the society, and slept in peace.

Mon. 31. About eleven I preached to a large and serious

congregation, near the Town-Hall, in Bodmin ; and about six

inthe evening at Launceston ; a town as little troubled with

religion as most in Cornwall.

Tues. SEPTEMBER 1.-I went to Tiverton. I was musing

here onwhat I hearda good man say long since,---" Once in

seven years I burn all my sermons ; for it is a shame if I can-

not write better sermons now than I could seven years ago."

Whatever others can do, I really cannot. I cannot write a

better sermon on theGood Steward, thanI did seven years ago :

I cannot write a better on the Great Assize, than I did twenty

years ago : I cannot write a better on the Use of Money, than I

did near thirty years ago: Nay, I know not that I can write a

betteronthe Circumcision of the Heart, than Idid five-and-forty

years ago. Perhaps, indeed Imay have read five or six hun-

dred books more than I had then, andmay know a little more

History, or Natural Philosophy, than I did , but I am not

sensible that this has made any essential addition to my know-

ledge inDivinity. Fortyyears ago I knew and preached every

Christian doctrine which I preach now.

Thur. 3.-About noon I preached at Cathanger, abouteight

miles from Taunton. It was an exceeding large house, built

(as the inscription over the gate testifies) in the year 1555, by

Serjeant Walsh, who had then eight thousand pounds a year ;

perhaps more than equal to twenty thousand now. Butthe

once famous family is now forgotten ; the estate is mouldered

almost into nothing; and three quarters of the magnificent

buildings lie level with the dust. I preached in the great hall,

like that of Lincoln College, to a very serious congregation. In

the evening I preached at South-Petherton, once a place of

renown, and the capital of a Saxon kingdom ; as is vouched by

a palace of King Ina still remaining, and a very large and


ancient church. I suppose the last blow given to it was by

Judge Jefferies, who, after Monmouth's rebellion, hanged so

many of the inhabitants, and drove so many away, that it is

never likely to lift up its head again.

Fri. 4. I spent some time in the evening, and an hour in

themorning, with the lovely children at Publow. Such another

company ofthem I never saw, since Miss Bosanquet removed

from Leytonstone.

Sat. 5.-I returned to Bristol. Sunday, 6. At eight I

preached near the Drawbridge ; at two near Kingswood school,

under the tree which I planted for the use of the next genera-

tion; and at five, near King's square, to a very numerous and

exceeding serious congregation.

Mon. 7.-In myway to Bath I read a pamphlet which sur-

prised me exceedingly. For many years I had heard the King

severely blamed for giving allplaces oftrust and profit to Scotch-

men : And this was so positively and continually affirined, that

Ihad no doubt ofit. To put the matter beyond all possible

dispute, the writer appeals to the Court Kalendar of the present

year, which contains the names of all those that hold places

under the King. And hereby it appears, that of four hundred

and fifty odd places, just eight are possessed by Scotchmen ;

and of the hundred and fifty-one places in the Royal House-

hold, four are possessed by Scots, and no more.

Ought not this to be echoed through the three kingdoms, to

show the regard to truth these wretches have, who are constantly

endeavouring to inflame the nation against their Sovereign, as

well as their fellow-subjects ?

Tues. 8. In the evening I stood on one side of the market-

place at Frome, and declared to a very numerous congregation,

"His commandments are not grievous." They stood as quiet

as those at Bristol, a very few excepted ; most of whom were,

by the courtesy of England, called Gentlemen. How much

inferior to the keelmen and colliers !

On Wednesday and Thursday I made a little excursion into

Dorsetshire, and on Saturday returned to Bristol. Sunday,

13. We had a comfortable opportunity at the Room in the

morning, as well as at the Square in the afternoon ; where the

congregation was considerably larger than the Sunday before :

But on Sunday, 20, it was larger still. Now let the winter

come : We have made our full use of the Michaelmas summer.

Oct. 1778.] JOURNAL. 137

On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, on meeting the

classes, I carefully examined whether there was any truth in

the assertion, that above a hundred in our society were con-

cerned in unlawful distilling. The result was, that I found two

persons, and no more, that were concerned therein.

I now procured a copy of part of Mr. Fletcher's late Letter

to Mr. Ireland; which I think it my duty to publish, as a full

answer to the lying accounts which have been published con-

cerning that bad man :--" Mr. Voltaire, finding himself ill, sent

for Dr. Fronchin, first Physician to the Duke of Orleans, one

of his converts to infidelity, and said to him, ' Sir, I desire you

will save my life. I will give you half my fortune, if you will

lengthenout mydays only six months. If not, I shall go to

the devil, and carry you with me. "

Thur. 24. I read Prayers and preached in Midsummer-

Norton church. Thence I went to Bradford, on a sultry hot

day, such as were several days this month ; and preached on

theseed that fell among thorns. God strongly applied his word.

Tues. 29. I preached at Almsbury, to a large number of

plain people, who seemed just ripe for the Gospel. We observed

Friday, OCTOBER 2, as a day of fasting and prayer, for our

King and nation. We met, as usual, at five, at nine, at one,

and in the evening. At each time, I believe, some found that

Godwas with us ; but more especially in the concluding service.

Sat. 3-. Visiting one at the poor-house, I was much moved

to see such a company of poor,maimed, halt, and blind, who

seemed to have no one caring for their souls. So I appointed

to be there the next day ; and at two o'clock had all that could

get out of bed, young and old, in thegreat hall. My heart was

greatly enlarged toward them, and many blessed God for the
consolation.

Monday, I went with my brother to the Devizes, and preached

in alarge, commodious room. This and the following evening

we preached at Sarum. Wednesday, 7. We went on to Win-

chester. I had thoughts of preaching abroad, if haply any

thing might awaken a careless, self-conceited people. But the

rainwould not permit : And it made the road soheavy, that

we could not reach Portsmouth-Common till near six.

Thur. 8. One of our friends, whom I have known several

years, Mrs. Sarah Md, and on whose veracity I could

depend, was mentioning some uncommon circumstances. I

[Oct. 1778.

desired her to relate them at large, which she readily did as
follows :-

" Six or seven years ago, a servant of my husband's died of

the small-pox. A few days after, as I was walking into the town,

I met him in his common every-day clothes, running towards

me. In about a minutehe disappeared.

" Mr. Heth, a Surgeon andApothecary,died in March, 1756.

On the 14th of April following, Iwas walking with two other

women in the High-Street, about day-break, and we all three

saw him, dressed as he usually was, in a scarlet surtout, a

bushy wig, and avery small hat. Hewas standing and leaning

against a post,with his chinresting on his hands. Aswe came

towards him, (for we were notfrighted atall,) he walked towards

us, and went by us. We looked steadily after him, and saw

him till he turned into the market-house.

"Not long after this, Mr. Sm- died. Ten or twelve days

after, as I was walking near his house, about eleven o'clock, in

a bright, sunshiny day, I saw him standing at his chamber

window, and looking full upon me; but it was with the most

horrid countenance that I ever saw. As I walked on, I could

not keep my eyes off him, till hewithdrew from the window,

though I was so terrifiedwith his ghastlylook, that Iwas ready

to dropdown."

Fri. 9.-I returned to London, and Sunday, 11, buried the

remains of Eleanor Lee. I believe she received the great

promise ofGod, entire sanctification, fifteen or sixteen years ago,

and that she never lost it for an hour. I conversed intimately

with her ever since, and never saw her do any action, little or

great, nor heard herspeakanyword,which I could reprove. Thou
wast indeed " a mother in Israel ! "

Tues. 13. I took a little tour into Oxfordshire, and preached

in the evening at Wallingford. Wednesday, 14. I went on to

Oxford, and, having an hour to spare,walked to Christ-Church,

for which I cannot but still retain a peculiar affection. What

lovely mansions are these ! What is wanting to make the

inhabitants of them happy? That, without which, no rational

creature can be happy,-the experimental knowledge of God.

In the evening I preached at Finstock, to a congregation

gathered from many miles round. How gladly could I spend a

fewweeks in this delightful solitude ! But I must not rest yet.

As long as God gives me strength to labour, I am to use it.

Oct. 1778.1 139

Thursday, 15. I preached at Witney. Since Nancy B. has

been detained here, the work ofGod has greatly revived. Mys-

terious Providence ! That one capable of being so extremely

useful, should be thus shut up in a corner !

Fri. 16. I was desired to preach at Thame, on my return

to London. I came thither a little after ten. The mob had

beenso troublesome there, that it was a doubt with the Preachers,

whether the place should not be given up. However, I thought

itmight not be amiss, before this was done, to make one trial

myself. But I found it impracticable to preach abroad, the

wind being so exceeding sharp. I went therefore into a large

building, formerly used by the Presbyterians. It was quickly

filled, and more than filled, many being obliged to stand without.

Yet there was no breath of noise; the whole congregation

seemed to be " all but their attention dead." We had prayed

before, that God would give us a quiet time, and he granted us

our request.

Immediately after, a strange scene occurred. I was desired

to visit one who had been eminently pious, but had now been

confined to her bed for several months, and was utterly unable

to raise herself up. She desired us to pray, that the chain

might be broken. A few of us prayed in faith. Presently she

rose up, dressed herself, camedown stairs, and I believehad not

any farther complaint. In the evening I preached at High-

Wycomb, and on Saturday returned to London.

Mon. 19.-About noon, I reached Mr. Fary's near Little

Brickhill. I designed to preach in the House ; but the number

ofpeople obliged me to preach abroad, in spite of the keen east

winds. Tuesday, 20. I preached about noon at Hanslip, and

in the evening at Moreton, near Buckingham. Wednesday,

21. I preached about noon at Silston, (properly Silverstone,)

and then walkedwith a company of our friends to Whittlebury.

This is the flower of all our societies in the Circuit,both for zeal

and simplicity. Thursday, 22. I preached at Towcester ; on

Friday, at Northampton ; and onSaturday, returned to London.

Mon. 26. I set out in the diligence to Godmanchester,

hoping to be there by six in the evening. But we did not come

till past eight : So, most of the people being gone, I only gavea

short exhortation. Atfive in the morning we had a large

congregation, but a much larger in the evening. Wednesday,

28. About noon I preached at St. Neot's, and afterwards visited


a lovely young woman, who appeared to be in the last stage of

a consumption, andwas feebly gasping after God. She seemed

to be just ripe for the Gospel, which she drank in with all her

soul. God speedily brought her to the blood of sprinkling, and

a few days after she died in peace.

I preached in the evening at Bedford, and the next day,

Thursday, 29, at Luton. We had amiserable preaching-house

here : But Mr. Cole has now fitted up a very neat and commo-

dious Room, which was thoroughly filled with well-behaved and

deeply attentive hearers. How long did we seem to be plough-

ing the sand here ! But it seems there will be some fruit at last.

Fri. 30. I preached at noon to fifty or sixty dull creatures,

at poor, desolate Hertford ; and they heard with something like

seriousness . In the afternoon I went on to London.

Sunday, NOVEMBER 1, was theday appointed for opening the

new chapel in the City-Road. It is perfectly neat, but not fine ;

and contains far more people than the Foundery : I believe,

together with the morning chapel, as many as the Tabernacle.

Many were afraid that the multitudes, crowding from all parts,

would have occasioned much disturbance. But they were

happily disappointed : There was none at all : All was quietness,

decency, and order. I preached on part of Solomon's Prayer at

the Dedication of the Temple ; and both in the morning and

afternoon, (when I preached on the hundred forty and four

thousand standing with the Lamb on Mount Zion,) Godwas

eminently present in the midst ofthe congregation.

Mon. 2.-I went to Chatham, and preached in the evening

to a lively, loving congregation. Tuesday, 3. I went by water

to Sheerness. Our Room being far too small for the people that

attended, I sent to the Governor to desire (what had been

allowed me before) the use of the chapel. He refused me,

(uncivilly enough) affecting to doubt whether I was in orders !

So I preached to as many as it would contain in our ownRoom.

Wed. 4.-I took a view of the old church at Minster, once a

spacious and elegant building. It stands pleasantly on the top

ofa hill, and commands all the country round. We went from

thence to Queensborough, which contains above fifty houses,
and sends two members to Parliament. Surely the whole Isle

of Sheppy is now but a shadow ofwhat it was once.

Thur. 5.-I returned to Chatham, and on the following

morning set out in the stage-coach for London. At the end
Dec. 1778.1 JOURNAL.

of Stroud, I chose to walk up the hill, leaving the coach to

follow me. But it was in no great haste : It did not overtake

me till I had walked above five miles. I cared not if it had

been ten : The more I walk, the sounder I sleep.

Sun. 15. Having promised to preach in the evening at St.

Antholine's church, I had desired one to have acoach ready at

the door, when the service at the new chapel was ended. But

hehad forgot ; so that, after preaching and meeting the society,

Iwas obliged to walk as fast as I could to the church. The

people were so wedged together, that it was with difficulty I got

in. The church was extremely hot ; but this I soon forgot ; for

it pleasedGod to send a gracious rain upon his inheritance.

Thur. 26. I fufilled the dying request ofAnn Thwayte, by
burying her remains, and preaching her funeral sermon. Inall

the changes of those about her, she stood steadfast, doing and

suffering the will of God: She was awoman offaith and prayer;

in life and death adorning the doctrine of God her Saviour.

Sun. 29. I was desired to preach a charity sermon in St.

Luke's church, Old-Street. I doubt whether it was ever so

crowded before ; and the fear ofGod seemed to possess the whole

audience. In the afternoon I preached at the new chapel; and

at seven, in St. Margaret's, Rood-Lane ; full as much crowded

as St Luke's. Is then the scandal of the Cross ceased ?

Tues. DECEMBER 1.-I went to Rye. Here, as in many

other places, those who begin to flee from the wrath to come

are continually " received to doubtful disputations ; " puzzled

and perplexed with intricate questions concerning absolute and

unconditional decrees ! Lord, how long wilt thou suffer this ?

How long shall these well-meaning zealots destroy the dawning

work ofgrace, and strangle the children in the birth ?

Wed. 2.-In the evening I preached at Robertsbridge, and

spoke with all possible plainness, both for the sake of threescore

children, and of a large congregation of serious, attentive people.

Thur. 3. Many at Sevenoaks seemed deeply affected, while

Iwas applying those words, " Do ye now believe ?" Especially

while I was reminding them of the deep work which God wrought

among them twelve or fourteen years ago. Friday, going on

to Shoreham, I found Mr. P. once more brought back from the

gates of death ; undoubtedly for the sake of his little flock ; who

avail themselves of his being spared too, and continually increase

not only in number, but in the knowledge and love ofGod.

[Jan. 1779.

Sun. 6.-I buried the remains of Merchant West, snatched

away in the midst of his years. From a child hehad the fear of

God, and was serious and unblamable in his behaviour. When

he was ajourneyman, he was reverenced by all who wrought in

the shop with him; he was a pattern of diligence in all things,

spiritual and temporal. During along and severe illness, his

patience was unshaken, till hejoyfully resigned his spirit toGod.

Mon. 7.-I took a little journey to Canterbury and Dover,

and was much comforted among aloving,earnest people. Fri-

day, 11. I preached at Lambeth, in the chapel newly prepared

by Mr. Edwards, whose wife has seventy-five boarders. Miss

Owen, at Publow, takes only twenty, thinking she cannot do her

duty to any more.

Fri. 18-. I calledupon Colonel Gallatin. Butwhat a change

is here : The fine gentleman, the soldier, is clean gone, sunk

into a feeble, decrepid old man; not able to rise off his seat, and

hardly able to speak.

Sun. 20.-I buried what was mortal of honest Silas Told.

For many years he attended the malefactors in Newgate, without

fee or reward ; and I suppose no man for this hundred years has

been so successful in that melancholy office. God had given

him peculiar talents for it; andhe had amazing success therein.

The greatest part of those whom he attended died in peace, and

many ofthem in the triumph of faith.

Fri. 25.-(Being Christmas-Day.) Our service beganat four,

as usual, in the new chapel. I expected Mr. Richardson to read

Prayers at West-Street chapel, but he did not come ; so I read

Prayers myself, and preached, and administered the sacrament

to several hundred people. In the afternoon I preached at the

new chapel, thoroughly filled inevery corner ; and in theevening

at St. Sepulchre's, one of the largest parish churches in London.

It was warın enough, being sufficiently filled ; yet I felt no

weakness or weariness, but was stronger after I had preachedmy

fourth sermon, than I was after the first.

Thur. 31. We concluded the oldyear with a solemn watch-

night, and beganthe new with praise and thanksgiving. We

had a violent storm at night. The roaring of the wind was like

loud thunder. It kept me awake half an hour; I then slept in

peace.

Fri. JANUARY 1, 1779.-At length we have a House capable

of containing the whole society. We met there this evening to

Feb. 1779.1

renew our covenant with God; and we never met on that solemn

occasionwithout a peculiar blessing.

Tues. 12. I dined anddrank teawith fourGerman Ministers.

I could not but admire the wisdom of those that appointed them .

They seem to consider not only the essential points, their sense

and piety, but even those smaller things, the good breeding,

the address, yea, the persons of those they send into foreign

countries.

Sun. 24. I visited ayoung woman in such terrible fits as I

scarce ever saw before ; and she was hardly out of one, when she

fell into another ; so that it seemed she must soon lose her reason,

ifnot her life. But Dr. Wilson, in one or twodays' time, restored

her to perfect health.

Mon. FEBRUARY 8.-Finding many serious persons were

much discouraged by prophets of evil, confidently foretelling

veryheavy calamities,which were coming upon our nation, I

endeavoured to lift up their hands, by opening and applying

those comfortable words : (Psalm xliii. 5, 6:) " Why art thou

so heavy, O my soul? And why art thou so disquieted within

me? O put thy trust in God ; for I will yet give him thanks,

which is the help ofmy countenance, and my God."

Wednesday, 10, was a National Fast. So solemn a one I never

saw before. From one end of the city to the other, there was

scarce any one seen in the streets. All places ofpublic worship

were crowded in an uncommondegree; and an unusual awe sat

onmost faces. I preached on the words of God to Abraham,

interceding for Sodom, " I will not destroy the city for his sake."

Mon. 15. I went to Norwich in the stage-coach, with two

very disagreeable companions, called a gentleman and gentle-

woman, but equally ignorant, insolent, lewd, and profane.

Wed. 17.-I went to Yarmouth, and preached to a large and

serious congregation. Thursday, 18. I preached at Lowestoft,

where is a great awakening, especiallyamongyouth and children ;

several of whom, between twelve and sixteen years of age, are a

pattern to all about them. Friday, 19. I preached at Loddon,

and afterwards talked with a girl sixteen years of age. She

was justified two months since, and has not yet lost the sight

of God's countenance for a moment; but has been enabled to

rejoice evermore, and to pray without ceasing. But being sur-

rounded with relations who neither loved nor feared God, they

were pressing upon her continually, till by little and little she


sunk back into the world, and had neither the power nor form of

religion left.

Sun. 21. I returned to Norwich, and took an exact account

of the society. I wish all our Preachers would be accurate in

their accounts, and rather speak under than above the truth.

I had heard again and again of the increase of the society. And

what is the naked truth ? Why, I left in it two hundred and

two members ; and I find one hundred and seventy-nine ! Sun-

day, 21. At twelve I took coach, and in the morning reached

London.

Sun. 28.-Immediately after preaching at Spitalfields, I

hasted away to St. Peter's, Cornhill, and declared to a crowded

congregation, " God hath given us his Holy Spirit." At four I

preached in the new chapel, for the benefit of the Reformation

Society. This also I trust will be a means of uniting together

the hearts of the children of God of various denominations.

Mon. MARCH 1.-I went to Bristol. Thursday, 4. I went

over to Paulton, and preached at noon to the liveliest people in

all the Circuit. This people are now just of the same spirit as

those of Bristol were forty years ago.

Thur. 11.-I opened the new chapel at Bath. It is about

half as large as that at London, and built nearly uponthe same

model. After reading Prayers, I preached on, " We preach

Christ crucified; to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the

Greeks foolishness." I believe God sent his word home to many

hearts. We concluded the service with the Lord's Supper.

Mon. 15. I began my tour through England and Scotland;

the lovely weather continuing, such as the oldest man alive has

not seen before, for January, February, and half of March. In

the evening I preached at Stroud, the next morning at Glou-

cester, designing to preach in Stanley at two, and at Tewkesbury

in the evening ; but the Minister of Gratton (near Stanley)

sending me word, I was welcome to the use of his church, I

ordered notice to be given, that the service would begin there at

six o'clock. Stanley chapel was thoroughly filled at two. It is

eighteen years since I was there before ; so that many of those

whom I saw here then, were now grey-headed ; andmany were

gone to Abraham's bosom. May we follow them as they did

Christ !

I was preparing to go to Gratton, when one brought me word

from Mr. Roberts, that he had changed his mind ; so I preached

March, 1779.1

in Mr. Stephen's orchard, to far more than his church would

have contained. And it was no inconvenience either to me or

them, as it was amild, still evening.

Wed. 17.-1 preached at Tewkesbury about noon, and at

Worcester in the evening. Thursday, 18. Upon inquiry I

found there had been no morning preaching since the Confer-

ence! So the people were of course weak and faint. At noon

I preached in Bewdley, in an open space, at the head of the town,

to avery numerous and quiet congregation. Here Mrs. C-

informed me, " This day twelvemonth I found peace with God ;

and the same day my son, till then utterly thoughtless, was con-

vinced of sin. Some time after, he died, rejoicing in God, and

praising him with his latest breath."

Fri. 19. I preached in Bengeworth church about noon, and

about six in Pebworth church. Saturday, 20. I went on to

Birmingham. Sunday, 21. Just at the time of preaching, at

Bromwich-Heath, began such a storm as that which ushered in

the year. Yet as no house could contain the people, I was con-

strained to stand in the court-yard. For amoment I was afraid

of the tiles falling on the people ; but they regarded nothing but

the word. As I concluded, we had a furious shower of hail :

Hitherto could the prince of the power of the air go ; but no
farther.

After preaching at Wednesbury, Darlaston, Dudley, and

Wolverhampton, on Wednesday, 24, I went on to Madeley.

Inthe way I finished a celebrated "Essay on Taste." And is

this the treatise that gained the premium? It is lively and

pretty ; but neither deep nor strong. Scarce any of the terms

are accurately defined : Indeed, defining is not this author's

talent. Hehas not by anymeans a clear apprehension; and it

is through this capital defect, that hejumbles together true and

false propositions, in every chapter and in every page.

To this Essay three extracts are subjoined. The first is much

to the purpose. The second is a superficial, empty thing. Is

this a specimen of the great M. D'Alembert ? But I was most

surprised at the third. What ! is this extracted from the famous

Montesquieu ? It has neither strength, nor clearness, nor

justness of thought ! And is this the writer so admired all

overEurope ? He is no more to be compared to Lord Forbes,

or Dr. Beattie, than amouse to an elephant.

Thur. 25. I preachedin the new House which Mr. Fletcher

[April, 1779.

has built in Madeley wood. The people here exactly resemble

those at Kingswood; only they are more simple and teachable.

But for want of discipline, the immense pains which he has

takenwith them has not done the good which might have been

expected.

I preached at Shrewsbury in the evening, and on Friday, 26,

about noon, in the assembly-room at Broseley. It was well we

were in the shade ; for the sun shone as hot as it usuallydoes at

midsummer. We walked from thence to Coalbrook-Dale, and

took a view of the bridge which is shortly to be thrown over the

Severn. It is one arch, a hundred feet broad, fifty-two high,

and eighteen wide ; all of cast-iron, weighing many hundred

tons. I doubt whether the Colossus at Rhodes weighed much
more.

Sat. 27-. I preached at Newcastle-under-Lyne ; Sunday,

28, at Burslem, morning and afternoon. Monday, 29. I went

on to our loving brethren at Congleton, and preached on the

nature of Christian zeal. Ameasure of this theyhave already ;

but they wantmuch more. Tuesday, 30, and the next day, I

preached at Macclesfield. The hearts ofmany were enlarged ;

and the society I found was increasing both in number and

strength .

Thur. APRIL 1.-About one, I preached at New-Mills, in

Derbyshire. A commodious preaching-house, lately built, has

proved a blessing to the whole country. They flock together

from every quarter, and are thankful both to God andman. In

the evening I preached at Stockport, where I received a strange

account of poor William Hamilton, who left us to join the

Quakers, and is as miserable as he can live, afraid to see any

man lest he should kill him. O what a poor exchange has this

unhappy man made !

Fri. 2.-About one I opened the new chapel at Davyhulme.

APRIL 4, (being Easter-Day,) was a solemn festival. In the

afternoon I preached at Oldham, to such acongregation as I

have not seen since I was in the Cornish amphitheatre. And

all, beside a few giddy children, were seriously attentive.

Mon. 5. I preached at Northwich. I used to go on from

hence to Little-Leigh ; but since Mr. Barker is gone hence, that

place knows us no more. I cannot but wonder at the infatua-

tion of men that really love and fear God, and yet leave great

part of, if not all, their substance to men that neither love nor

April, 1779. ] 147

fear him ! Surely if I did little goodwith my money while I

lived, I would, at least, do good with it when I could live no

longer.

Tues. 6. I went to Mr. S's at Nantwich, a nephew of

Mr. Matthew S-; who was, fifty years ago, one ofour little

company at Oxford, and was then both in person, in natural

temper, and in piety, one of the loveliest young men I knew.

Mr. Joseph S was then unborn, and was for many years

without God in the world. But he is now as zealous in the

works of God, as he was once in the works of the devil. While

Ipreached itwas a season of strong consolation ; but one young

gentlewoman refused to be comforted. She followed me into

Mr. S's all in tears ; but would neither touch meat nor

drink. After I had spent a little time in prayer, she broke out

into prayer herself; and she did not cease, till God turned her

sorrow intojoy unspeakable.

After preaching at Alpraham and Chester, on Wednesday I

went on to Warrington. The proprietor ofthe new chapel had

sent me word, that I was welcome to preach in it ; but he had

now altered his mind : So I preached in our own ; and I saw

not one inattentive hearer.

I preached at Liverpool in the evening, and the next day ;

at Wigan on Friday ; on Saturday and Sunday at Bolton.

Monday, 12. I preached at Bury about one ; and in the evening

at Rochdale. Now was the day of visitation for this town.

The people were all on fire : Never was such a flame kindled

here before ; chiefly by the prayer-meetings scattered through

the town. Tuesday, 13. I preached at nine to a crowded audi-

ence in the new House at Bacup ; at one in the shell of the

House at Padiham, where there is at length a prospect of

peace, after abundance of disturbance, caused by one who neither

fears God nor reverences man. In the evening I preached at

Colne; but the people were still in such a panic, that few durst

go into the left-handgallery. Wednesday, 14. After a delightful

ride through the mountains, I preached first in Todmorden, and

thenin Heptonstall church. I afterwards lodged at the Ewood,

which I still love for good Mr. Grimshaw's sake.
Thur. 15. I went to Halifax, where a little thing had lately

occasioned great disturbance. An angel blowing a trumpet

was placed on the sounding-board over the pulpit. Many were

vehemently against this ; others as vehemently for it : But a


total end was soon put to the contest ; for the angel vanished

away. The congregations, morning and evening, were very

large; and the work ofGod seems to increase, in depth as well

as extent.

Sun. 18. In the morning I preached in Haworth church ;

but in the afternoon I could not. Thousands upon thousands

were gathered together, so that I was obliged to stand in the

church-yard. And I believe all that stood still were able to

hear distinctly.

Mon. 19. I preached in Bingley church to a numerous con-

gregation. I dined with Mr. Busfield, in his little paradise ;

but it can give no happiness unless God is there. Thence I

went to Otley. Here also the work of God increases ; particu-

larlywith regard to sanctification. And I think every one whohas

experienced it, retains a clearwitness of what God has wrought.

Thur. 22.-I was a little surprised at a passage in Dr.

Smollet's " History of England," vol. xv., pp. 121, 122 :-

" Imposture and fanaticism still hang upon the skirts of

religion. Weak minds were seduced by the delusions of a

superstition, styled Methodism, raised upon the affectation of

superior sanctity, and pretensions to divine illumination. Many

thousands were infected with this enthusiasm bythe endeavours

of a few obscure Preachers, such as Whitefield, and the two

Wesleys, who found means to lay the whole kingdom under
contribution."

Poor Dr. Smollet ! Thus to transmit to all succeeding gene-

rations a whole heap of notorious falsehoods !

" Imposture and fanaticism ! " Neither one nor the other

had any share in the late revival of scriptural religion, which is

no other than the love of God and man, gratitude to our Creator, and good-will to our fellow-creatures. Is this delusion and

superstition ? No, it is real wisdom ; it is solid virtue. Does

this fanaticism " hang upon the skirts of religion ? " Nay, it is
the very essence of it. Does the Doctor call this enthusiasm ?

Why ? Because he knows nothing about it. Who told him

that these " obscure Preachers " made "pretensions to divine

illumination ? " How often has that silly calumnybeen refuted

to the satisfaction of all candidmen ? However, they " found
means to lay the whole kingdom under contribution." So does

this frontless man, blind and bold, stumble on without the least

shadow of truth !

April, 1779.] JOURNAL. 149

Meantime, what faith can be given to his History ? What

credit can anyman of reason give to any fact uponhis authority ?

In travelling this week I looked over Baron Swedenborg's

"Account of Heaven and Hell." Hewas aman of piety, of a

strong understanding, and most lively imagination ; but he had

a violent fever when he was five-and-fifty years old, which quite

overturned his understanding. Nor did he ever recover it ; but

it continued " majestic, though in ruins." From that time he

was exactly in the state of that gentleman atArgos,-

Qui se credebat miros audire tragædos,

In vacuo lætus sessor plausorque theatro.

Whowondrous tragedies was wont to hear,

Sitting alone in the empty theatre.

His words, therefore, from that time were ægri somnia, the

dreams of a disordered imagination ; just as authentic as

Quevedo's " Visions of Hell. " Of this work in particular I

must observe, that the doctrine contained therein is not only

quite unproved, quite precarious from beginning to end, as

depending entirely on the assertion of a single brain-sick man ;

but that, inmany instances, it is contradictory to Scripture, to

reason, and to itself. But, over and above this, it contains

many sentiments that are essentially and dangerously wrong.

Such is that concerning the Trinity ; for he roundly affirms

God to be only one person, who was crucified : So that he

revives and openly asserts the long-exploded heresy of the

Sabellians and Patripassians ; yea, and that of the Anthropo-

morphites ; affirming that God constantly appears in heaven in

the form of a man. And the worst is, he flatly affirms, " None

can go to heaven, who believes three persons in the Godhead : "

Which is more than the most violent Arian or Socinian ever

affirmed before.

Add to this, that his ideas of heaven are low, grovelling, just

suiting a Mahometan paradise ; and his account of it has a

natural tendency to sink our conceptions, both of the glory of

heaven, and of the inhabitants of it ; whom he describes as far

inferior both in holiness and happiness to Gregory Lopez, or

Monsieur De Renty. And his account of hell leaves nothing

terrible in it ; for, first, he quenches the unquenchable fire. He

assures us there is no fire there ; only he allows that the gover-

nor of it, the devil, sometimes orders the spirits that behave ill, to

[April, 1779.

be " laid on a bed of hot ashes." And, secondly, he informs

you, that all the damned enjoy their favourite pleasures. He

that delights in filth is to have his filth ; yea, and his harlot

too ! Now, how dreadful a tendencymust this have in such an

age and nation as this ! I wish those pious men, Mr. Clowes

and Clotworthy, would calmlyconsider these things, before they

usher into the world any more of this madman's dreams.

Mon. 26. I preached at Huddersfield, where there is a great

revival of the work ofGod. Manyhave found peacewithGod:

Sometimes sixteen, eighteen, yea, twenty in one day. So that

the deadly wound they suffered, when their Predestinarian

brethren left them, is now fully healed ; and they are not only

more lively, but more innumber, than ever they were before.

Tues. 27.-I saw amelancholy sight indeed! One that ten

years ago was clearly perfected in love ; but was worried by

Mr. , day and night, threaping him down he was in a

delusion, that at length it drove him stark mad. And so he

continues to this day. Observe ! it was not Perfection drove

this manmad, but the incessant teasing him with doubtful dis-

putations.

Wed. 28.-I had promised to preach at six in the morning,

to the poor prisoners at Whiteley. Though the ground was

covered with snow, so many people flocked together, that Iwas

constrained to preach in the court of the prison. The snow

continued to fall, and the north wind to whistle round us ; but

I trust God warmed many hearts.

I preached at Wakefield in the evening ; Thursday, 29, at

Rothwell and Leeds ; and on Friday noon, at Harewood. In

the afternoon we walked to Mr. Lascelles's house. It is finely

situated on a little eminence, commanding a most delightful

prospect of hill anddale, and wood and water. It is built of a

fine white stone, with two grand and beautiful fronts. I was

not much struck with anything within. There is too much

sameness in all the great houses I have seen in England; two

rows of large, square rooms, with costly beds, glasses, chairs,

and tables. But here is a profusion of wealth ; every pane of

glass, we were informed, cost six-and-twenty shillings. One

looking-glass cost five hundred pounds, and one bed, six hundred.

The whole floor was just on the plan of Montague-House : now

the British Museum. The grounds round the house are plea-

sant indeed, particularly the walks on the river-side, and through

May, 1779.1

the woods. But what has the owner thereof, savethe beholding

them with his eyes ?

Sat. MAY 1.-I looked over the first volume of Mr. Bryant's

"Ancient Mythology." He seems to be a person of immense

reading, and indefatigable industry. But I have two objections

to thewhole work : 1. That his discoveries, being built chiefly

on etymologies, carry no certainty in them. 2. That were they

ever so certain, they are of no consequence. For instance,

Whether Chiron was a man or a mountain, and whether the

Cyclops were giants or watch-towers,-are points of no manner

ofimportance, either to me or any man living.

Sun. 2.-Dr. Kershaw, the Vicar of Leeds, desired me to

assist him at the sacrament. It was a solemn season. We were

ten Clergymen, and seven or eight hundred communicants.

Mr. Atkinson desired me to preach in the afternoon. Such a

congregation had been seldom seen there ; but I preached to a

much larger in our own House at five ; and I found nowant of

strength.

Fri. 7-. After having visited the intermediate societies, I

came to Darlington, and found some of the liveliest people in

the north ofEngland. All but one or two of the society are

justified ; great part of them partakers of the great salvation ;

and all of them seem to retain their first simplicity, and to be as

teachable as little children.

Sun. 9. I preached in the market-place ; and all the congre-

gation behaved well, but a party of the Queen's Dragoons.

Monday, 10. I preached at Barnard-Castle ; and saw a quite

different behaviour in the Durham Militia ; the handsomest

body of soldiers I ever saw, except in Ireland. The next even-

ing they all came, both Officers and soldiers, andwere a pattern

to the whole congregation. In myjourney to Brough, (where

I preached at noon,) I read over a volume of Dr. Blair's Ser-

mons. He is an elegant, but not a deep, writer ; much resem-

bling, but not equalling, Mr. Seed. I do not remember that any

day in January, February, or March, was near so cold as this.

Wed. 12. After preaching at Cuthburton and in Teesdale,

I went a little out of my way, to see one of the wonders of

nature. The river Tees rushes down between two rocks, and

falls sixty feet perpendicular into a basin of water, sixty feet

deep. In the evening I preached to the lovely congregation in

Weardale, and the next day went on to Newcastle.

[May, 1779.

Sun. 16. I preached at Gateshead-Fell in the morning;

and in the new House, near Sheephill, at noon. Here thework

of God greatly revives ; many are lately convinced of sin, and

many enabled, from dayto day, to rejoice in God their Saviour.

Mon. 17. About noon I preached at Shields, and in the

evening at Sunderland. Tuesday, 18. I read Prayers and

preached in Monkwearmouth church , and Thursday, 20,

returned to Newcastle. Sunday, 23. Inthe morning I preached

at Ballast-Hills ; about two, at the Fell; about five, at the

Garth-Heads. The congregationwas double to that at the

Fell ; and I trust God gave us a double blessing.

Mon. 24. I preached at five in the Orphan-House ; about

nine, at Placey ; at noon, in the market-house, at Morpeth.

Many soldiers, who were marching through the town, came in;

and the powerof the Lordwas present toheal. In the evening

I preached in the Court-House, at Alnwick ; and at night was

no more tired than in the morning.

Tues. 25. We walked through the Castle. Two of the

rooms are more elegant than even those at Harewood-House.

But it is not a profusion of ornaments, (they are exceeding

plain and simple,) it is not an abundance of gold and silver,

but a je ne sçai quoi, that strikes every person of taste.

In the evening I preached in the Town-Hall, at Berwick.

Many Officers, as well as soldiers, were there ; and the whole

congregation seemed much affected. Shall we see fruit at Ber-

wick also ?

Wed. 26. We had suchacongregation at Dunbar as I have

not seen there for many years. Thursday, 27. I went on to

Edinburgh. I was agreeably surprised at the singing in the

evening. I havenot heard such female voices, so strong and

clear, anywhere in England.

Fri. 28. I went to Glasgow, and preached in the House ;

but the next evening, by the river-side. Sunday, 30. At seven

I spoke exceeding strong words, in applying the parable of the

Sower. In the afternoon I went to the English chapel. But

how was I surprised ! Such decency have I seldom seen even

at West-Street, or the new Room in Bristol. 1. All, both men

and women, were dressed plain : I did not see one high head :

2. No one took notice of any one, at coming in; but, after a

short ejaculation, sat quite still: 3. None spoke to any one

during the Service, nor looked either on one side or the other :

June, 1779.1 153

4. All stood, every man, woman, and child, while the Psalms

were sung: 5. Instead of an unmeaning voluntary, was an

anthem, and one of the simplest and sweetest I ever heard :

6. The Prayers, preceding a sound, useful sermon, were seri-

ously and devoutly read: 7. After Service, none bowed, or cour-

tesied, or spoke, but went quietly and silently away.

After church, I preached again by the river side, to ahuge

multitude of serious people: I believe, full as many more as we

had the Sunday before, at Newcastle. Surely we shall not lose
all our labour here.

Mon. 31. I returned to Edinburgh; and, JUNE 1, set out

on my northernjourney. In the evening I preached at Dundee.

The congregation was, as usual, very large and deeply attentive.

But that was all. I did not perceive that any one was affected

at all. I admire this people : So decent, so serious, and so per-

fectly unconcerned.

Wed. 2. We went on to Arbroath, where was near as large

a congregation as at Dundee, but nothing so serious. The

poor Glassites here, pleading for a merely notional faith, greatly

hinder either the beginning or the progress of any real work of

God. Thursday, 3. I preached at Aberdeen, to a people that

canfeel as well as hear. Friday, 4. I set out for Inverness,

and about eight preached at Inverury, to a considerable number

of plain country-people, just like those we see in Yorkshire.

My spirit was much refreshed among them, observing several

of them in tears. Before we came to Strathbogie, (now new-

named Huntley,) Mr. Brackenbury was much fatigued. So I

desired him to go into the chaise, and rode forward to Keith.

Mr. Gordon, the Minister, invited us to drink tea at his house.

In the evening I went to the market-place. Four children,

after they had stood a while to consider, ventured to come near

me ; then a few men and women crept forward; till we had

upwards of a hundred. At nine on Sunday, 6, I suppose they

were doubled ; and some of them seemed a little affected. I

dined at Mr. Gordon's, who behaved in the most courteous,

yea, and affectionate, manner. At three I preached in the kirk,

one of the largest I have seen in the kingdom, but very ruinous.

It was thoroughly filled, and God was there in an uncommon

manner. He sent forth his voice, yea, and that a mighty voice ;

so that I believe many of the stout-hearted trembled. In the

evening I preached once more in the market-place, on those


awful words, " Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not

quenched."

Mon. 7.-I came to Grange-Green, near Forres, about twelve

o'clock. But I found the house had changed its master since I

was here before, nine years ago. Mr. Grant (who then lived

here, in his brother's house) was now Sir Lodowick Grant ;

having succeeded to the title and estate of Sir Alexander, dying

without issue. But his mind was not changed with his fortune.

He received me with cordial affection, and insisted on my send-

ing for Mrs. Smith and her little girl, whom I had left at Forres.

Wewere all here as at home, in one of the most healthy and

most pleasant situations in the kingdom ; and I had the satis-

faction to observe my daughter sensibly recovering her strength,

almost every hour. In the evening all the family were called in

to prayers ; to whom I first expounded a portion of Scripture.

Thus ended this comfortable day. So has God provided for us

in a strange land !

Tues. 8.-I found another hearty welcome from Mr. Dunbar,

the Minister of Nairn. A little after ten I preached in his kirk,

which was full from end to end. I have seldom seen a Scotch

congregation so sensibly affected. Indeed it seemed that God

smote the rocks, and brake the hearts of stone in pieces.

In the afternoon I reached Inverness, but found a new face

of things there. Good Mr. Mackenzie had been for some years

removed to Abraham's bosom. Mr. Fraser, his colleague, a

pious man, of the old stamp, was likewise gone to rest. The

three present Ministers are of another kind; so that I have no

more place in the kirk ; and the wind and rain would not permit

me to preach on the Green. However, our House was large,

though gloomy enough. Being now informed, (which I did not

suspect before,) that the town was uncommonly given to drunk-

enness, I used the utmost plainness of speech ; and I believe

not without effect. I then spent some time with the society,

increased from twelve to between fifty and sixty : Many ofthese

knew inwhom they had believed; andmany were going on to

perfection : So that all the pains which have been taken to stop

the work ofGod here, have hitherto been in vain.

Wed. 9. We had another rainy day, so that I was again

driven into the House ; and again I delivered my own soul to a

larger congregationthanbefore. In the morning we had an affec-

tionate parting, perhaps to meet no more. I am glad, however,

June, 1779.]

that I have made three journeys to Inverness. It has not been

lost labour.

Between ten and eleven I began preaching at Nairn. The

House was pretty well filled again ; and many more of the

Gentry were there, than were present on Tuesday. It pleased

God to giveme again liberty ofspeech, inopening and applying

those words, " God is a Spirit ; and they that worship him, must

worship him in spirit and in truth."

About two we reached Sir Lodowick Grant's. In the evening

we had a very serious congregation. Afterwards I spent an

hour very agreeably with the family, and two or three neigh-

bouring gentlemen.

Fri. 11. We did not stop at Keith, but went on to Strath-

bogie. Here we were in a clean, convenient house, and had

every thing we wanted. All the family very willingly joined us

in prayer. We then slept in peace.

Sat. 12. About one I preached at Inverury, to a larger

congregation than before, and was again refreshed with the

simplicity and earnestness of the plain country-people. In the

evening I preached at Aberdeen. Sunday, 13. I spoke as

closely as I could, both morning and evening, and made a pointed

application to the hearts of all that were present. I am convinced

this is the onlyway whereby we can do any good in Scotland.

This very day I heard many excellent truths delivered in the

kirk. But as there was no application, it was likely to do as

much good as the singing of a lark. I wonder the pious Minis-

ters in Scotland are not sensible of this. They cannot but see,

that no sinners are convinced of sin, none converted to God, by

this way of preaching. How strange is it then, that neither

reason nor experience teaches them to take a better way !

Mon. 14. I preached again at Arbroath ; Tuesday, 15, at

Dundee ; and Wednesday, 16, at Edinburgh. Thursday, 17.

I examined the society. In five years I found five members had

been gained! Ninety-nine being increased to a hundred and

four. What then have our Preachers been doing all this time ?

1. They have preached four evenings in the week, and on Sun-

day morning; the other mornings they have fairly given up.

2. They have taken great care not to speak too plain, lest they

should give offence. 3. When Mr. Brackenbury preached the

old Methodist doctrine, one of them said, " You must not preach

such doctrine here. The doctrine of Perfection is not calculated

[June, 1779.

for the meridian of Edinburgh." Waving, then, all other hin-

derances, is it any wonder, that the work of God has not pros-

peredhere?

On Friday and Saturday, I preached with all possible plain-

ness ; and some appeared to be much stirred up. On Sunday,

20, I preached at eight, and at half an hour past twelve ; and

God gave us a parting blessing.

Iwas inhopes ofpreaching abroad at Dunbarinthe evening,

but the rainwould not permit. Monday, 21. I preached in the

Court-House at Alnwick ; and finding the people were greatly

alarmed, with the news of the French and Spanish fleets, I

opened and applied, " Say ye to the righteous, it shall be well

with him." I believemany laid hold of the promise, and were

not a little comforted.

Tues. 22. Finding the panic had spread to Newcastle, I

strongly enforced those words, " The Lord sitteth above the

water-floods ; the Lord reigneth a King for ever." Wednesday,

23. I rested here. Lovely place, and lovely company ! But

I believe there is another world : Therefore, I must " arise and

gohence !"

Thur. 24. I preached at Stockton-upon-Tees at noon, and

at Yarm in the evening. Friday, 25. At two in the afternoon

I preached to a lovely congregation, at Potto, and to such

another at Hutton-Rudby. Iwas afterwards agreeably surprised

in examining the select society. Many ofthem havebeenmem-

bers thereof for near twenty years. And not one of them has

lost the pure love of God ever since they first received it.

Sat. 26. After preaching at Stokesley and Guisborough, I

went on to our loving, earnest brethren at Whitby ; just of the

same spirit with those at Darlington, in the opposite point of
the Circuit.

Sun. 27-. I preached at eight in the Room, and at five in

the market-place, to a huge congregation. They were deeply

attentive ; but no more affected than the stones they stood upon.

Mon. 28. I preached in the new preaching-house, at Robin

Hood's Bay, and thenwent on to Scarborough. Tuesday, 29,

I spent agreeably and profitably with my old friends ; and inmy

way toBridlington, Wednesday, 30, took a view ofFlamborough-

Head. It is an huge rock, rising perpendicular from the sea to an

immense height, which gives shelter to an innumerable multitude

of sea-fowl of various kinds. I preached in the evening at Brid

July, 1779. ] 157

lington, and afterwards heard a very uncommon instance of

paternal affection:-A gentleman of the town had a favourite

daughter, whom he set up in a milliner's shop. Some time

after she had a concern for her soul, and believed it her duty

to enter into the society. Upon this her good father forbad

her his house ; demanding all the money he had laid out ; and

required her instantly to sell all her goods, in order to make the

payment!

In this journey I looked over the " History of Whitby," in

which are many curious things. Among others, there is an

account of St. Ninian, a Monk of Whitby Abbey, long before

the Conquest. Here is also an account of the father of the

Percy family : He came over with William the Conqueror, and

took his name from a town in Normandy. So the pretty tale of

piercing the eye of the Scotch King proves to be mere inven-

tion!

Thur. JULY 1.-This was the first of eighteen or twenty

days full as hot as any I remember in Georgia; and yet the

season is remarkably healthy. I preached in Beverley at noon,

and at Hull in the evening. Saturday, 3. I reached Grimsby,

and found a little trial. In this, and many other parts of the

kingdom, those striplings, who call themselves Lady Hunting-

don's Preachers, have greatly hindered the work of God. They

have neither sense, courage, nor grace, to go and beat up the

devil's quarters, in any place where Christ has not been named ;

but wherever we have entered as by storm, and gathered a few

souls, often at the peril of our lives, they creep in, and, by doubt-

ful disputations, set every one's sword against his brother. One

of these has just crept into Grimsby, and is striving to divide

the poor little flock ; but I hope his labour will be in vain, and

they will still hold " the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace."
Sun. 4.-I had designed to preach abroad at Louth ; but

the raindrove us into the House. In the evening I expounded,

and strongly applied, the story of Dives and Lazarus. The

whole congregation, except a few poor gentlemen, behaved with

decency.

Mon. 5.-I preached about eleven, at Langham-Row, to a

congregation gathered from many miles round, on, " How

amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts !" As a great

part of them were athirst for perfect love, they drank in every

word. In the afternoon we went to Raithby. It is a small

[July, 1779.

village on the top of a hill. The shell of Mr. Brackenbury's

house was just finished, near which he has built a little chapel.

It was quickly filled with deeply serious hearers. I was much

comforted among them, and could not but observe, while the

landlord and his tenants were standing together, how

Love, like death, makes all distinctions void.

Tues. 6. After an absence of near twenty years, I once

more visited poor Coningsby, and preached at eleven in their

new preaching-house, to a plain, simple people. In the evening

I took my usual stand in the market-place at Horncastle. The

wild men were more quiet than usual ; I suppose, because they

saw Mr. Brackenbury standing by me ; whom they knew to be

in Commission for the Peace, for this part of the county.

Wed. 7.-I preached at Sturton and Gainsborough ; and

Thursday, 8, at Scotter, where the poor people walk " in the

fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost." In

the evening I preached at Ouston ; and on Friday, 9, went on

to Epworth. How true is this trite remark,-

Nescio quá natale solum dulcedine cunctos

Ducit, et immemores non sinet esse suâ !

Thenatal soil to all how strangely sweet !

Theplace where first he breathed who can forget !

In the evening I took my usual stand in the market-place ; but

had far more than the usual congregation. Saturday, 10.

Taking a solitary walk in the church-yard, I felt the truth of,

"One generation goeth, and another cometh." See how the

earth drops its inhabitants as the tree drops its leaves !

Sun. 11.-About eight I preached at Misterton ; and about

one at Overthorpe. But good Alice Shadford was not there.

She was long " amother in Israel," a burning and shining light,

an unexceptionable instance of perfect love. After spending

near a hundred years on earth, she was some months since

transplanted to paradise.

So general an out-pouring of God's Spirit we had seldom

known, as we had at Epworth in the afternoon.

Likemighty wind, or torrent fierce,

It did opposers all o'errun.

O that they may no more harden their hearts, lest God should

swear, " They shall not enter into my rest !"

July, 1779.] 159

Mon. 12.-I preached at Crowle; and afterwards searched the

church-yard, to find the tomb of Mr. Ashbourn. We could

find nothing of it there. At length we found alarge flat stone

in the church ; but the inscription was utterly illegible, the

letters being filled up with dust. However, we made a shift to

pick it out; and thenread as follows :-

Here lies the Body

"Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised inheart and ears, ye do always resist the

HolyGhost : As your fathers did, so do ye."-Acts vii. 51.

" I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought, and invain :

Yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. Isai.

xlix.4,

But that generation, which was abandoned to allwickedness,

is gone : So are most of their children. And there is reason to

hope, that the curse entailed on them and their children is gone

also : For there is now a more lively work of God here, than in

any ofthe neighbouring places .

Tues. 13.-About noon I preached at Swinfleet, under the

shade of some tall elms. At six in the evening I preached on

the Green at Thorne, to a multitude of people. The work of

Godgoes on swiftlyhere: Many are awakened, many converted

toGod. Wednesday, 14. I preached to anelegant congregation

at Doncaster ; in the evening to a numerous one at Rotherham.

Thursday, 15. I preached in Paradise-Square, in Sheffield, to

the largest congregation I ever saw on a week-day. Friday, 16.

I preached in the evening at Derby to many genteel and many

plain people. Saturday, 17. I preached at noon in Castle.

Donnington ; but in the open air, for there wasno enduring the

House. Yet they persuaded me to preach within at Notting-

ham in the evening ; but the House was as hot as an oven.

Sunday, 18. I made shift to preach in the Room at eight ; but

at five I went to the Cross. We had a London congregation ;

and all as well behaved as if they had been in Moorfields.
One who had left us, to join the Quakers, desired to be present

at the love-feast ; in the close of which, being able to contain

himself no longer, he broke out and declared, he must join us

again. I went home with him ; and, after spending some time in

prayer, left him full of love and thankfulness.

Mon. 19. At five our House was quite filled with people,

and with the presence of God. Farewell, ye loving, lovely

followers of the Lamb ! May ye still adorn the doctrine of God

your Saviour !

About nine I preached in the market-place at Loughborough ;

about noon, at Griffy-Dam; and in the evening, at Ashby.

Tuesday, 20. I preached in Markfield church about noon ; and

in the evening at Leicester ; where we had an exceeding solemn

time, while I described the Son ofman coming in his glory.

Wed. 21. The House was filled at five, and we had another

solemn opportunity. About eight, calling at Hinckley, I was

desired to preach : As also at Forcell, ten or twelve miles far-

ther. When I came to Coventry, I found notice had been

given for my preaching in the park ; but the heavy rain pre-

vented. I sent to the Mayor, desiring the use of the Town-

Hall. He refused ; but the same day gave the use of it to a

dancing-master. I then went to the women's market. Many

soon gathered together, and listened with all seriousness. I

preached there again the next morning, Thursday, 22, and

again in the evening. Then I took coach for London. Iwas

nobly attended; behind the coach were ten convicted felons,

loudly blaspheming and rattling their chains ; by my side sat a

man with a loaded blunderbuss, and another upon the coach.

Sun. 25. Both the chapels were full enough. On Monday,

I retired to Lewisham to write. Tuesday, AUGUST 3. Our

Conference began; which continued and ended in peace and

love. Sunday, 8. I was at West-Street in the morning, and

at the new chapel in the evening, when I took a solemn leave of

the affectionate congregation. This was the last night which I

spent at the Foundery. What hath Godwrought there in one-

and-forty years !

Mon. AUGUST 9.-1 set out for Wales, with my brother

and his family. In the evening I preached at Oxford ; the

next, at Witney. Wednesday. We went on to Gloucester, where

I preached with much satisfaction to a crowded audience.

Thursday, 12. Wewent on to Monmouth, where the late storm

is blown over. I preached at six in the evening, but did not

observe one inattentive person then, any more than at five in

themorning.

Fri. 13.-As I was going down a steep pair of stairs, my

foot slipped, and I fell down several steps. Falling on the edge

of one of them, it broke the case of an Almanack, which was in

my pocket, all to pieces. The edge of another stair met my

right buckle, and snapped the steel chape ofit in two ; but I

was not hurt. So doth our good Master give his angels charge

overus ! In the evening I preached at Brecknock ; and, leav-

ingmybrother there, on Saturday, 14, went forward to Car-

marthen.

This evening, and in the morning, Sunday, 15, the new

preaching-house contained the congregation ; but in the after-

noon we had, I think, the largest congregation I ever saw in

Wales. I preached on the Gospel for the day, the story of the

Pharisee and the Publican ; and I believe many were constrained

to cry out, for the present, " God be merciful to me a sinner ! "

Mon. 16. In the evening I preached in the market-place

again, to a very serious congregation ; many ofwhom were in

tears, and felt the word ofGod to be sharper than a two-edged

sword.

Tues. 17-. Having some steep mountains to climb, I took a

pair of post-horses. About four miles from the town, one of
:

them began to kick and flounce, without any visible cause, till

he got one of his legs over the pole. Mr. Broadbentand I then
came out of the chaise and walked forward. While the drivers


were setting the chaise right, the horses ran back almost to the

town; so that we did not reach Llyngwair till between two and

three o'clock. Mr. Bowen was not returned from a journey to

Glasgow. However, I spent a very comfortable evening with

Mrs. Bowen and the rest of the family.

Wed. 18. I preached about ten in Newport church; and

then we went on to Haverfordwest. Here we had a very differ-

ent congregation, both as to number and spirit ; and we found

the society striving together for the hope of the Gospel. Thurs-

day, 19. We went over to Fracoon, one of the loveliest places

in Great Britain. The house stands in a deep valley, sur-

rounded with tall woods, and them with lofty mountains. But,

as Admiral Vaughan was never married, this ancient family will

soon come to an end. At two I preached in Newcastle church,

and in the evening at Haverford.

Fri. 20. Many of us met at noon, and spent a solemn hour

in intercession for our King and country. In the evening the

House was thoroughly filled with people of all denominations.

I believe they all felt that God was there, and that he was no

respecter of persons.

Sat. 21.- I went to Pembroke. Understanding that a large

number of American prisoners were here, in the evening I took

my stand over against the place where they were confined ; so

that they all could hear distinctly. Many of them seemed

much affected. O that God may set their souls at liberty !

Sun. 22. Mr. Rees, a neighbouring Clergyman, assisting
me, I began at St. Daniel's between nine and ten. The con-

gregation came from many miles round ; and many of them

were greatly refreshed. While we rode to Haverford after

dinner, I think it wasfull as hot as it uses to be in Georgia ; till

about five o'clock a violent shower exceedingly cooled the air ;

but it ceased in halfan hour, and we had then such a congrega-

tion as was scarce ever seen here before ; and though many of

the Gentry were there, yet a solemn awe spread over the whole

assembly.

Mon. 23. I came once more to Carmarthen. Finding the

people here (as indeed in every place) under a deep consterna-

tion through the terrible reports which flew on every side, I cried

aloud in the market-place, " Sayye unto the righteous, it shall be
well with him." God made it aword in season to them, and

many were no longer afraid.

Aug. 1779.] JOURNAL.
Tues. 24.-Setting out immediately after preaching, about

eight I preached at Kidwelly, about nine miles from Carmar-

then, to a very civil and unaffected congregation. At eleven,

though the sun was intensely hot, I stood at the end of the

church-yard in Llanelly, and took occasion from a passing-bell,
strongly to enforce those words, " It is appointed unto men once

to die. " About six I preached at Swansea to a large congrega-

tion, without feeling any weariness.

Wed. 25. I preached at five ; andabout eight in the Town-

Hall at Neath. In the afternoon I preached in the church

near Bridge-End, to a largercongregation than I ever saw there

before; and at six, in the Town-Hall at Cowbridge, much

crowded, and hot enough. The heat made it a little more

difficult to speak ; but, by the mercy of God, I was no more

tired when I had done, than when I rose in the morning.

Thur. 26. I preached at five, and again at eleven. I think

this was the happiest time ofall. The poor and the rich seemed

to be equally affected. O how are the times changed at Cow-

bridge, since the people compassed the house where I was, and

poured in stones from every quarter ! But my strength was

then according to my day; and (blessed be God ! ) so it is still.
In the evening I preached in the large hall at Mr. Matthews's

in Llandaff. Andwill the rich also hear the words of eternal

life? " With God all things are possible."

Fri. 27. I preached at Cardiff about noon, and at six in the

evening. We then went on to Newport ; and setting out early

in the morning, reached Bristol in the afternoon. Sunday, 29.

Ihada very large number of communicants. It was oneof the

hottest days I have known in England. The thermometer rose

to eighty degrees ;-as high as it usually rises in Jamaica.

Being desired to visit adyingman on Kingsdown, I had no

time but at two o'clock. The sun shone without a cloud ; so

that I had awarm journey. But I was well repaid ; for the

poor sinner found peace. At five I preached to an immense

multitude in the Square ; and God comforted many drooping
souls.

Mon. 30. I set out for the west, and in the evening preached

atTaunton, on, " Walk worthy of the Lord. " Tuesday, 31.

After preaching at Collumpton about noon, in the evening I

preached at Exeter, in a convenient Room, lately a school ; I

suppose formerly a chapel. It is both neat and solemn, and is


believed to contain four or five hundred people. Manywere

present again at five in the morning, SEPTEMBER 1, and found

it a comfortable opportunity. Here a gentleman, just come

from Plymouth, gave us a very remarkable account :-" For

two days the combined fleets of France and Spain lay at the

mouth of the harbour. They might have entered it with per-

fect ease.
The wind was fair; there was no fleet to oppose

them ; and the island, which is the grand security ofthe place,

being incapable of giving them any hinderance ; for there was

scarce any garrison, and the few men that were there had no

wadding at all, and but two rounds of powder." But had they

not cannon ? Yes, in abundance ; but only two of them were

mounted ! Why then did they not go in, destroy the dock,

and burn, or at least plunder, the town ? I believe they could

hardly tell themselves. The plain reason was, the bridle of

Godwas in their teeth ; and He had said, " Hitherto shall ye

come, and no farther."

After preaching at Tiverton, Halberton, Taunton, and South-

Brent, in the way, on Saturday, 4, I returned to Bristol.

Sun. 5.-Being willing to make the best of the fine weather,

I preached at eight on the quay, on, " The Lord sitteth above

the water-flood : And the Lord remaineth a King for ever."

At ten I began the service at Kingswood ; and in the afternoon

preached in the avenue, to a multitude of people. But we had

five or six times as many at King's Square ; and great was our

rejoicing in the Lord.

Mon. 6.-I preached on David's prayer, " Lord, turn the
counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness." And how remarkably

has he heard this prayer with regard to the French Ahithophels !

Wed. 8.-I preached at Paulton, where the people are still

all alive, and the society is still as one family; consequently it

increases both in grace and number. At six I preached at

Pensford, and spent a pleasant evening with the lovely family
at Publow. Where is there such another ? I cannot tell : I

doubt, not in Great Britain or Ireland.

Sun. 12.-I found it work enough to read Prayers, and

preach, and administer the sacrament to several hundred people.
But itwas comfortable work ; and I was no more tired at the

end than at the beginning.

Mon. 13. I preached at Bath and Bradford ; on Tuesday,

at the end of the new House, in Frome. Wednesday, 15. I

Oct. 1779.1 JOURNAL.
preached at Malcolm and Shaftesbury ; Thursday, 16, at

Shepton-Mallet. Here also, as well as at Paulton, (the two

most unlikely places in the Circuit,) a spreading flame is kindled.

I preached at Coleford in the evening. Amongthis plain, sim-

ple people, the power ofGod is always present.

Sun. 19. The rain would not suffer me to preach abroad.

OnMonday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I examined the society,

and found alarge number had been called home this year. A

few are still tottering over the grave; but death hath lost its

sting.

Thur. 23. I preached in the afternoon near the fish-ponds.

The people here had been remarkably dead for many years ;

but since that saint of God, Bathsheba Hall, with her husband,

came among them, a flame is broke out. The people flock

together in troops, and are athirst for all the promises of God.

In the evening one sat behind me in the pulpit at Bristol,

who was one of our first Masters at Kingswood. A little after

he left the school, he likewise left the society. Riches then

flowed in upon him; with which, having no relations, Mr.
"But

Spencer designed to do much good-after his death.

God said unto him, Thou fool ! " Two hours after, he died

intestate, and left all his money to be scrambled for !

Reader ! if you have not done it already, make your Will

before you sleep !

Fri. 24-. James Gerrish, jun., of Roade, near Frome, was

for several years zealous for God: But he too grew rich, and

grew lukewarm, till he was seized with a consumption. At the

approach of death he was "horribly afraid; " he was " in the

lowest darkness, and in the deep." But " he cried unto God in
:

his trouble," and was " delivered out of his distress." He was

filledwith peace and joy unspeakable, and so continued till he

went to God. His father desired I would preach his funeral ser-

mon ; which I accordingly did this day, at Roade. I concluded

the busy day with a comfortable watch-night at Kingswood. !

Mon. 27. I preached at Pill. On Wednesday I opened the 1

new chapel in Guinea-Street. Thursday, 30. I preached at

Amesbury, on Communion with God, while deep awe sat on

the face of all the people. Friday, OCTOBER 1. I took a
solemn leave of the children at Kingswood. Several of them

have been convinced of sin again and again; but they soon 1

trifled their convictions away.


Sun. 3.-I preached once more in the Square, to a multitude

of people ; and afterwards spent a solemn hour with the society,

in renewing our covenant with God.

Mon. 4.-I left Bristol, preached at the Devizes at eleven,

and in the evening at Sarum. Tuesday, 5. I preached atWhit-

church, where many, even of the rich, attended, and behaved

with much seriousness. Wednesday, 6. At eleven I preached

in Winchester, where there are four thousand five hundred

French Prisoners. I was glad to find they have plenty of

wholesome food ; and are treated, in all respects, with great

humanity.

In the evening I preached at Portsmouth-Common. Thurs

day, 7. I took a view of the Camp adjoining to the town, and

wondered to find it as clean andneat as a gentleman's garden.

But there was no Chaplain. The English soldiers of this age

have nothing to do with God !

Fri. 8.-We took chaise, as usual, at two, and about eleven

came to Cobham. Having a little leisure, I thought I could

not employ it better thanintaking awalk through the gardens.

They are said to take up four hundred acres, and are admirably

well laid out. They far exceed the celebrated gardens at Stow ;

and that in several respects :-1. In situation ; lying onamuch

higher hill, and having a finer prospect from the house. 2. In

having a natural river, clear as crystal, running beneath and

through them. 3. In the buildings therein ; which are fewer

indeed, but far more elegant ; yea, and far better kept, being

nicely clean, which is sadly wanting at Stow. And, lastly, In

the rock-work ; to which nothing of the kind at Stow is to be

compared.

This night I lodged in the new house at London. How

manymore nights have I to spend there ?

Mon. 11.-I began my little tour into Northamptonshire.

In the evening I preached at Stony-Stratford ; the next day at

Honslip, and at Morton, a little mile from Buckingham. Wed-

nesday, 13. Having so lately seen Stourhead and Cobham

gardens, I was now desired to take a view of the much more

celebrated gardens at Stow. The first thing I observed was

the beautiful water which runs through the gardens, to the

front of the house. The tufts of trees, placed on each side of

this, are wonderfully pleasant ; and so are many of the walks

and glades through the woods, which are disposed with a fine

Oct. 1779.] 169

variety. The large pieces of water interspersed give a fresh

beauty to the whole. Yet there are several things which must

give disgust to any person ofcommon sense :-1. The buildings,

called Temples, are most miserable, many of them both within

andwithout. Sir John Vanbrugh's is an ugly, clumsy lump,

hardly fit for a gentleman's stable. 2. The temples of Venus

and Bacchus, though large, havenothing elegant in the struc-

ture; and the paintings inthe former, representing a lewd story,

are neither well designed nor executed. Those in the latter are

quite faded, and most of the inscriptions vanished away. 3. The

statues are full as coarse as the paintings ; particularly thoseof

Apollo and the Muses, whom a person, not otherwise informed,

might take to be nine cook-maids. 4. Most of the water in the

ponds is dirty, and thick as puddle. 5. It is childish affectation

to call things here by Greek or Latin names, as Styx, and the

Elysian Fields. 6. It was ominous for My Lord to entertain

himself and his noble company in a grotto built on the bank of

Styx; that is, on the brink of hell. 7. The river on which it

stands is a black, filthy puddle, exactly resembling a common

sewer. 8. One of the stateliest monuments is taken down, the

Egyptian Pyramid; and no wonder, considering the two inscrip-

tions, which are still legible ; the one,-

Linquenda tellus , et domus, et placens

Uxor : Neque harum, quas colis, arborum

Tepræter invisas cupressos,

Ulla brevem dominum sequetur !

The other,-

Lusisti satis, edisti satis, atque bibisti :

Tempus abire tibi est : Ne potum largius æquo

Rideat, et pulset lasciva decentius ætas."

Upon the whole, I cannot but prefer Cobhamgardens to those

at Stow: For, 1. The river at Cobham shames all the ponds at

* The following is Boscawen's translation of these verses from Horace :-

Thy lands, thy dome, thy pleasing wife,

These must thou quit ; 'tis nature's doom :

No tree, whose culture charms thy life,

Save the sad cypress, waits thy tomb.

Ofmeat anddrink, ofpleasure and ofplay,

You've had your fill : 'Tis time you steal away,

Lest you be jostled offby that brisk race

W'hom sports become, and wanton revels grace.-EDIT.


Stow. 2. There is nothing at Stow comparable to the walk

near the wheel which runs up the side of a steep hill, quite

grotesque and wild. 3. Nothing in Stow gardens is to be com-

pared to the large temple, the pavilion, the antique temple, the

grotto, or the building at the head of the garden ; nor to the

neatness which runs through the whole.

But there is nothing even at Cobham to be compared, 1. To

the beautiful cross at the entrance of Stourhead gardens. 2.

To the vast body ofwater. 3. The rock-work grotto. 4. The

temple of the sun. 5. The hermitage. Here too every thing

is nicely clean, as well as in full preservation. Add to this, that

all the gardens hang on the sides of a semicircular mountain.

And there is nothing either at Cobham or Stow which can

balance the advantage of such a situation.

On this and the two following evenings I preached at Whit-

tlebury, Towcester, and Northampton. On Saturday I returned
to London.

Mon. 18.-I set out for Sussex ; and after visiting the societies

there, returned to London on Saturday, 23. I was in hopes,

by bringing her with me, to save the life of Miss A., of Ewhurst,

far gone in a consumption. But shewas too far gone: So that

though that journey helped her for awhile, yet she quickly

relapsed, and soon after died in peace.

Sun. 24. I preached a charity sermon in Shadwell church.

I spoke with all possible plainness. And surely some, out of an

immense multitude, will receive the truth, and bring forth fruit

withpatience.

Mon. 25.-I set out for Norwich. Tuesday, 26. I went on

toYarmouth; on Wednesday to Lowestoft; on Friday to Loddon.

Saturday, 30. I came to Norwich again.

Mon. NOVEMBER 1.-I crossed over to Lynn, and settled the

little affairs there ; on Wednesday, 3, went on to Colchester ;

and on Friday, to London. Saturday, 6. I began examining

the society, which usually employs me eleven or twelve days.

Sat. 13.-I had the pleasure of an hour's conversation with

Mr. G. , one of the members of the first Congress in America.

He unfolded a strange tale indeed ! How has poor K. G. been

betrayed on every side ! But this is our comfort : There is One

higher than they. And He will command all things to work

together for good.

The following week I examined the rest of our society ; but

Nov. 1779.1 171

did not find such an increase as I expected. Nay, there was a

considerable decrease,plainly owing to a senseless jealousy that

had crept in between our Preachers ; which had grieved the Holy

Spirit ofGod, and greatly hindered his work.

Mon. 22. My brother and I set out for Bath, on a very

extraordinary occasion. Some time since Mr. Smyth, a Cler-

gyman, whose labours God had greatly blessed in the north of

Ireland, brought his wife over to Bath, who had been for some

time in a declining state of health. I desired him to preach

every Sunday evening in our chapel, while he remained there.

But as soon as I was gone, Mr. M'Nab, one of our Preachers,

vehemently opposed that ; affirming it was the common cause

of all the Lay Preachers ; that they were appointed by the

Conference, not by me, and would not suffer the Clergy to ride

over their heads ; Mr. Smyth in particular, of whom he said

all manner of evil. Others warmly defended him. Hence

the society was torn in pieces, and thrown into the utmost con-

fusion.

Tues. 23. I read to the society a paper which I wrote near

twenty years ago on alike occasion. Herein I observed, that

" the rules of our Preachers were fixed by me, before any Con-

ference existed," particularly the twelfth : "Above all, you are

to preach when and where I appoint." By obstinately opposing

which rule, Mr. M'Nab has made all this uproar. In the morn-

ing, at a meeting of the Preachers, I informed Mr. M'Nab,

that, as he did not agree to our fundamental rule, I could not

receive him as one of our Preachers, till he was of another mind.

Wed. 24. I read the same paper to the society at Bristol, as

I found the flame had spread thither also. A few at Bath

separated from us on this account : But the restwere thoroughly

satisfied. So on Friday, 26, I took coach again, and on Satur-

day reached London.

In this journey I read Dr. Warner's History of Ireland, from

its first settlement to the English Conquest ; and, after calm

deliberation, I make no scruple to pronounce it a mere senseless

romance. I do not believe one leaf of it is true, from the begin-

ning to the end. I totally reject the authorities on which he

builds : I will not take Flagherty's or Keating's word for a far-

thing. I doubt not, Ireland was, before the Christian era, full

as barbarous as Scotland or England. Indeed it appears from

their own accounts, that the Irish in general were continually

[Dec. 1779.

plundering and murdering each other from the earliest ages to

that period: And so they were ever since, by the account of

Dr. Warner himself, till they were restrained by the English.

How then were they converted by St. Patrick ? Cousin-german

to St. George! To what religion? Not to Christianity. Neither

in his age, nor the following, had they the least savour of Chris-

tianity, either in their lives or their tempers.

Sun. 28.-I preached acharity sermon at St. Peter's, Corn-

hill. Monday, 29. I visited the societies in Kent, and returned

on Saturday.

Sunday, DECEMBER 5.-In applying those words, " What

could I have done for my vineyard which I have not done?" I

found such an uncommon pouring out of the convincing Spirit,

as we have not known for many years. In the evening the

same Spirit enabled me strongly to exhort a numerous congre-

gation, to " come boldly to the throne ofgrace ; " and to " make

all their requests known unto God with thanksgiving."

Tues. 7.-I preached in Redriffchapel, a cold, uncomfortable

place, to a handful ofpeople, who appeared to be just as much

affected as the benches they sat upon.

Thur. 9. In speaking on those words, " Set thy house in

order; for thou shalt die and not live," I took occasion to ex-

hort all who had notdone it already, to settle their temporal

affairs without delay. Letnot any man who reads these words

put it off a day longer !

Mon. 13. I retired to Lewisham, and settled the society-

book. Fifty-seven members of the society have died this year ;

and none of them " as a fool dieth." Anhundred and seventy

have left the society. Such are the fruits of senseless pre-

judice.

Sat. 25.-We began the service at the new chapel, as usual,

at four in the morning. Afterwards I read Prayers and preached

and administered the Lord's Supper at West-Street. In the

afternoon I preached at the new chapel again; then met the

society ; and afterwards,the married men and women. But after

this I was no more tired than when I rose in the morning.

Wed. 29. Mr. Hatton, lately come from America, gave us

an account of his strange deliverance. He was Collector of the

Customs for the easternports of Maryland, and zealous for King

George. Therefore the rebels resolved to dispatch him ; and a

party was sent for that purpose under one Simpson, who owed

Dec. 1779.1 JOURNAL .
him five hundred pounds. But first he sent him the following
note:-

" We are resolved to have you dead or alive. So we advise

you to give yourselfup, that you may give us no more trouble.
" I am, Sir,

" Your obedient servant."

Mr. Hatton not complying with this civil advice, a party of

rifle-menwere sent to take him. He was just going out, when

a child told him they were at hand, and had only time to run

and get into a hollow which was under the house. The maid

clapped to the trap-door, and covered it over with flax. They

searched the house from top to bottom,opened all the closets,

turned up the beds, and, finding nothing, went away. He was

scarce come out, when another party beset the house, and came

so quick, that he had but just time to get in again ; and the

maid, not having flax enough at hand, covered the door with foul

linen. When these also had wearied themselves with searching,

and went away, he put on his boots and great coat, took a gun

and a rug, (it being asharp frost,) and crept into a little marsh

near the house. Athird party came quickly, swearing he must

be about the house, and they would have him if he was alive.

Hearing this he stole away with full speed, and lay down near

the sea-shore, between two hillocks, covering himselfwith seaweeds. They came so near that he heard one ofthem swear, " If I

find him, Iwill hang him on the nexttree." Another answered,

"Iwill not stay for that : I willshoot him the moment I see him."

After some time, finding theywere gone, he lifted up his !

head, and heard a shrill whistle from aman fifty or sixty yards

off. He soon knew him to be a deserter from the rebel army.

He asked Mr. H. what he designed to do ; who answered,

" Go in my boat to the English ships, which are four or five

and twenty miles off." But the rebels had found and burnt the

boat. So, knowing their life was gone if they stayed till the 1

morning, they got into a small canoe, (though liable to overset 1

with a puff ofwind,) and set off from shore. Having rowedtwo

or three miles, they stopped at a little island, and made a fire,

being almost perishedwith cold. But they werequickly alarmed,

byaboat rowing toward the shore. Mr. Hatton, standing up,

said, " We have a musket and a fusee. If you load one, as

fast as I discharge the other, I will give a good account of them

174 [Feb. 1780.

all. " He then stepped to the shore, and bade the rowers stop,

and tell him who they were ; declaring he would fire among

them, if any man struck another stroke. Upon their answering,

he found they were friends, being six more deserters from the

rebel army. So they gladly came on shore, and brought pro-

visions with them to those who before had neither meat nor

drink. After refreshing themselves, they all went into the

boat, and cheerfully rowed to the English ships.

Fri. 31. We concluded the year at West-Street, with a

solemn watch-night. Most of the congregation stayed till the

beginning of the year, and cheerfully sang together,-

Glory to God, and thanks, and praise,

Who kindly lengthens out our days,&c.

Sun. JANUARY 2, 1780.-We had the largest congregation

at the renewal of our covenant with God, which ever met upon

the occasion ; and we were thoroughly convinced, that God

was not departed from us. He never will, unless we firstdepart

from him.

Tues. 18.-Receiving more and more accounts of the increase

of Popery, I believed it my duty to write a letter concerning it,

which was afterwards inserted in the public papers. Manywere

grievously offended; but I cannot help it : I must follow my

own conscience.

Sat. 22.-I spent an hour or two very agreeably in Sir Ashton
Lever's museum . It does not equal the British Museum in size ;

nor is it constructed on so large a plan ; as it contains nomanu-

scripts, no books, no antiquities, nor any remarkable works of

art. But I believe, for natural curiosities, it is not excelled by

any museum in Europe ; and all the beasts, birds, reptiles, and

insects, are admirably well ranged and preserved : So thatifyou

saw many ofthem elsewhere, you would imagine they were alive !

The hippopotamus, in particular, looks as fierce as if he was just

coming out of the river ; and the old lion appears as formidable

now as when he was stalking in the Tower.

Sun. 28. In the evening I retired to Lewisham, to prepare

matter (who would believe it ? ) fora Monthly Magazine. Fri-

day, FEBRUARY 4, being the National Fast, I preached first at

the new chapel, and then at St. Peter's, Cornhill. What a

difference in the congregation ! Yet out of these stones God

can raise up children to Abraham.

March, 1780.] 175

Thur. 17.-I preached at Dorking, and could not but reflect,

in this room I lodged the first time I saw poor Mr. Ireland :

Emphatically poor ! Poor beyond expression ;-though he left

fourscore thousand pounds behind him !

Thur. 24-. I met the building Committee ; according to

whose representation, our income at last nearly answers our

expenses. If so, it will clear itselfin a few years.

Mon. 28.-Taking the post-coach, I reached Newbury time

enough to preach to a crowded audience. Tuesday, 29, and

Wednesday, I preached at Bath, where brotherly love is now
restored. Thursday, MARCH 2. I went into Bristol, and

enjoyed much peace among a quiet, loving people. On Mon-

day, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I examined the society, and

had reason to rejoice over them.

Mon. 13.-I set out for the north, andin the evening preached

at Stroud, where is a considerable increase of the work of God.

Tuesday, 14. I preached in the church at Pitchcomb ; but it

would by no means contain the congregation. In the evening

I preached at Tewkesbury,and onWednesday, 15, atWorcester,

to a very serious congregation. Thursday, 16. About noon I

began preaching at Bewdley, in an open space at the head of

the town. The wind was high and exceeding sharp ; but no

one seemed to regard it. Inthe middle of the sermon came a

manbeating a drum ; but a gentleman of the town soon silenced

him. Friday, 17. About noon I preached at Bengeworth

church, to the largest congregation I ever saw there ; and in

Pebworth church about six, to a larger congregation than I had

seen there before. I found uncommon liberty in applying those

words, (perhaps a last warning to the great man of the parish,

Mr. Martin, ) " Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with

thy might."

Sat. 18.-Iwenton toBirmingham ; and,Sunday,19,preached

at eight in the morning, and at half-past one in the afternoon ;

in the evening, at Wednesbury. Monday, 20. I reached Con-

gleton, and preached to a lively congregation on our Lord's

words : " Lazarus, come forth ! " Tuesday, 21. I preached in

the new chapel at Macclesfield ; Thursday, 23, at Stockport
and Manchester.

On Good-Friday I preached, at seven, in Manchester ; about

one, in Oldham ; and in Manchester, at six. Saturday, 25. I

went on to Bolton, where the work ofGod is continually increas

[April, 1780.

ing. On Easter-Day I set out for Warrington. Mr. Harmer

read Prayers both morning and afternoon. We had a large

congregation in the morning ; as many as the church could well

contain in the afternoon ; and more than it could contain in the

evening. At last there is reason to hope, that God will have a

steady people even in this wilderness.

The next evening, when afew of the societywere met together,

the power ofGod came mightily upon them. Some fell to the

ground; some cried aloud for mercy ; some rejoiced with joy

unspeakable. Two or three found aclear sense of the love of

God; onegay youngwoman, in particular, who was latelymuch

prejudiced against this way,but is nowfilled withjoyunspeakable.

Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I spent at Liverpool,

being undetermined whether to proceed or not. At length I

yielded to the advice ofmy friends, and deferred my journey to

Ireland. So I preached at Northwich about noon, and in the

evening at Alpraham, in the midst of all the old Methodists.

Wehad a very different congregation at Nantwich in the even-

ing. But as many as could get into the House, or near the door,

behaved very seriously.

Sat. APRIL 1.-I returned to Chester, and found many alive

to God, but scarce one that retained his pure love. Sunday, 2.

I reached Warrington about ten. The chapel was well filled

with serious hearers ; and I believe God confirmed the word

of his grace. Hastening back to Chester, I found a numerous

congregation waiting, and immediately began, "This is the

victory that overcometh the world, even our faith."

Mon. 3.-I returned to Manchester, and, Tuesday,4, strongly

applied, " What could I have done more to my vineyard, that
Ihave not done ? " At present there are many here that "bring

forth good grapes : But many swiftly increase in goods ; and I

fear very few sufficiently watch and pray that they may not

set their hearts upon them.

Wed. 5. I preached at Bolton ; Thursday, 6, about noon,

at Bury ; and at Rochdale in the evening. Friday, 7. I went

to Delph, a little village upon the mountains, where a remarkable

work of God is just broke out. Iwasjust set down, when the

Minister sent me word, I was welcome to preach in his church.

On hearing this, many people walked thither immediately, near

amile from the town ; but in ten minutes he sent me word, his

mind was changed. We knew not then what to do, till the

April, 1780.1 JOURNAL.
Trustees of the Independent meeting offered us the use of their

House. It was quickly filled, and truly God bore witness to his

word. In the evening I preached at Huddersfield. Saturday,

8. About noon I opened the new House at Mirfield, and in the

evening preached at Daw-Green. Sunday, 9. I went on to

Birstal, and took my stand at the front of the House, though the

north-east wind whistled round about. Ipreached again between

four and five, pointing them to the Great Shepherd and Bishop

of their souls.

Mon. 10. I preached in the prison at Whitelee ; in the

evening at Morley ; and on Tuesday morning at Cross-Hall.

The family here are much grown in grace since I saw them

last. Most of them now enjoy the great salvation, and walk
worthy of their vocation ; and all around them " see their good

works, and glorify their Father which is in heaven."

In the evening I preached to a very genteel congregation at

Wakefield. Wednesday, 12. After preaching at Rothwell, I

inquiredwhat was become of that lovely class of little girls, most

of them believers, whom I met here a few years since. I found

those of them that hadpious parents remain to this day : But

all ofthem whose parents did not fear God are gone back into
theworld.

In the evening I preached in the new House at Leeds.

Thursday, 13. I opened the new House at Hunslet. On Fri-

day, I preached at Woodhouse. Sunday, 16. Our House at

Leeds was full at eight; yet every one heard distinctly. Inthe

afternoon I preached at the old church ; but a considerable part

ofthe people could not hear. Indeed the church is remarkably

ill constructed. Had it been built with common sense, all that

were in it, and even more, might have heard every word.

Mon. 17. I left Leeds in one of the roughest mornings I
haveever seen. We had rain, hail, snow, and wind, in abun-

dance. About nine I preached at Bramley ; between one and

two at Pudsey. Afterwards I walked to Fulneck, the German

settlement. Mr. Moore showed us the house, chapel, hall,

lodging-rooms, the apartments of the widows, the single men,
and single women. He showed us likewise the workshops of

various kinds, with the shops for grocery, drapery, mercery,

hardware, &c., withwhich, aswellaswith bread from their bake-

house, they furnish the adjacent country. I see not what but

the mighty power of God can hinder them from acquiring mil-

[April,1780.

lions ; as they, 1. Buy all materials with readymoney at the

best hand : 2. Have above a hundred young men, above fifty

young women, many widows, and above a hundred married per-

sons ; all of whom are employed from morning to night, without

any intermission, in various kinds ofmanufactures, not for jour-

neymen's wages, but for no wages at all, save a little very plain

food and raiment : As they have, 3. Aquick sale for all their

goods, and sell them all for ready money. But can they lay

up treasure on earth, and at the same time lay up treasure

inheaven ?

In the evening I preached at Bradford, where I was well

pleased to find many, both men andwomen, who had never suf-

fered any decay since they were perfected in love. Wednes-

day, 19. I went to Otley ; but Mr. Ritchie was dead beforel

came. But he had first witnessed a good confession. One
"י

telling him, " You will be better soon ; he replied, " I cannot

be better ; for I have God inmy heart. I am happy, happy,

happy in his love."

Mr. Wilson, the Vicar, after a little hesitation, consented that

I should preach his funeral sermon : This I did to-day. The

text he had chosen was, " To you that believe, he is precious."

Perhaps such a congregation had hardly been in Otley church

before. Surely the right hand of the Lord bringeth mighty

things to pass !

Sun. 23. Mr. Richardson being unwilling that I should

preach anymore in Haworth church, Providence opened ano-

ther : I preached in Bingley church,both morning and after-

noon. This is considerably larger than the other. It rained

hard in the morning : This hindered many ; so that those who did

come, got in pretty well in the forenoon ; but in the afternoon

very many were obliged to go away.

After preaching at several other places onMonday and Tues-

day, Wednesday, 26, I preached in Heptonstall church, well

filled with serious hearers. In the evening I preached near
Todmorden, in the heart of the mountains. One would won-

der where all the people came from. Thursday, 27. I preached

in Todmorden church, with great enlargement of heart. In
the afternoon we went on to Blackburn. It seemed, the whole

townwas moved. But the question was,where to put the con

gregation. We could not stand abroad because of the sun : So

as many as could, squeezed into the preaching-house. All the

May, 1780.] 179

chief men of the town were there. It seems as if the last will

befirst.

Sun. 30. We had alovely congregation at Colne ; but a

much larger at one and at five. Many of them came ten or

twelve miles; but I believe not invain: God gavethem agood

reward for their labour.

Mon. MAY 1.-We reached Grassington about ten. The

multitude of people constrained me to preach abroad. It was

fair all the time I was preaching; but afterwards rained much.

At Pateley-Bridge, the Vicar offered me the use of his church.

Though it was more than twice as large as our preaching-house,

it was not near large enough to contain thecongregation. How

vast is the increase of the work of God ! Particularly in the

most rugged and uncultivated places ! How does he" send

the springs " ofgrace also " into the valleys, that run among the
hills".

Tues. 2.-We came to Ripon, and observed a remarkable

turn of Providence : The great hinderance of the work of God

in this place has suddenly disappeared ; and the poor people,

beingdelivered from their fear, gladly flock together to hear His

word. The new preaching-house was quickly more than filled.

Surely some of them will not be forgetful hearers !

In the afternoonwe travelled through a delightful country ;

themore so when contrasted with the horrid mountains. The

immense ruins ofGarvaix Abbey show what a stately pile it was

once. Though we were at a lone house, a numerous congrega-

tion assembled in the evening ; on whom I enforced, " This is

life eternal, to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou hast sent."

Wed. 3-. Judging it impracticable to pass the mountains in

a carriage, I sent my chaise round, and took horse. At twelve

I preached at Swaledale, to a loving people, increasing both in

grace and number. Thence we crossed over another range of

dreary mountains, and in the evening reached Barnard-Castle.

Not being yet inured to riding, I now felt something like weari-

ness. But I forgot it in the lively congregation, and in the

morning it was gone.

Thur. 4.-About eight I preached to a serious congregation

at Cuthbedson ; and about one at Newbiggin, in Teesdale. We

doubtedhow we should get over the next mountain, the famous

Pikelow, after so long and heavy rains ; but I scarce ever remem-

180 [May, 1780.

ber us getting over it so well. We found the people in Wear-

dale, as usual, some of the liveliest in the kingdom ; knowing

nothing, and desiring to know nothing, save Jesus Christ and

him crucified.

Fri. 5.-Noticehaving been given, without my knowledge, of

my preaching at Ninthead, all the lead-miners that could, got

together ; and I declared to them, " All things are ready." After

riding over another enormous mountain, I preached at Gam-

blesby (as I did about thirty years ago) to a large congregation

of rich and poor. The chief man of the town was formerly a

Local Preacher, but now keeps his carriage. Has he increased

in holiness as well as in wealth ? If not, he has made a poor

exchange.

In the evening, a large upper room, designed for an assembly,

was procured for me at Penrith ; but several of the poor people

were struck with apanic, for fear the room should fall. Finding

there was no remedy, I went down into the court below, and

preached in great peace to a multitude of well-behaved people.

The rain was suspended while I preached, but afterwards

returned, and continued most of the night. Saturday, 6. Iwent

on to Whitehaven ; and, in the evening, exhorted all who knew

in whom they had believed, to " walk worthy of the Lord in

allwell pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increas-

ing in the knowledge of God."

Sun. 8.-I preached at eight, at two, and at five ; but could

not preach abroad because of the rain. We were in hopes of

sailing for the Isle of Man the next morning, as a little vessel

was waiting for us ; but the wind then turned full against us.

By this means I had an opportunity given me of meeting the

select society. Iwas pleased to find, that none of them have

lost the pure love of God, since they received it first. I was

particularly pleased with apoorNegro. She seemed to be fuller

of love than any of the rest. Andnot only her voice had an

unusual sweetness, but her words were chosen and uttered with

a peculiar propriety. I never heard, either in England or

America, such a Negro speaker (man or woman) before.

Tues. 9. Finding no hopesof sailing, after preaching morn-

ing and evening, I went to Cockermouth. Wednesday, 10. At

eight I preached in the Town-Hall ; but to the poor only : The

rich could not rise so soon. In the evening I preached in the
Town-Hall at Carlisle ; and from the number and seriousness
May, 1780.1 JOURNAL.

of the hearers, I conceived a little hope, that even here some

good willbe done.

Thur. 11. I reached Newcastle ; and on Friday, 12, went

to Sunderland. Many of our friends prosper in the world. I

wish their souls may prosper also. Sunday, 14. I preached at

Gateshead-Fell at two o'clock, andhoped to preach at the Garth-

Heads at five ; but the rain drove us into the House. But all

was well ; for many found God was there.

Mon. 15-. I set out for Scotland ; and Tuesday, 16, came

to Berwick-upon-Tweed. Such a congregation I have not seen

there for many years. Perhaps the seed which has so long

seemed to be sown in vain, may at length produce agoodharvest.

Wed. 17.-I went on to Dunbar. Ihave seldom seen such

acongregation here before. Indeed some of them seemed at

first disposed to mirth ; but they were soon as serious as death.

Andtruly the power of the Lord was present to heal those that

werewilling to come to the throne of grace. Thursday, 18. I

read, with great expectation, Dr. Watts's " Essay on Liberty ;"

but I wasmuch disappointed. It is abstruse and metaphysical.

Surely he wrote it either when he was very young or very old.

Inthe evening I endeavoured to preach to the hearts of a large

congregation at Edinburgh. We have cast much " bread upon

the waters " here. Shall we not " find it again," at least " after

manydays ?"

Fri. 19. I preached at Joppa, a settlement of colliers, three

miles from Edinburgh . Some months ago, as some of them

were cursing and swearing, one ofour Local Preachers going by,

reprovedthem. One of them followed after him, and begged

he would give them a sermon. He did so several times.

Afterwards the Travelling Preachers went, and a few quickly

agreed to meet together. Some of these now know in whom

they have believed, and walk worthy of their profession.

Sat. 20.-I took one more walk through Holyrood House,

the mansion of ancient Kings. Buthow melancholy an appear-

ance does it make now ! The stately rooms are dirty as stables ;

the colours ofthe tapestry are quite faded ; several of the pic-

tures are cut and defaced. The roof of the royal chapel is

fallen in ; and the bones of James the Fifth, and the once beau-

tiful Lord Darnley, are scattered about like those of sheep or
oxen.

Such is human greatness ! Is not " a living dog better
than adead lion ? "

[May, 1780.

Sun. 21. The rain hindered me from preaching at noon

upon the Castle-Hill. In the evening the House was well filled,

and I was enabled to speak strong words. But I am not a

Preacher for the people of Edinburgh. Hugh Saunderson and

Michael Fenwick are more to their taste.

Tues. 23. A gentlemantook me to see Roslyn Castle, eight

miles from Edinburgh. It is now all in ruins, only a small

dwelling-house is built on one part ofit. The situation of it is

exceeding fine, on the side of a steep mountain, hanging over a

river, from which another mountain rises, equally steep, and

clothed with wood. At a little distance is the chapel, which is

in perfect preservation, both within and without. I should never

have thought it had belonged to any one less than a sovereign

Prince ! the inside being far more elegantly wrought with

variety of Scripture histories in stone-work, than I believe can

be found again in Scotland ; perhaps not in all England.

Hence we went to Dunbar. Wednesday, 24. In the after-

noon I went through the lovely garden of agentleman in the

town, who has laid out walks hanging over the sea, and winding

among the rocks. One of them leads to the Castle, wherein

that poor injured woman, Mary Queen of Scots, was confined.

But time has well nigh devoured it : Only a few ruinous walls

are now standing.

Thur. 25. We went on to Berwick. Friday, 26. In return-

ing to Alnwick we spent an hour at H., an ancient monastery.

Part of it the Duke of Northumberland has repaired, furnished

it in a plainmanner, and surrounded it with a little garden.

An old inscription bears date 1404,when partof it was built by

the fourth Earl of Northumberland. How many generations

have had their day since that time, andthen passed away like a

dream ! Wehad ahappy season at Alnwick with a large and

deeply attentive congregation.

Sat. 27. At noon I preached in the Town-Hall at Morpeth ;

and God applied his word to many hearts. In the afternoon I

preached to the loving colliers at Placey, and then went on to
Newcastle.

Sun. 28.-Between eight and nine in the morning I preached

at Gateshead-Fell, on Fellowship withGod; a subject which not

a few of them understand by heart-felt experience. The con-

gregation at Sheephill about noon was far too large for any

House to contain. Such was the power of God that I almost

June, 1780.1 183

wondered any couldhelp believing. At five I preached at the

Garth-Heads, to a still more numerous congregation ; but there

were few among them who remembered my first preaching near

that place in the Keelman's Hospital. For what reason the

wise managers of that place forbade my preaching there any

more, I am yet still to learn.

Wed. 31.-Taking my leave of this affectionate people, I

went to Mr. Parker's, at Shincliff, near Durham. The congre-

gation being far too large to get into the House, I stood near

his door. It seemed as if the whole village were ready to receive

the truth in the love thereof. Perhaps their earnestness may

provoke the people ofDurham to jealousy.

In the afternoon we took a view of the Castle at Durham, the

residence of the Bishop. The situation is wonderfully fine,

surrounded by the river, and commanding all the country ; and

many of the apartments are large and stately ; but the furniture

is mean beyond imagination ! I know not where I have seen

such in a gentleman's house, or aman of five hundred a year,

except that ofthe Lord-Lieutenant in Dublin. In the largest

chambers, the tapesty is quite faded; beside that, it is coarse

and ill-judged. Take but one instance :-In Jacob's vision you

see, on the one side, alittle paltry ladder, and an angel climbing

it, in the attitude of a chimney-sweeper; and on the other side

Jacob staring at him, from under a large silver-laced hat !

Thur. JUNE 1.-About ten I preached at Aycliff, a large

village, twelve miles from Durham; all the inhabitants whereof

seem now as full ofgood-will, as they were once of prejudice.

I preached at Darlington in the evening. It is good to be

here ; the liveliness of the people animates all that come near

them. On Friday evening we had a love-feast, at which many

weregreatly comforted, by hearing such artless, simple accounts

ofthe mighty works ofGod.

Sat. 3.-At noon I preached to a large congregation at

Northallerton. The sun shone full in my face when I began ;

but itwas soon overcast ; and I believe this day, ifnever before,

God gave ageneral call to this careless people. In the evening

I preached at Thirsk. When I was here last, a few young

womenbehaved foolishly ; but all were deeply serious now, and

seemed to feel that God was there.

Sun. 4. The Service began about ten at Staveley, near

Boroughbridge. Mr. Hartley, the Rector, read Prayers. But


the church would scarce contain half the congregation ; so that

Iwas obliged to stand upon a tombstone, both morning and

afternoon. In the evening I preached at Boroughbridge, to a

numerous congregation ; and all were attentive, except a few

soldiers, who seemed to understand nothing of the matter.

Mon. 5.-About noon I preached at Tockwith, and then

went on to York. I was surprised to find ageneral faintness

here ; one proof ofwhich was,that the morning preachingwas

given up. Tuesday, 6, was the Quarterly Meeting, the most

numerous I ever saw. At two was the love-feast, at which

several instances ofthe mighty power ofGod were repeated ; by

which it appears that his work is still increasing in several parts

of the Circuit.

An arch news-writer published aparagraph to-day, probably

designed for wit, concerning the large pension which the famous

Wesley received for defending the King. This so increased the

congregation in the evening, that scores were obliged to go away.

AndGod applied that wordto many hearts, " I will not destroy

the city for ten's sake !"

Wed. 7.-I preached at Pocklington and Swinfleet. Thurs-

day, 8. I preached on theGreen at Thorne, to a listening multi-

tude. Only two or three were much diverted at the thought

ofseeing the dead,small andgreat, standing before God !

Fri. 9.-About noon Ipreached at Crowle ; and in the even-

ing at Epworth, on, " I willnot let thee go, except thou bless

me." Saturday, 10. In the evening I preached atOwstone ; and

passing the Trent early in the morning, on Sunday, 11, preached

at Kirton, about eight, to a very large and very serious congre-

gation. Only before me stood one,something like a gentleman,

with his hat on even at prayer. I could scarce help telling him

a story :-In Jamaica, aNegro passing by the Governor, pulled

off his hat ; so did the Governor ; at which one expressing his

surprise, he said, " Sir, I should be ashamed if a Negro had

more good manners than the Governor ofJamaica."

About two I preached atGainsborough,andagainat five, to

a very numerous congregation. We had then a love-feast, and

one of the most lively which I have known for many years.

Many spoke, and with great fervour, as well as simplicity ; so
that most who heard blessed God for the consolation.

Mon. 12.-About eleven I preached at Newton-upon-Trent,

to a large and very genteel congregation. Thence we went to

June, 1780.1

Newark : But our friends were divided as to the place where I

should preach. At length they found a convenient place,

covered on three sides, and on the fourth open to the street. It

contained two or three thousand people well, who appeared to

hear as for life. Onlyone big man, exceeding drunk, was very

noisy and turbulent, till his wife (fortissima Tyndaridarum ! *)

seized him by the collar,gave him two or three hearty boxes on

the ear, and dragged him away like a calf. But, at length, he

got out of her hands, crept in among the people, and stood as

quiet as alamb.

Tues. 13. I accepted of an invitation from agentleman at

Lincoln, inwhich I had not set my foot for upwards of fifty

years. At six in the evening I preached in the Castle-yard, to

a large and attentive. congregation. They were all as quiet as

if I had been at Bristol. WillGodhave apeople here also ?

Wed. 14. I preached again at ten in the morning. In the

middle of the sermon a violent storm began ; on which Mr.

Wood, the keeper, opened the door of the Court-House, which

contained the whole of the congregation. I have great hope

some of these will have their fruit unto holiness, and in the end

everlasting life.

Heavy raindrove us into the House at Horncastle in the

evening. Thursday, 15. I preached atRaithby. Two of Mr.

Brackenbury's brothers spent the evening with us. Friday, 16.

Wewent on to Boston, the largest town in the county, except

Lincoln. From the top of the steeple (which I suppose is by

far the highest tower in the kingdom) we hada view not only

of all the town, but ofall the adjacent country. Formerly this

townwas in the fens ; but the fens are vanished away : Great

part of them is turned into pasture, and part into arable land. :

At six the House contained the congregation, all of whom

behaved in the most decent manner. How different from those

wild beasts with whom Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Matherhad todo !

Saturday, 17. The House was pretty well filled in the morn-

ing, andmany were much affected. Agentleman who was there

invited me to dinner, and offered me the use of his paddock ;

but the wind was so exceeding high, that I could not preach

abroad, as I did when I was here before, just six-and-twenty

years ago ; and Mr. Thompson, a friendly Anabaptist, offering

•The bravest Amazonian of her race. EDIT .

[June, 1780.

me the use ofhis large meeting-house, I willingly accepted the

offer. I preached to most of the chief persons in the town, on

1 Cor. xiii. 1-3 ; and many of them seemed utterly amazed.

" Open their eyes, O Lord, that they sleep not in death ! "

Sun. 18.-I gave them a parting discourse at seven ; and

after adding a few members to the little society, and exhorting

them to cleave close to each other, I left them with acomfort-

able hope that they wouldnot be scattered any more.

About noon I preached in the market-place at Wainfleet,

once a large sea-port town, till the harbour was blocked upby

sand. The congregation behaved exceeding well. We now

passed into Marshland, a fruitful and pleasant part of the

county. Such is Langham-Row in particular, the abode of

honest George Robinson and his fourteen children. Although

it was a lone house, yet such a multitude of people flocked

together, that I was obliged to preach abroad. It blew a storm,

and we had several showers of rain; but no one went away. I

do not wonder that this society is the largest, as well as the

liveliest, in these parts of Lincolnshire.

Mon. 19. I preached at Louth, where the people used to be

rough enough ; but now were serious and calmly attentive.

Such a change in awhole town, I have seldom known in the

compass of one year.

Tues. 20. Afterpreaching at Tealby, I went on to Grimsby,

where I am still more at home than at any place in the east of

Lincolnshire ; though scarce any of our first members remain :

They are all safe lodged in Abraham's bosom. But here is still

a loving people, though a little disturbed bythe Calvinists, who

seize on every halting soul as theirown lawful prey.

Wed. 21. I preached at Scotter, to a lovely, simple-hearted

people ; and at Epworth in the evening.

Thur. 22.-I preached once more at Crowle, to a numerous

and deeply serious congregation. Every one thought, " Can

any good come out of Crowle ? י" But God's thoughts were not

as our thoughts. There is now such a work ofGod in this, as

is in few of the places round about it.

Sat. 24. I preached about noon at Belton. There was the

dawn of ablessed work here ; but " My Lady's Preachers," so

called, breaking in, set every one's sword against his brother.

Some of them revive a little ; but I doubt whether they will ever
recover their first love.

July, 1780.1 JOURNAL . 187

Sun. 25. Sir William Anderson, the Rector, having sent

an express order to his Curate, he did not dare to gainsay. So

at ten I began reading Prayers to such a congregation as I

apprehend hardly ever assembled in this church before. I

preached on Luke viii. 18, part of the Second Lesson. Not a
"

breath was heard ; all was still " as summer's noontide air ;

and I believe our Lord then sowed seed inmany hearts, which

will bring forth fruit to perfection.

After dinner I preached at Westwood-side. The high wind

was a little troublesome ; but the people regarded it not. We

concluded the day with one of the most solemn love-feasts I

haveknown for manyyears.

Mon. 26. Finningley church was well filled in the even-

ing ; and many seemed much affected. Tuesday, 27. I preached

at Doncaster about noon, and to a larger congregation at

Rotherham in the evening. Wednesday, 28. I went to Shef-

field: But the House was not ready ; so I preached in the

Square.

I can hardly think I am entered this day into the seventy-

eighth year ofmy age. By the blessing of God, I amjust the

same as when I entered the twenty-eighth. This hath God

wrought, chiefly by my constant exercise, my rising early, and

preaching morning and evening.

Thur. 29. I was desired to preach at Worksop ; but when

I came, they had not fixed on any place. At length they chose

a lamentable one, full of dirt and dust, but without the least

shelter from the scorching sun. This few could bear : So we

had only a small company of as stupid people as ever I saw.

Inthe evening I preached in the old House at Sheffield ; but

the heat was scarce supportable. I took my leave of it at five

inthe morning, and in the evening preached in the new House,

thoroughly filled with rich and poor ; towhom I declared, "We

preach Christ crucified : " And He bore witness to his word in a

very uncommon manner. Saturday, JULY 1. I preached once

more at Rotherham . Sunday, 2. At eight I preached at

Sheffield. There was afterwards such a number of communi-

cants as was never seen at the old church before. I preached

again at five ; but very many were constrained to go away. We

concluded our work by visiting some that were weak in body,

but strong in faith, desiring nothing but to do and suffer the
willofGod.


Monday, 3, and Tuesday, 4, I preached at Derby ; Wed-

nesday, 5, at a church eight miles from it. In the afternoon,

as I was going through Stapleford, in my way to Nottingham,

Iwas stopped by some who begged me to look into their new

preaching-house. Many following me, the House was soon

filled; and we spent half an hour together, to our mutual com-

fort. In the evening I preached at Nottingham. Wednesday,

5. I preached in Loughborough about eleven, and in the even-

ing at Leicester. I know not how it is that I constantly find

such liberty of spirit in this place.

Thur. 6. The Room at five, according to custom, was filled

from end to end. I have not spent awhole day in Leicester for

these fifty-two years: Surely I shall before I die. This night

we spent in Northampton ; then went on to London.

Sun. 9. We hadafull congregation at the new chapel, and

found God had not forgotten to be gracious. In the following

days I read over, with a few of our Preachers, the large Minutes

of the Conference, and considered all the articles, one by one, to

sce whether any should be omitted or altered.

Sunday, 16, was a day ofmuch refreshment and strong con-

solation to many, who are persuaded that God will revive his

work, and bind up the waste places. Monday, 17. My brother

and I set out for Bath. I preached at Reading in the evening.

On Tuesday evening I preached at Rainsbury-Park. On Wed-

nesday we reached Bath .

Ayear ago, there was such an awakening here as never had

been from the beginning ; and, in consequence of it, a swift and

large increase of the society. Just then Mr. M'Nab, quarrel-

ling with Mr. Smyth, threw wildfire among the people, and

occasioned anger, jealousies,judging each other, backbiting and

tale-bearing without end ; and, in spite of all the pains which

have been taken, the wound is nothealed to this day.

Both my brother and I now talked to as many as we could,

and endeavoured to calm and soften their spirits ; and on Fri-

day and Saturday I spoke severally to allthe members of the

society that could attend. On Friday evening, both in the

preaching, and at the meeting of the society, the power of God

was again present to heal ; as also on Saturday, both morning

and evening : And a few are added to the society.

Sun. 23. I preached (after reading Prayers) at ten, at half-

hour past two, and in the evening. Very many heard ; I hope

Aug. 1780.] 189

somefelt what was spoken. We have sown: O may God give

the increase !

Mon. 24.-I went on to Bristol. While I was at Bath, I

narrowly observed and considered the celebrated Cartoons ; the

three first in particular. What a poor designer was one of the

finest painters in the world ! 1. Here are two men in a boat ;

each of them more thanhalf as long as the boat itself. 2. Our

Lord, saying to Peter, " Feed my sheep," points to three or four

sheep standing by him. 3. While Peter and John heal the lame

man, two naked boys stand by them. For what ? O pity that

so fine a painter should be utterly without common sense !

In the evening I saw one of the greatest curiosities in the

vegetable creation,-the Nightly Cereus. About four in the

afternoon, the dry stem began to swell; about six, it gradually

opened; and about eight, it was in its full glory. I think the

inner part of this flower, which was snow-white, was about five

inches diameter ; the yellow rays which surrounded it, I judged,

were in diameter nine or ten inches. About twelve it began

to droop, being covered with a cold sweat ; at four it died

away.

The people at Bath were still upon my mind: So on Thurs-

day, 27, I went over again ; and God was with us of a truth,

whenever we assembled together. Surely God is healing the

breaches of this poor, shattered people.

Sun. 30. Forty or fifty of our Preachers being come, we

had asolemn opportunity in the morning. Wehad the most

numerous congregation in the afternoon which has been seen

here for many years. Andwillnot the Lord be glorified in our

reformation, rather than our destruction ?

Tues. AUGUST 1.-Our Conference began. We have been

always, hitherto, straitened for time. It was now resolved, “ For

the future we allow nine or ten days for each Conference ; that

every thing, relative to the carrying onof the work ofGod, may

be maturely considered."

Fri. 4-. I preached on a convenient piece of ground, at one

end of Radcliff-Parade. Great part of the immense congrega-

tion had never heard this kind of preaching before ; yet they

were deeply attentive, while I opened and applied those awful

words, " I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God."

Sun. 6.-We had the largest numbers of communicants that

had ever met at the new Room ; and the largest congregation, at

[Aug. 1780.

five, that had ever met near King's Square. Wednesday, 9.

We concluded the Conference in much peace and love.

Fri. 11. The sultry heat continuing, I would not coop

myself up in the chapel, but preached again near Radcliff-

Parade, with much comfort and peace.

Mon. 14. For fear of the violent heat,we set out for Corn-

wall very early in the morning. But we feared where no fear

was ; for that very day the heat was at an end, andamild rain

began ; which, at intervals, followed us almost to the Land's

End.

After preaching at South-Brent, Taunton, and Collumpton,

on Friday, 16, we came to Exeter. It is still a day of small

things here, for want ofa convenient preaching-house. Thurs-

day, 17. I went on to Plymouth. Here I expected little com-

fort. A large preaching-house was built ; but who was to pay

for it ? I preached in it at six, at five in the morning, and on

Friday evening; and, from the number and spirit of the hearers,

could not but hope that good will be done here also.

Sat. 19. I snatched the opportunity of a fair evening, to

preach in the Square at Plymouth-Dock. Sunday, 20. At seven

in the morning, and at five in the evening. I preached at the

Dock ; in the afternoon in Plymouth House. It was crowded

sufficiently. After preaching I made a collection for the House,

which amounted to above five-and-twenty pounds. When I had

done, Mr. Jane said, " This is not all. We must have a weekly

collection both here and at the Dock. Let as many as can

subscribe sixpence a week for one year. I will subscribe five

shillings a week. And let this be reserved for the payment of

the debt." It was done : And by this simple method, the most

pressing debts were soon paid.

Mon. 21. I preached to alarge and quiet congregation in

the main street at St. Austle. Tuesday, 22. I preached at

Mevagissey ; in the evening at Helstone. Wednesday, 23. I went

on to Penzance. It is now a pleasure to be here ; the little

flock being united together in love. I preached at a little dis-

tance from the preaching-house. A company of soldiers were

intown; whom, toward the close of the sermon, the good Offi-

cer ordered to march through the congregation. But as they

readily opened and closed again, it made very little disturbance.

Thur. 24.-I preached near the preaching-house at St. Just.

God applied his word with power : More especially at the meet

Sept. 1780.1 JOURNAL . 191

ing of the society, when all our hearts were as melting wax.

Friday, 25. I preached in the market-place at St. Ives, to most

of the inhabitants of the town. Here is no opposer now. Rich

and poor see, and very many feel, the truth.

I now looked over a volume of Mr. K-'s Essays. He is a

lively writer, of middling understanding. But I cannot admire

his style at all. It is prim, affected, and highly Frenchified. I

object to the beginning so many sentences with participles.

This does well in French, but not in English. I cannot admire

his judgment in many particulars. To instance in one or two :

He depresses Cowley beyond all reason ; who was far from being

a mean poet. Full as unreasonably does he depress modern

eloquence. I believe I have heard speakers at Oxford, to say

nothing of Westminster, who were not inferior to either Demos-

thenes or Cicero.

Sat. 26. We had our Quarterly Meeting at Redruth, where

all was love and harmony. Sunday, 27. It was supposed, twenty

thousand people were assembled at the amphitheatre in Gwen-

nap. And yet all, I was informed, could hear distinctly, in the

fair, calm evening.

Mon. 28. I preached at Wadebride and Port-Isaac ; Tues-

day, 29, at Camelford and Launceston. Hence we hastened

toward Bristol, by way of Wells ; where (the weather being

intensely hot, so that we could not well bear the Room) I

preached on the shady side of the market-place, on, "By grace

are ye saved, through faith." As I was concluding, a Serjeant

of Militia brought a drum. But he was a little too late. I pro-

nounced the blessing, and quietly walked away. I know not

that ever I felt it hotter in Georgia than it was here this afternoon.

Sun. SEPTEMBER 3.-I preached three times at Bath; and,

I believe, not without a blessing. Wednesday, 6. I preached

at Paulton. The flame, kindled last year, still continues to burn

here : And, (what is strange,) though so many have set their

hand to the plough, there are none that look back. In all the

number, I do not find so much as one backslider .

Thur. 7-. I spent an hour with the children, the most diffi-

cult part of our work. About noon I preached to a large and

serious congregation at Chew-Magna ; in the evening, to a still

more serious company at Stoke ; where Mr. Griffin is calmly

waiting for the call that summons him to Abraham's bosom.

[Oct. 1780.

Mon. 11.-As I drew near Bath, I wondered what haddrawn

such a multitude of people together, till I learnt, that one ofthe

Members for the city had given an ox tobe roasted whole. But

their sport was sadly interrupted by heavy rain which sent

them home faster than they came ; many of whom dropped in at

our chapel, where I suppose they never had been before.

Tues. 12. At the invitation of that excellent woman, Mrs.

Turner, I preached about noon in her chapel in Trowbridge.

Asmost of the hearers were Dissenters, I did not expect to do

much good. However, I have done myduty : God will look to

the event.

Thur. 14. I read Prayers and preached in Clutton church:

But it was with great difficulty, because ofmyhoarseness ; which

so increased, that in four-and-twenty hours I could scarce speak

at all. At night I usedmy never-failing remedy, bruised gar-

lick applied to the soles of the feet. This cured my hoarseness

in six hours : In one hour it cured my lumbago,the pain in the

small of my back, which I had had ever since I came from

Cornwall.

Wed. 20.-I preached in the market-place at Pill, to the

most stupid congregation I have lately seen. Thursday, 21. I

married Mr. Horton and Miss Durbin. May they be patterns

to all aroundthem ! Sunday, 24. I preached in Temple church,

the most beautiful and the most ancient in Bristol.

Sun. OCTOBER 1.-Ipreached, as usual, morning and evening

at the Room. About two I preached a funeral sermon at Kings-

wood, for that blessed saint, Bathsheba Hall, a pattern for many

years of zealously doing and patiently suffering the will ofGod.

In the evening about seven hundred of us joined in solemnly

renewing our covenant with God.

Mon. 2.-After preaching at the Devizes, I went on to Sarum.

Tuesday, 3. I walked over to Wilton, and preached to a very

serious congregation in the new preaching-house. I found at

Sarum the fruit of Captain Webb's preaching : Some were

awakened, and one perfected in love. Yet I was a little sur-

prised at the remark of some of our eldest brethren, that they

had never heard Perfection preached before.

Wed. 4. The preaching house at Whitchurch, though much

enlarged, could not contain the congregation in the evening.

Some genteel people were inclined to smile at first ; but their

mirth was quickly over. The awe of God fell upon the whole

Nov. 1780.] JOURNAL. 193

congregation, and many " rejoiced unto him with reverence."

Saturday, 7. I returned from Portsmouth to London.

Mon. 16.-I went to Tunbridge-Wells, and preached to a

serious congregation, on Rev. xx. 12. Tuesday, 17. I came

back to Sevenoaks, and in the afternoon walked over to the Duke

of Dorset's seat. The park is the pleasantest I ever saw ; the

trees are so elegantly disposed. The house, which is at least

twohundred years old, is immensely large. It consists of two

squares, considerably bigger than the two Quadrangles in Lin-

coln College. I believe we were shown above thirty rooms,

beside the hall, the chapels, and three galleries. The pictures

are innumerable ; I think, four times as many as in the Castle

at Blenheim. Into one of the galleries opens the King's bed-

chamber, ornamented above all the rest. The bed-curtains are

cloth-of-gold ; and so richlywrought,that it requiressomestrength

to draw them. The tables, the chairs, the frames of the looking-

glasses, are all plated over with silver. The tapestry, repre-

senting the whole history of Nebuchadnezzar, is as fresh as if

newly woven. But the bed-curtains are exceeding dirty, and

look more like copper than gold. The silver on the tables,

chairs, and glass, looks as dull as lead. And, to complete all,

King Nebuchadnezzar among the beasts, together with his eagle's

claws, has a large crown upon his head, and is clothed in scarlet

and gold.

Mon. 23. I visited, for a few days, the societies in Northamp-

tonshire. Monday, 30. I went to High-Wycomb, where the

new preaching-house was well filled in the evening. Tuesday,

31. We had such a congregation at noon in Oxford as I never

saw there before ; and, what I regarded more than their number,

was their seriousness : Even the young gentlemen behaved well ;

nor could I observe one smiling countenance, although I closely

applied these words, " I am not ashamedof the Gospel of Christ. "

Sun. NOVEMBER 5.-I preached at the new chapel, on Luke

ix. 55 : " Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of; " and

showed, that, supposing the Papists to be heretics, schismatics,

wicked men, enemies to us, and to our Church and nation; yet

we ought not to persecute, to kill, hurt, or grieve them, but

barely to prevent their doing hurt.

In the ensuing week I finished visiting the classes, and had

the satisfaction to findthat the society is considerably increased,

both in number and strength, since the Conference.


Mon. 20-. I went on to Chatham, and finding the society

groaning under a large debt, advised them to open a weekly sub-

scription. The same advice I gave to the society at Sheerness.

This advice they all cheerfully followed, and with good effect.

OnFriday, 24, we agreed to follow the same example at London;

and in one year we paid off one thousand four hundred pounds.

Mon. 27-. I went to Bedford, and preached in the evening.

Tuesday, 28. I preached at St. Neot's. Wednesday, 29. At

ten I preached in Godmanchester; and about six in the new

House at Huntingdon. I have seldom seen a new congregation

behave with such seriousness. Thursday, 30. I came to Luton,

and found that child of sorrow and pain, Mrs. Cole, was gone to

rest. For many years she had not known an hour's ease ; but

she died in full, joyous peace. And how little does she regret

all that is past, now the days of her mourning are ended !

Mon. DECEMBER 4.-I visited the eastern societies in Kent,

and on Friday returned to London. Sunday, 10. I began

reading and explaining to the society, the large Minutes of the

Conference. I desire to do all things openly and above-board.

I would have all the world, and especially all of our society, see

not only all the steps we take, but the reasonswhy we take them.

Sat. 16.-Having a second message from Lord George

Gordon, earnestly desiring to see me, I wrote a line to Lord

Stormont, who, on Monday, 18, sent me a warrant to see him.

On Tuesday, 19, I spent an hourwith him, at his apartment in

the Tower. Our conversation turned upon Popery and religion.

He seemed to be well acquainted with the Bible ; andhadabun-

dance of other books, enough to furnish a study. I was agree-

ably surprised to find he did not complain ofanyperson or thing ;

and cannot but hope, his confinement will take a right turn,

and prove a lasting blessing to him.

Fri. 22. At the desire of some of myfriends, I accompanied

them to the British Museum. What an immense field is here

for curiosity to range in! One large room is filled from top to

bottom with things brought from Otaheite ; two or three more

with things dug out of the ruins of Herculaneum ! Seven huge

apartments are filled with curious books ; five with manuscripts ;

two with fossils of all sorts, and the rest with various animals.

But what account will aman give to the Judge of quick and

dead for a life spent in collecting all these ?

Sun. 24.-Desiring to make the most of this solemn day, I

Jan. 1781. ] JOURNAL .
preached early in the morning, at the new chapel; at ten and

four I preached at West-Street ; and in the evening met the

society at each end ofthe town.

Fri. 29.-I saw the indictment of the Grand Jury against

Lord George Gordon.
I stood aghast ! What a shocking

insult upon truth and common sense ! But it is the usual form.

The more is the shame. Why will not the Parliament remove

this scandal from our nation ?

Sat. 30. Waking between one and two in the morning, I
observed a bright light shine upon the chapel.

cluded there was a fire near ; pr I easily co
obably in the a n

d -
joining timber-

yard. If so, I knew it would soon layus in ashes. I first

called all the family to prayer ; then going out, we found the

fire about an hundred yards off, and had broke out while the

wind was south. But a sailor cried out, " Avast ! Avast ! the

wind is turned in a moment ! " So it did, to the west, while we

were at prayer, and so drove the flame from us. We then

thankfully returned, and I rested well the residue of the night.
Sun. 31. We renewed our covenant with God. We had

the largest company that I ever remember ; perhaps two hundredmore than we had last year. And we had the greatest

blessing. Several received either a sense of the pardoning love

ofGod, or power to love him with all their heart.

Mon. JANUARY 1 , 1781. We began, as usual, the service

at four, praising Him who, maugre all our enemies, had brought

us safe to the beginning of another year.

Sun. 7. Much of the power of God rested on the congrega-

tion, while I was declaring how "the Son ofGod was manifested,

to destroy the works of the devil."

Sun. 14. I preached at St. John's, Wapping. Although

the church was extremely crowded, yet there was not the least

noise or disorder, while I besought them all, by the mercies

of God, to present themselves a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable
toGod.

Thur. 18.-Hearing Mr. Holmes was extremely weak, I went

down to Burling, and found him very nearworn out, just totter-

ing over the grave. However, he would creep with me to the

church, which was well filled, though the night was exceeding

dark. I preached on, " Repent, and believe the Gospel." The

congregation appeared to be quite stunned. Inthe morning I
returned to London .
196 [Feb. 1781.

Tues. 23.-I went to Dorking, and buried the remains of

Mrs. Attersal ; a lovely woman, snatched away in the bloom of

youth. I trust it will be a blessing to many, and to her husband

in particular.

Thur. 25. I spent an agreeable hour at a concert of my

nephews. But I was a little out of my element among Lords

and Ladies. I love plain music and plain company best.

Mon. FEBRUARY 12.-I went to Norwich. The House was

extremely crowded in the evening, and the whole congregation

appeared to be wounded ; consequently,many attended in the

morning. Tuesday, 13. I was desired to preach that evening,

on, " Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling ;

for it is God that worketh inyou both to will and to do of his

good pleasure." Even the Calvinists were satisfied for the

present; and readily acknowledged that we did not ascribe our

salvation to our own works, but to the grace of God.

Wed. 14. To awaken, if possible, the careless ones at Lod-

don, at two in the afternoon, I opened and enforced those awful

words, " Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not

quenched. " In the evening, I applied those gracious words,

" All things are ready ; come unto the marriage."

After spending Thursday and Friday with the affectionate

people at Lowestoft, on Saturday I returned to Norwich. Here

I found about fifty missing out of the two hundred and sixteen

whom I left in the society a year ago. Such fickleness I have

not found any where else in the kingdom ; no, nor even in

Ireland.

Sun. 18. The chapel was full enough, both in the afternoon

and the evening. I declared to them the whole counsel of God,

and on Monday returned to London.

Wednesday, 21 , being the National Fast, I preached in the

new chapel in the morning, and at West-Street, in the afternoon.

At this, as well as the two last Public Fasts, all places ofpublic

worship were crowded : All shops were shut up ; all was quiet in

the streets, and seriousness seemed to spread through the whole

city. And one may hope even this outward acknowledgment of

God is in a measure acceptable to him.

Sun. 25. My brother, Mr. Richardson, and Mr. Bucking-

ham being ill, I went through the Service at Spitalfields alone.

The congregation was much larger thanusual ; but mystrength

was as my day, both here, the new chapel, and afterwards at

March, 1781.] 197

St. Antholin's church : The Service lasted till near nine ; but

Iwas no more tired than at nine in the morning.

Fri. MARCH 2.-We had our General Quarterly Meeting,

and found the money subscribed this yearfor the payment of the

public debt was between fourteen and fifteen hundred pounds.

Sun. 4.-At eight in the evening I took coach for Bristol,

with Mr. Rankin and two other friends. We drove with two

horses as far as Reading. Two more were then added, with a

postilion, who knowing little of his business, instead of going

forward, turned quite round on a sloping ground, so that we

expected the coach to overturn every moment. So it must have

done, but that the coachman instantly leaped off, and with

some other men held it up, till we got out at the opposite door.

The coach was then soon set right, and we went on without let

or hinderance.

After spending two or three days at Bath, on Thursday, 8,

Iwent forward to Bristol. On Monday, 12, and the following

days, I visited the society; butwas surprised to find no greater

increase, considering what Preachers they had had.

Sun. 18. I preached morning and evening at the Room ;

in the afternoon at Temple church. The congregation here is

remarkably well-behaved ; indeed so are the parishioners in

general. And no wonder, since they have had such a succession

ofRectors as few parishes in England have had. The present

incumbent truly fears God. So did his predecessor, Mr. Catcott,

who was indeed as eminent for piety as most Clergymen in

England. He succeeded his father, aman of the same spirit,

who I suppose succeeded Mr. Arthur Bedford ; a person greatly

esteemed, fifty or sixty years ago, for piety as well as learning.

Mon. 19. For several years the severe weather has begun

the very day I set out from Bristol. But the mild weather now

continued seven or eight days longer. This evening I preached

at Stroud ; Tuesday, 20, at Stroud, Gloucester, Tewkesbury,

and Worcester. Wednesday, 21. At noon I preached in Bewd-

ley; and atWorcester in the evening. Thursday, 23. I preached

in Bengeworth church, and had some conversation with that

amiable man, Mr. B. I preached in the evening at Pebworth

church, on those words in the Lesson, " Godliness with content-

ment is greatgain."

Sat. 24.-I was invited to preach at Quinton, five miles from

Birmingham. I preached there at noon in the open air, to a


serious and attentive congregation. Some of them appeared to

be very deeply affected. Who knows but itmay continue? In

the evening I had another comfortable opportunity with our

friends at Birmingham.

Sun. 25. I preached at Birmingham,Dudley, and Wednes-

bury. Monday, 26. I preached at noon in Mr. Barker's large

parlour, at Congreve, near Penkridge. Many stood in the next

room, andmanyin the garden,near the windows : And I believe

all could hear. I brought strange things to the ears of those

that had been used to softer doctrines. And I believe not in

vain. They seemed to receive the truth in the love thereof.

In the evening I preached at Newcastle-under-Lyne. Mr.

Scott and two or three of his Preachers were present. They

have lately begun to preach both here and at Burslem. If

they would go and break up fresh ground, we should rejoice ;

but we cannot commend them for breaking in upon our labours,

after we have borne the burdenand heat ofthe day.

Tues. 27. I went a little out of my way in order to open

the new preaching-house at Shrewsbury. I did not so much

wonder at the largeness, as at the seriousness, of the congrega-

tion. So still and deeply attentive a congregation I did not

expect to see here. How apt are we to forget that important

truth, that " all things are possible with God! "

Wed. 28.-I returned to Burslem. How is the whole face of

this countrychanged in about twenty years ! Since the potteries

were introduced, inhabitants have continually flowed in from

every side. Hence the wilderness is literally become a fruitful

field. Houses, villages, towns have sprung up. And the coun-

try is not more improved than the people. The word of God

has had free course among them. Sinners are daily awakened

and converted to God ; and believers grow in the knowledge of

Christ. In the evening the House was filled with people, and

with the presence of God. This constrained me to extend the

service a good deal longer than I am accustomed to do. Like-

wise at the meeting of the society, manywere filled with strong
consolation.

Afterpreaching at Congleton, Macclesfield, and Stockport, in

my way, on Friday, 30, I opened the new chapel at Manches-

ter, about the size of that in London. The whole congregation

behaved with the utmost seriousness. I trust much good will

be done in this place.

April, 1781. ] JOURNAL. 199

Sun. APRIL 1.-I began reading Prayers at ten o'clock .

Our country friends flocked in from all sides. At the Commu-

nion was such a sight as I am persuaded was never seen at

Manchester before : Eleven or twelve hundred communicants at

once ; and all ofthem fearing God.

Tues. 3.-I took a solemn leave of our affectionate friends

here, and went on to Bolton. The society here are true, origi-

nal Methodists. They are notconformed to the world, either in

its maxims, its spirit, or its fashions ; but are simple followers of

the Lamb : Consequently they increase both in grace and
number.

Wed. 4.-I went over to Wigan, and preached a funeral ser-

mon for Betty Brown, one ofthe first members ofthis society ; one

of whom, John Layland, gave me the following artless account

of her:-" She met with us in a class about twenty years, even

to the Sunday before her death, whichwas on Friday, March 2.

Going to market that day ingood health, she returned (as she

often did) without her husband, ate her supper, and went to bed.

About midnight, he came, and found her body; but the spirit

was fled! Her love for God, for his cause, and for her brethren

and sisters, was truly remarkable. So was her pity for back-

sliders. At home and abroad she was continually intent on one

thing. We cannot forget her tears and prayers, which we

doubt not the Lord hath heard.

"A little before her death, sitting with my sisters, she seemed

indeep thought, and broke out, ' I will go to God ! ' One of

them being surprised, said, ' Pray, Betty, what do you mean ? '

She only replied, I will go to God.' So that, if I think right,

she was the beloved of God, the delight of his children, a dread

towicked men, and atorment to devils."

Thur. 5. I went to Chester. The House was well filled

with deeply attentive hearers. I perceived God had exceedingly

blessed the labours of Jonathan Hern and William Boothby.

The congregations were much larger than they used to be.

The society was increased ; and they were not only agreed

among themselves, but inpeacewith all round about them.

Fri. 6. I went to Alpraham, and preached the funeral ser-

mon ofgood old sister Cawley. She has been indeed a mother

in Israel ; a pattern of all good works. Saturday, 7. At noon,

I preached at Preston-on-the-Hill ; and in the evening at War-

rington. Sunday, 8. The service was at the usual hours. I

[April, 1781

came just in time to put a stop to a bad custom, which was

creeping in here : A few men, who had fine voices, sang a Psalm

which no one knew, in a tune fit for an opera, wherein three,

four, or five persons, sung different words at the same time!

What an insult upon common sense. What aburlesque upon

public worship ! No custom can excuse such a mixture ofpro-

faneness and absurdity.

Mon. 9.-Desiring to be in Ireland as soon as possible, I

hastened to Liverpool, and found a ship ready to sail; but the

wind was contrary, till on Thursday morning, theCaptain came

in haste, and told us, the windwas come quite fair. So Mr.

Floyd, Snowden, Joseph Bradford, and I, with two of our sis-

ters, went on board. But scarce were we out at sea,when the

wind turned quite foul, and rose higher and higher. In an hour

I was so affected, as I had not been for fortyyears before. For

two days I could not swallow the quantity ofa pea ofanything

solid, and very little of anyliquid. Iwas bruised and sore from

head to foot, and ill able to turn me on the bed. All Friday,

the storm increasing, the sea of consequence was rougher and

rougher. Early on Saturdaymorning, the hatches were closed,

which, together with the violent motion, made our horses so tur-

bulent, that I was afraid we must have killed them, lest they

should damage the ship. Mrs. S. now crept to me, threw her

arms over me, and said, " O Sir, we will die together ! " We

had by this time three feet water in the hold, though it was an

exceeding light vessel. Meantimewe were furiously driving on

alee-shore ; and when the Captain cried, " Helm a lee," she

would not obey the helm. I called our brethren to prayers ;

and we found free access to the throne of grace. Soon after we

got, I know not how, into Holyhead harbour, after being suffi-

ciently buffeted by the winds andwaves, for twodays and two

nights.

Themore I considered, the more I was convinced, it was not

the will of God I should go to Ireland at this time. Sowe went

into the stage-coach without delay, and the next evening came
to Chester.

I now considered in what place I could spend a few days to

the greatest advantage. I soon thought of the Isle of Man,

and those parts of Wales which I could not well see in my ordi-

nary course. I judged it would be best to beginwith the latter.

So, after a day or two's rest, on Wednesday, 18, I set out for

April, 1781.]

Brecon, purposing to take Whitchurch (where I had not been

formanyyears) and Shrewsbury in myway. Atnoon I preached

in Whitchurch, to a numerous and very serious audience ; in

the evening at Shrewsbury ; where, seeing the earnestness of the

people, I agreed to stay another day.

Here I read over Sir Richard Hill's Letter to Mr. Madan,

on his Defence of Polygamy. I think it is home to the point ;

and wish always to write (if I must write controversy) in just

such a spirit.

Not knowing the best way from hence to Brecon, I thought

well to go round by Worcester. I took Broseley in myway, and

thereby had aview of the iron bridge over the Severn : I sup-

pose the first and the only one in Europe. It will not soon be

imitated.

In the evening I preached at Broseley; and on Saturday, 21,

went on to Worcester. I found one of our Preachers, Joseph

Cole, there ; but unable to preach through his ague. So that

I could not have come more opportunely. Sunday, 22. I

preached at seven in our own Room. At three the Service

began at St. Andrew's. As no notice had been given of my

preaching there, only aswe walked along the street, it was sup-

posed the congregation would be small ; but it was far otherwise.

High and low, rich and poor, flocked together from all parts of

the city; and truly God spoke in his word; so that I believe

most of them were almost persuaded to be Christians. Were

it only for this hour alone, the pains of coming to Worcester

would have been well bestowed.

Mon. 23. Being informed it was fifty miles to Brecknock,

we set out early : But, on trial, we found they were computed

miles. However, taking fresh horses at the Hay, I just reached

it in time, finding a large companywaiting. Wednesday, 25 .

I set out for Carmarthen. But Joseph Bradfordwas so ill, that,

after going six miles, I left him at a friend's house, and went

only myself. I came in good time to Carmarthen, and enforced

those solemn words on a serious congregation, " Now he com-

mandeth all men everywhere to repent."

Thur. 26.-I went on to Pembroke, and in the evening

preached in the Town-Hall. Friday, 27. I preached at Jeffer-

son, seven miles from Pembroke, to a large congregation of

honest colliers. Inthe evening I preached in Pembroke Town-

Hall again, to an elegant congregation ; and afterwards met the


society, reduced to a fourth part of its ancient number. But as

they are now all in peace and love with each other, I trust they

will increase again. Saturday, 18. We had, in the evening,

the most solemn opportunity which I have had since we came

into Wales : And the society seemed all alive, and resolved to

be altogether Christians.

Sun. 29. At seven I preached in the Room, on, “ Lazarus,

come forth ; " and about ten, began at St. Daniel's. The

church was filled as usual ; and the Second Lesson gave me a

suitable text, " Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian."

I applied the words as closely as possible ; and I doubt not,

some were more than almost persuaded. In the evening I

preached at Haverfordwest, to the liveliest congregation I

have seen in Wales.

Mon. 30.-I met about fifty children ; such acompany as I

have not seen for manyyears. Miss Warren loves them, and

they love her. She has taken true pains with them, and her

labour has not been in vain. Several ofthem are much awak-

ened ; and the behaviour of all is so composed, that they are a

pattern to the whole congregation.

Tues. MAY 1.-I rode to St. David's, seventeen measured

miles from Haverford. Iwas surprised to find all the land, for

the last nine or ten miles, so fruitful and well cultivated. What

adifference is there between the westernmost parts of England,

and the westernmost parts of Wales ! The former (thewest of

Cornwall) so barren and wild; the latter, so fruitful and well

improved. But the town itself is a melancholy spectacle. I

saw but one tolerable good house in it. The rest were misera-

ble huts indeed. I do not remember so mean a town even in

Ireland. The cathedral has been a large and stately fabric, far

superior to any other in Wales. But a great part of it is fallen

down already ; and the rest is hastening into ruin : One blessed

fruit (among many) of Bishops residing at a distance from their

See. Here are the tombs and effigies ofmany ancient worthies :

Owen Tudor in particular. But the zealous Cromwellians

broke off their noses, hands, and feet ; anddefacedthem as much

as possible. But what had the Tudors done to them ? Why,

they were progenitors ofKings.

Thur. 3-. About ten I preached at Spittal, a large village

about six miles from Haverford. Thence we went to Tracoon,

and spent a few hours in that lovely retirement, buried from all

May, 1781.]

the world, in the depth of woods and mountains. Friday, 4.

About eleven I preached in Newport church, and again at four

in the evening. Saturday, 5. I returned to Haverford.

Sun. 6.-1 preached in St. Thomas's church, on, " We preach

Christ crucified." It was a stumbling-block to some of the

hearers. So the Scripture is fulfilled. But I had amendswhen

Imet the society in the evening.

Mon. 7-. About ten I preached near the market-place in

Nerbeth, a large town ten miles east from Haverford. Abun-

dance of people flocked together. And they were all still as

night. In the evening I preached to an equally attentive con-

gregation at Carmarthen.

Tues. 8.-I had a large congregation at Llanelly and at

Swansea. Some months since, there were abundance of hearers

at Neath : But, on a sudden, one lying tongue set the society on

fire, till almost half of them were scattered away. But as all,

offended, or not offended, were at the Town-Hall, I took the

opportunity of strongly enforcing the Apostle's words, " Let all

bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil-speak-

ing, be put away from you, with all malice." I believe God

sealed his word onmanyhearts ; and we shall have better days

atNeath.

About three I preached in the church near Bridge-End,

and at six in the Town-Hall at Cowbridge. Thursday, 10. I

preached in our Room about ten, on, " I am not ashamed of

the Gospel of Christ." May God deliver us from this evil

disease, which eats out all the heart of religion ! In the evening I

preached in the Town-Hall, at Cardiff: But the congregation

was almost wholly new. The far greater part of the old society,

Ann Jenkins, Thomas Glascot, Arthur Price, Jane Haswell,

Nancy Newell, and a long train, are gone hence, and are no

more seen. And how few are followers of them, as they were

ofChrist !

Mon. 14. Before I reached Monmouth, one met and

informed me, that Mr. C., a Justice of the Peace, one of the

greatest men in the town, desired I would take a bed at his

house. Of consequence, all the rabble of the town were as quiet

as lambs ; and we had acomfortable opportunity both night

and morning. Surely this is the Lord's doing !

Tues. 15.-We went through miserable roads to Worcester.

Wednesday, 16. About ten I preached in the large meeting at

[May, 1781.

Kidderminster, to a numerous congregation. With much diffi-

culty we reached Salop in the evening, and found the people

waiting. There has been no tumult since the new House was

built. So far God has helped us.

Thur. 17. I preached at Whitchurch and Nantwich ; Fri-

day, 18, at eleven, in the chapel near Northwich ; and in the

evening at Manchester. Sunday, 20. I found much enlarge-

ment in applying to a numerous congregation the lovely account

given by St. James of " pure religion and undefiled." In the

afternoon, I preached a funeral sermon for Mary Charlton, an

Israelite indeed. From the hour that she first knew the par-

doning love of God, she never lost sight of it for a moment.

Eleven years ago, she believed that God had cleansed her from

all sin ; and she showed that she had not believed in vain, by

her holy and unblamable conversation.

Mon. 21. I went over to Warrington, and preached in the

evening. Fearing many of the congregation rested in a false

peace, I endeavoured to undeceive them, by closely applying

those words, " Ye shall know them by their fruits." Tuesday,

22. About eleven, I preached at Chowbent, and in the evening

at Bolton ; where the people seemed to be on the wing, just

ready to take their flight to heaven.

Wed. 23. Having appointed to preach at Blackburn, I was

desired to take Kabb in my way. But such a road sure no car-

riage ever went before. Iwas glad to quit it, and use my own

feet. About twelve I found a large number of plain, artless

people, just fit for the Gospel. So I applied our Lord's words,

" If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink." In the

evening I preached in the new House at Blackburn.

Thur. 24. I went on to Preston, where the old prejudice

seems to be quite forgotten. The little society has fitted up a

large and convenient House, where I preached to a candid

audience. Every one seemed to be considerably affected : I

hope in somethe impression will continue.

Fri. 25. We went on to Ambleside; and on Saturday, to

Whitehaven. Sunday, 27. I preached, morning and evening,

in the House ; in the afternoon, in the market-place. But abun-

dance of people went away, not being able to bear the intense

heat ofthe sun.

Wed. 30.-I embarked on board the packet-boat, for the Isle

ofMan. We had adead calm for many hours : However, we

June, 1781.1 JOURNAL. 205

landed atDouglas on Friday morning. Both the Preachers

met me here, and gave me a comfortable account of the still

increasingwork of God.

Before dinner, we took a walk in a garden near the town,

wherein any ofthe inhabitants of it may walk. It is wonder-

fully pleasant ; yet not so pleasant as the gardens of the Nun-

nery, (so it is still called,) which are not far from it. These

are delightfully laid out, and yield to few places of the size in

England.

At six I preached in the market-place, to a large congrega-

tion ; all ofwhom, except a few children, and two or three giddy

young women, were seriously attentive .

Sat. JUNE3. Irode to Castleton,through apleasant and(now)

well-cultivated country. At six I preached in the market-place,

tomost of the inhabitants of the town, on, " One thing is need-

ful." I believe the word carried conviction into the hearts of

nearly all that heard it. Afterwards I walked to the house of

one of our English friends, about two miles from the town. All

the day I observed, wherever I was, one circumstance that sur-

prised me :-In England we generally hear the birds singing,

morning and evening ; but here thrushes, and various other

kinds of birds, were singing allday long. Theydid not inter-

mit, even during the noon-day heat, where they had a few trees

to shade them.

JUNE 4.-(Being Whit-Sunday.) I preached inthe market-

place again about nine, to a still larger congregation than before,

on, " I am not ashamed ofthe Gospel ofChrist." How few of

the genteel hearers could say so ! About four in the afternoon,

I preached at Barewle, on the mountains, to a larger congrega-

tion than that in the morning. The rain began soon after I

began preaching ; but ceased in a few minutes. I preached on,

" They were all filled with the Holy Ghost ; " and showed in

what sense this belongs to us and to our children.

Between six and seven I preached on the sea-shore at Peel,

to the largest congregation I have seen in the island : Even the

society nearly filled the House. I soon found what spirit they

were of. Hardly in England (unless perhaps at Bolton) have

I found so plain, so earnest, so simple a people.

Mon. 5.-We hadsuch acongregation at five, asmight have

been expected on a Sunday evening . We then rode through

and over the mountains to Beergarrow ; where I enforced, on


an artless, loving congregation, " If any man thirst, let him

come unto me and drink." A few miles from thence,we came

to Bishop's Court, where good Bishop Wilson resided near

threescore years. There is something venerable, though not

magnificent, in the ancient palace; and it is undoubtedly situ-

ated in one of the pleasantest spots of the whole island.

At six in the evening I preached at Balleugh ; but the

preaching-house would not contain one half of the congrega-

tion ; of which the Vicar, Mr. Gilling, with his wife, sister, and

daughter, were a part. He invited me to take a breakfast with

him in the morning, Tuesday, 5 ; which I willingly did. He

read family-prayers before breakfast, in a very serious manner.

After spending a little time very agreeably, I went on toKirk-

Andrews.

Here also I was obliged to preach in the open air ; the rain

being suspended till I had done. In the afternoon we rode

through a pleasant and fruitful country to Ramsay, about as

large as Peel, and more regularly built. The rain was again

suspended while I preached to well nigh all the town ; but I
saw no inattentive hearers .

Wed. 6. We had many of them again at five, and they

were all attention. This was the place where the Preachers

had little hope of doing good. I trust they will be happily

disappointed.

This morning we rode through the most woody, and far the

pleasantest, part of the island ;-a range offruitful land, lying

at the foot of the mountains, from Ramsay, through Sulby, to

Kirkmichael. Here we stopped to look at the plain tomb-stones

of those two good men, Bishop Wilson and Bishop Hildesley ;

whose remains are deposited, side by side, at the east end of the

church. We had scarce reached Peel before the rain increased ;

but here the preaching-house contained all that could come.

Afterwards, Mr. Crook desired me to meet the singers. I was

agreeably surprised. Ihave not heard better singing either at

Bristol or London. Many, both men and women, have admir-

able voices ; and they sing with good judgment. Who would

have expected this in the Isle of Man ?

Thur. 7.-1 met our little body of Preachers. Theywere

two-and-twenty in all. I never saw in England so many stout,

well-looking Preachers together. If their spirit be answerable

to their look, I know not what can stand before them. In the

June, 1781.1 207

afternoon I rode over to Dawby, and preached to avery large

and very serious congregation.

Fri. 8-. Having now visited the island round, east, south,

north, and west, I was thoroughly convinced that we have no

such Circuit as this, either in England, Scotland, or Ireland. It

is shut up from the world ; and,having little trade, is visited by

scarce any strangers. Here are no Papists, no Dissenters of any

kind, no Calvinists, no disputers. Here is no opposition, either

from the Governor, (amild humane man,) from the Bishop, (a

goodman,) or from the bulk of the Clergy. One or two of them

did oppose for a time ; but they seem now to understand better.

So that we have now rather too little, than too much, reproach ;

the scandal of the cross being, for the present, ceased. The

natives are a plain, artless, simple people ; unpolished, that is,

unpolluted ; few of them are rich or genteel ; the far greater

part, moderately poor ; and most of the strangers that settle

among them are men that have seen affliction. The Local

Preachers are men of faith and love, knit together in one mind

and one judgment. They speak either Manx or English, and

follow a regular plan, which the Assistant gives them monthly.

The isle is supposed to have thirty thousand inhabitants.

Allowing half of them to be adults, and our societies to contain

one or two and twenty hundred members, what a fair proportion

is this ! What has been seen like this, in any part either of

Great Britain or Ireland ?

Sat. 9. We would willingly have set sail ; but the strong

north-east wind prevented us. Monday, 11. It being moderate,

we put to sea: But it soon died away into a calm ; so I had

time to read over and consider Dr. Johnson's " Tour through

Scotland." I had heard that he was severe upon the whole

nation ; but I could find nothing ofit. He simply mentions

(but without any bitterness) what he approved or disapproved ;

and many of the reflections are extremely judicious ; some of

them very affecting.

Tues. 14. The calm continuing, I read over Mr. Pennant's

" Tour through Scotland." How amazingly different from Dr.

Johnson's ! He is doubtless a man both of sense and learning.

Why has he then bad English in almost every page ? No man

should be above writing correctly.

Having several passengers on board, I offered to give them a

sermon ; which they willingly accepted. And all behaved with

[June, 1781.

the utmost decency, while I showed, " His commandments are

not grievous." Soon after, a little breeze sprung up, which,

early in the morning, brought us to Whitehaven.

Tues. 14. I had a design to preach at noon in the Town-

Hall at Cockermouth; but Mr. Lothian offeringme his meeting-

house, which was far more convenient, I willingly accepted his

offer. By this means I had a much more numerous audience ;

most of whom behaved well.

At seven I preached at Mr. Whyte's, in Ballantyne ; a little

village four miles from Cockermouth. Many assembled here

who had hardly seen or heard a Methodist before. I believe

some ofthem did not hear in vain. After this, I saw Mr. Whyte

no more. God soon called him into a better world. Friday, 15.

In the evening I preached in the Town-Hall, at Carlisle ; and

on Saturday, 16, reached Newcastle.

Sun. 17. In the morning I preached at the Ballast-Hills ;

in the afternoon at Gateshead : andat five, at the Garth-Heads.

To-day I heard a remark, at All-Saints' church, which I never

read or heard before, in confirmation of that assertion of Abra-

ham, " If they hear not Moses and the Prophets : "-" The

thing has been tried. One did rise from the dead, in the sight

ofa multitude ofpeople. The namesake of this Lazarus rose

from the dead. The very Pharisees could not deny it. Yet

who of them that believed not Moses and the Prophets was

thereby persuaded to repent ? "

Wed. 20.-I went over to Sunderland ; and preached evening

and morning to a lovely congregation. Thursday, 21. I read

Prayers and preached in Monkwearmouth church ; and Friday,

22, returned to Newcastle.

Sat. 23.-I went over to Hexham, and preached in themarket-

place to a numerous congregation, on, " I saw the dead, small

and great, stand before God." None were rude or uncivil in

any respect ; and very few were inattentive. Sunday, 24. I

preached in the morning at Gateshead-Fell ; about noon, at a

village called Greenside, ten miles west of Newcastle, to the

largest congregation I have seen in the north ; many of whom

were Roman Catholics. In the evening I preached once more

at the Garth-Heads,(some thought to the largest congregation

that had ever been there,) on those words in the Service, " Com-

fort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God."

After preaching at many places in the way, on Wednesday,

July, 1781.] 209

27, I preached at York. Many of our friends met me here, so

that in the evening the House would ill contain the congregation.

And I know not when I have found such a spirit among them ;

they seemed to be all hungering and thirsting after righteousness.

Thur. 28. I preached at eleven in the main street at Selby,

to alarge and quiet congregation ; and in the evening at Thorne.

This day I entered my seventy-ninth year ; and, by the grace

of God, I feel no more of the infirmities of old age, than I did at

twenty-nine. Friday, 29. I preached at Crowle and at Epworth.

Ihave now preached thrice aday for seven days following ; but

it is just the same as if it had been but once.

Sat. 30-. I went over to Owstone, and found the whole town

was moved. One of the chief men of the town had been just

buried, and his wife a few days before. In a course of nature

they might have lived many years, being only middle-aged. He

had known the love of God, but had choked the good seed by

hastening to be rich. But Providence disappointed all his

schemes ; and it was thought he died of a broken heart. I took

that opportunity of enforcing, " Whatsoever thy hand findeth

to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work, nor device,

nor knowledge, norwisdom, inthe grave, whither thou goest."

Sun. JULY 1.-I preached, as usual, at Misterton, at Over-

thorpe, and at Epworth. Monday, 2. I preached at Scotter

about eight ; at Brigg, at noon ; and in the evening, in the old

church-yard, at Grimsby, to almost all the people of the town,

on, " Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord." The late

proof of it is in the glorious death of Robert Wilkinson ; and

the behaviour of his widow,

So firm, yet soft, so strong, yet so resign'd,

I believe, will hardly be forgotten by any that were witnesses
ofit.

Tues. 3.-I preached at Claythorp, three miles from Grimsby.

Here, likewise, there has been an outpouring of the Spirit. I

was reminded here of what I saw at Cardiff almost forty years

ago. I could not go into any of the little houses, but presently

itwas filled with people ; and I was constrained to pray with

them in every house, or they would not be satisfied. Several of

these are clearly renewed in love, and give a plain, scriptural

account of their experience ; and there is scarce a house in the

[July, 1781 .

village, wherein there is not one or more earnestly athirst for
salvation.

Wed. 4-. I called upon an honest man, and, I hope, took

him outofthe hands of an egregious quack ; who was pouring in

medicines upon him, for what he called "wind in the nerves !"

In the evening I preached at Louth, now as quiet as Grimsby.

When shall we learn " to despair of none ?"

Thur. 5. I had the pleasure of meeting Mr. Brackenbury

again, though still exceeding weak. His chapel was thoroughly

filled in the evening ; I trust, with sincere hearers.

Fri. 6.-1 crossed over to Langham-Row; where the high

wind would not suffer me to preach abroad. But the House

tolerably contained the congregation; most of whom attended

again at five in the morning.

To-day I finished the second volume of Dr. Robertson's

" History of America." His language is always clear and strong,

and frequently elegant ; and I suppose his history is preferable

to any history of America which has appeared in the English

tongue. But I cannot admire, First, His intolerable prolixity in

this history, as well as his " History of Charles the Fifth."

He promises eight books ofthe History of America, and fills four

of them with critical dissertations. True, the dissertations are

sensible, but they have lost their way; they are not history :

And they are swelled beyond all proportion; doubtless, for the

benefit of the author and the bookseller, rather than the reader.

I cannot admire, Secondly,A Christian Divine writing a history,

with so very little of Christianity in it. Nay, he seems studiously

to avoid saying any thing which might imply that he believes

the Bible. I can still less admire, Thirdly, His speaking so

honourably of a professed Infidel ; yea, and referring to his

masterpiece of Infidelity, " Sketches of the History of Man;"

as artful, as unfair, as disingenuous a book, as even Toland's

" Nazarenus." Least of all can I admire, Fourthly, His copying

after Dr. Hawkesworth, (who once professed better things,) in

totally excluding the Creator from governing the world. Was

it not enough, never to mention the Providence of God, where

therewas the fairest occasion, without saying expressly, " The
fortune of Certiz," or " chance," did thus or thus ? So far as

fortune or chance governs the world, God has no place in it.

The poor American, though not pretending to be a Christian,

knew better than this. When the Indian was asked, " Why do

July, 1781.1 JOURNAL. 211

you think the beloved ones take care of you ?" he answered,

"When I was in the battle, the bullet went on this side, and on

that side; and this man died, and that man died; and I am

alive ! So I know, the beloved ones take care of me."

It is true, the doctrine of a particular Providence (and any

but a particular Providence is no Providence at all) is absolutely

out of fashion in England: And a prudent author might write

this to gain the favour ofhis gentle readers. Yet I will not say,

this is real prudence ; because he may lose hereby more than

hegains; as the majority, even of Britons, to this day, retain

some sort of respect for the Bible.

If it was worth while to mention a little thing, after things of

so much greater importance, I would add, I was surprised that

so sensible a writer, in enumerating so many reasons, why it is

so much colder in the southern hemisphere than it is in the

northern; why it is colder, for instance, at forty degrees south,

than at fifty north latitude ; should forget the main, the primary

reason, namely, the greater distance of the sun ! For is it not

well known, that the sun (to speak with the vulgar) is longer on

the north side the line than the south ? that he is longer in

the six northern signs than the southern, so that there is a dif-

ference (says Gravesande) ofnine days ? Now, if the northern

hemisphere be obverted to the sun longer than the southern,

does not this necessarily imply that the northern hemisphere

will be warmer than the southern? And is not this the primary

reason of its being so ?

Sat. 7-. I designed to go from hence to Boston ; but a mes-

sage from Mr. Pugh, desiring me to preach in his church on

Sunday, mademe alter my design. So, procuring a guide, I set

out for Rauceby. We rode through Tattershall, where there

are large remains of a stately castle ; and there was in the chan-

cel of the old church, the finest painted glass (so it was

esteemed) in England ; but the prudent owner, considering it

brought him in nothing by staying there, lately sold it for a

round sum ofmoney.

Here I met with such a ferry as I never saw before. The

boat was managed by an honest countryman who knew just

nothing of the matter, and a young woman equally skilful.

However, though the river was fifty yards broad, we got over it

in an hour and a half. We then went on through the fens in a

marvellous road, sometimes tracked, and sometimes not, till


about six we came to Rauceby, and found the people gathered

from all parts. I preached on those words in the Second Lesson,

" There is neither Greek nor Jew, Barbarian, Scythian, bond

nor free : But Christ is all and in all."

Sun. 8. The congregation was still larger. Hence I rode

over to Welby, and preached in Mr. Dodwell's church in the

afternoon and in the evening, to a numerous and serious congre-

gation. Monday, 9. I preached at Grantham in the open air,

(for no house would contain the congregation,) and none made

the least disturbance, any more than at Newark, (where I

preached in the evening,) or in the Castle-yard at Lincoln, on

Tuesday, 10. Wednesday, 11. I preached at Newton-upon-

Trent, and Gainsborough.

After visiting many other societies, I crossed over into the

West-Riding of Yorkshire. Monday, 23. I preached at Yeadon,

to a large congregation. I had heard, the people there were

remarkably dead: If so, they were now remarkably quickened ;

for I know not when I have seen a whole congregation so

moved. Tuesday, 24. We had fifty or sixty children at five ;

and as many or more in the evening; andmore affectionate ones

I never saw. For the present at least God has touched their

hearts. On Wednesday and Thursday I preached at Bradford

and Halifax ; on Friday at Greetland chapel, and Hudders-

field. After preaching I retired to Longwood-House, one of

the pleasantest spots in the county. Saturday, 28. I preached

at Longwood-House, at Mirfield, and at Daw-Green. Sunday,

29. I preached at eight before the House. I expected to preach

at one, as usual, under the hill at Birstal ; but after the Church

Service was ended, the Clerk exclaimed with a loud voice, " The

Rev. Mr. Wesley is to preach here in the afternoon." So I

desired Mr. Pawson to preach at one. The church began at

half-hour past two; and I spoke exceeding plain to such a con-

gregation as I never met there before. In the evening I

preached at Bradford to thousands upon thousands, on, " The

wages of sin is death ; but the gift of God is eternal life through

Jesus Christ our Lord."

Mon. 30.-I crossed over to Tadcaster at noon ; and in the

evening to York. Hence I took a little circuit through Malton,

Scarborough, Beverley, Hull, and Pocklington, and came to
York again.

Sun. AUGUST 5.-At the old church in Leeds we had

Aug. 1781.] 213

eighteen Clergymen, and about eleven hundred communicants.

I preached there at three : The church was thoroughly filled ;
and I believe most could hear, while I explained the new co-

venant," which Godhas now made with the Israel ofGod.

Mon. 6.-I desired Mr. Fletcher, Dr. Coke, and four more

of our brethren, to meet every evening, that we might consult

together on any difficulty that occurred. On Tuesday our Con-

ference began, at which were present about seventy Preachers,

whom I had severally invited to come and assist me with their

advice, in carrying on the great work of God. Wednesday 8.

I desired Mr. Fletcher to preach. I do not wonder he should

be so popular ; not only because he preaches with all his might,

but because the power of God attends both his preaching and

prayer. On Monday and Tuesday we finished the remaining

business of the Conference, and ended it with solemn prayer and

thanksgiving.

Wed. 15. I went to Sheffield. In the afternoon I took a view

ofthe chapel lately built by theDuke ofNorfolk : Onemay safely

say, there is none like it in the three kingdoms ; nor, I suppose,

inthe world. It is a stone building, an octagon, about eighty

feet diameter. A cupola,which is at a great height, gives some,

but not much, light. Alittle more is given by four small win-

dows, which are under the galleries. The pulpit is movable :

It rolls upon wheels ; and is shifted once a quarter, that all the

pews mayface it in their turns : I presume the first contrivance

ofthe kind in Europe.

After preaching in the evening to a crowded audience, and

exhorting the society to brotherly love, I took chaise with Dr.

Coke; and, travelling day and night, the next evening came to

London. We observed Friday, 17, as a fast-day, and con-

cluded it with a solemn watch-night. Having finished my busi-

ness in town for the present, on Sunday, 19, at eight in the

evening, I took coach with my new fellow-traveller, George

Whitfield; and on Monday evening preached at Bath. Tues-

day, 21. I went on toBristol ; and after resting a day, on Thurs-

day, 23, set out for Cornwall.

Finding, after breakfast, that I was within amile ofmy old

friend, G. S., I walked over, and spent an hour with him.

He is all-original still, like no man in the world, either in senti-

ments or any thing about him. But perhaps if I had his

immense fortune, I might be as great an oddity as he.

[Aug. 1781.

About six in the evening I preached at Taunton, to a

numerous congregation. I found the Letters concerning Popery

hadmuch abated prejudice here. Friday, 24. I preached at

Collumpton about noon, and at Exeter in the evening. Satur-

day, 25. I preached in the Square at Plymouth-Dock, to a

quieter congregation than usual. Sunday, 26. Between one

and two, I began in the new House in Plymouth. The large

congregation was all attention; and there seemed reason to hope

that even here we shall find some fruit of our labour. In the

evening I preached again in the Square, on the story of the

Pharisee and Publican, to such a congregation, for number and

seriousness together, as I never saw there before.

Mon. 27.-I was desired to preach at Trenuth at noon, a

little way (they said) out of the road. The little way proved

six or seven miles through a road ready to break our wheels in

pieces. However, I just reached St. Austle time enough to

preach ; and God greatly comforted the hearts ofhis people.

Tues. 28.-Between nine and ten we had such a storm of

rain, as I do not remember to have seen in Europe before. It

seemed ready to beat in the windows of the chaise, and in three

minutes drenched our horsemen from head to foot. We reached

Truro, however, at the appointed time. I have not for many

years seen a congregation so universally affected. One would

have imagined, every one that was present had a desire to save

his soul.

In the evening I preached in the High-Street at Helstone.

I scarce know a town in the whole county which is so totally

changed ; not a spark of that bitter enmity to the Methodists,

in which the people here for many years gloried above their

fellows .

Going through Marazion, I was told that a large congrega-

tion was waiting: So I stepped out of my chaise, and began

immediately ; and we had a gracious shower. Some were cut

to the heart ; but more rejoiced with joy unspeakable.

In the evening I preached in the market-place at Penzance.

Idesigned afterwards to meet the society; but the people were

so eager to hear all they could, that they quickly filled theHouse

from end to end. This is another of the towns wherein the

whole stream of the people is turned, as it were, from east to

west.

We had a happy season, both at St. Just on Thursday

Sept. 1781.1 JOURNAL. 215

evening, and in the market-place at St. Ives on Friday. Satur-

day, SEPTEMBER 1. I made an end of that curious book, Dr.

Parson's " Remains of Japhet." The very ingenious author

has struck much light into some of the darkest parts of ancient

history; and although I cannot entirely subscribe to every

proposition which he advances, yet I apprehend he has suffi-

ciently proved the main ofhis hypothesis ; namely,-

1. That, after the flood, Shem and his descendants peopled

the greatest parts of Asia. 2. That Ham and his children

peopled Africa. 3. That Europe was peopledby the two sons

ofJaphet, Gomer and Magog ; the southern and south-western

byGomer and his children ; and the north and the north-western

by the children of Magog. 4. That the former were called

Gomerians, Cimmerians, Cimbrians ; and afterwards Celtiæ,

Galatæ, and Gauls ; the latter were called by the general name

of Scythians, Scuiti, Scots. 5. That the Gomerians spread

swiftly through the north of Europe, as far as the Cimbrian

Chersonesus, (including Sweden, Denmark, Norway, and divers

other countries,) and then into Ireland, where they multiplied

veryearly into a considerable nation. 6. That some ages after,

another part of themwho had first settled in Spain, sailed to Ire-

land,under Milea, or Milesius ; and, conquering the first inhabit-

ants, took possession of the land. 7. That about the same time

the Gomerians came to Ireland, the Magogians, or Scythians,

came to Britain ; so early that both still spoke the same language,

andwell understood each other. 8. That the Irish, spoke by

the Gomerians, and the Welsh, spoke by the Magogians, are

one and the same language, expressed by the same seventeen

letters, which were long after brought by a Gomerian Prince

into Greece. 9. That all the languages ofEurope, Greek and

Latinin particular, are derived from this. 10. That the ante-

diluvian language, spoken by all till after the flood, and then

continued in the family of Shem, was Hebrew ; and from this

(theHebrew) tongue many ofthe Eastern languages are derived.

The foregoing particulars this fine writer has made highly

probable. And these may be admitted, thoughwe do not agree

to his vehement panegyric on the Irish language ; much less,

receive all the stories told by the Irish Poets, or Chroniclers,

as genuine, authentic history.

At eleven I preached in Camborne Church-town ; and I

believe the hearts of all the people were bowed down before the

•

[Sept. 178

Lord. After the Quarterly Meeting in Redruth, I preached in

the market-place, on the first principle, " Ye are saved through

faith." It is also the last point ; and it connects the first point

of religion with the last.

Sun. 5.-About five in the evening I preached at Gwennap.

I believe two or three and twenty thousand were present ; and

I believe God enabled me so to speak, that even those who stood

farthest off could hear distinctly. I think this is my ne plus

ultra. I shall scarce see a larger congregation, till we meet in

the air.

After preaching at Bodmin, Launceston, Tiverton, and Hal-

berton, on Wednesday, 5, about noon, I preached at Taunton.

I believe it my duty to relate here what some will esteem a most

notable instance of enthusiasm. Be it so or not, I aver the

plain fact. In an hour after we left Taunton, one of the chaise

horses was on a sudden so lame, that he could hardly set his

foot to the ground. It being impossible to procure any human

help, I knew of no remedy but prayer. Immediately the lame-

ness was gone, and he went just as he did before. In the

evening I preached at South-Brent ; and the next day went on

to Bristol.

Fri. 8. I went over to Kingswood, and made a particular

inquiry into the management of the school. I found some of

the Rules had not been observed at all; particularly that of

rising in the morning. Surely Satan has a peculiar spite at this

school ! What trouble has it cost me for above these thirty

years ! I can plan; but who will execute ? I know not ; God

help me !

Sun. 9. In the calm, sunshiny evening I preached near

King's Square. I know nothing more solemn than such acon-

grégation, praising God with one heart and one voice. Surely

they who talk of the indecency of field-preaching never saw such

asight as this.

Mon. 10. I preached at Paulton and Shepton-Mallet to a

lively, increasing people in each place. Tuesday, 11. I found

the same cause of rejoicing at Coleford ; and the next evening

at Frome. Thursday, 13. I preached at Roade and at Bradford.

Friday, 14. After an interval of thirty years, I preached again

in Trowbridge. About two I preached near the church in

Freshford ; and then spent a day or two at Bath.

On Monday, 17, I preached at Chew-Magna and Stoke :

Oct. 1781.] 217

on Tuesday at Clutton and Pensford. But Pensford is now

a dull, dreary place, the flower of the congregation being

gone.

Thur. 20.-I went over to Mangots-Field, a place famous

for all manner of wickedness, and the only one in the neighbour-

hood ofKingswood which we had totally neglected. But, ona

sudden, light is sprung up even in this thick darkness. Many

inquire what they must do to be saved. Many of these have

broke off outward sin, and are earnestly calling for an inward

Saviour. I preached in the main street, to almost all the inha-

bitants ofthe town, on, " Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and

thou shalt be saved."

Fri. 21. I preached at Thornbury, where I had not been

before for near forty years. It seems as if good might at length

be done here also ; as an entire new generation is now come up,

in the room of the dry, stupid stocks that were there before.

On Monday, 24, and the following days, I met the classes at

Bristol, andwas not a little surprised to find that the society is

still decreasing. Certainly we have all need to stir up the gift

ofGod that is in us, and with all possible care to " strengthen

the things that remain."

Thur. 27. I preached atBath andBradford; and onFriday,

at Trowbridge. How long did we toil here and take nothing !
Fri-

At length, it seems, the answer ofmany prayers is come.

day, 28. About noon I preached at Keynsham ; and not without

hopes ofdoing good even here. Since Miss Owen has removed

from Publow , Miss Bishop has set up a school here ; and it is

worthy to be called a Christian school. It is what the school

at Publow was !

Sat. 29. I spent an hour with Mr. Henderson at Hannam,

and particularly inquired into his whole method ; and I am

persuaded there is not such another house for lunatics in the

threekingdoms . He has a peculiar art ofgoverning his patients ;

not by fear, but by love. The consequence is, many of them

speedily recover, and love him ever after.

Thur. OCTOBER 4.-I was importuned to preach the con-

demned sermon at Bristol. I did so, though with little hope of

doing good; the criminals being eminently impenitent. Yet

they were, for the present, melted into tears ; and they were

not out of God's reach .

Sun. 7-. I took my leave of the congregation in the new

[Oct. 1781.

Square, in a calm, delightful evening. Monday, 8. I preached

at the Devizes about eleven ; at Sarum in the evening.

Tues. 9.-I preached at Winchester, where I went with

great expectation to see that celebrated painting in the cathe-

dral, the raising of Lazarus. But I was disappointed. I

observed, 1. There wassuch a huddle of figures, that, had I not

been told, I should not ever have guessed what they meant.

2. The colours in general were far too glaring, such as neither

Christ nor his followers ever wore . When will painters have

common sense ?

Wed. 10. I opened the new preaching-house just finished

at Newport in the Isle of Wight. After preaching, I explained

the nature of a Methodist society ; ofwhich few had before the

least conception. Friday, 11. I came to London, and was

informed that my wife died on Monday. This evening she

was buried, though I was not informed ofit till a day or two

after.

Mon. 15. I set out for Oxfordshire, and spent five days

with much satisfaction among the societies. I found no offences

among them at all, but they appeared to walk in love. On

Friday, 19, I returned to London.

Sun. 21. About ten at night we set out for Norwich, and

came thither about noon on Monday. Finding the people lov-

ing and peaceable, I spent a dayor two with much satisfaction ;

and on Wednesday, went on to Yarmouth. There is a prospect

ofgood here also, the two grand hinderers having taken them-

selves away. At Lowestoft I found much life and much love.

On Friday I preached at Loddon, and on Saturday returned

to Norwich.

Sun. 28.-I preached at Bear-Street to a large congregation,

most ofwhom had never seen my face before. At half an hour

after two, and at five, Ipreached to our usual congregation ; and

the next morning commended them to the grace of God.

Mon. 29.-I went to Fakenham, and in the evening preached

in the Room, built by Miss Franklin, now Mrs. Parker. I

believe most of the town were present. Tuesday, 30. I went

to Wells, a considerable sea-port, twelve miles from Fakenham,

where also Miss Franklin had opened a door by preaching

abroad, though at the peril of her life. She was followed by a

young woman of the town, with whom I talked largely, and

found her very sensible, and much devoted to God. From her

Dec. 1781.1 JOURNAL. 219

I learnt, that till the Methodists came, they had none but

female Teachers in this country ; and that there were six of these

within ten or twelve miles, all of whom were members of the

Church of England. I preached about ten in a small, neat

preaching-house ; and all but two or three were very attentive.

Here are a few who appear to be in great earnest. And if so,

they will surely increase.

At two in the afternoon I preached at Walsingham, a place

famous for many generations. Afterwards I walked over what

is left ofthe famous Abbey, the east end ofwhich is still stand-

ing. We then went to the Friary ; the cloisters and chapel

whereof are almost entire. Had there been a grain of virtue or

public spirit in Henry the Eighth, these noblebuildings need not

have run to ruin.

Wed. 31. I went to Lynn, and preached in the evening to

a very genteel congregation. I spoke more strongly than I am

accustomed to do, and hope they were not all sermon-proof.

Friday, NOVEMBER 2. I returned to London.

Mon. 5. I began visiting the classes, and found a consider-

able increase in the society. This I impute chiefly to a small

company ofyoung persons, who have kept a prayer-meeting at

five every morning. In the following week, I visited most of

the country societies, and found them increasing rather than

decreasing. Sunday, 18. I preached at St. John's, Wapping ;

andGodwas present both to wound and heal. Monday, 19.

Travelling all night, I breakfasted at Towcester, and preached

there in the evening and the following morning. Tuesday, 20.

Wehad apleasant walk to Whittlebury. This is still the love-

liest congregation, as well as the liveliest society, in the Circuit.

Thursday, 22. We had a large congregation at Northampton.

On Friday I returned to London.

Mon. 26. I took a little tour through Sussex ; and Wednes-

day, 28, I preached at Tunbridge-Wells, in the large Presby-

terian meeting-house, to a well- dressed audience, and yet deeply

serious. On Thursday I preached at Sevenoaks. Friday, 30.

I went on to Shoreham, to see the venerable old man. He is

in his eighty-ninth year, and has nearly lost his sight : But he

has not lost his understanding, nor even his memory ; and is full

of faith and love. On Saturday I returned to London.

Sunday, DECEMBER 2.-I preached at St. Swithin's church

in the evening. About eight I took coach, and reached St.

[Jan. 1782.

Neot's in the morning. I preached in the evening to a larger

congregationthan I ever saw there before. Tuesday, 4. About

nine I preached for the first time at Bugden, and in the evening

at Huntingdon. Wednesday, 5. I was at Bedford. On Thurs-

day, 6, ourHouse at Lutonwas thoroughly filled ; and I believe

the people felt, as well as heard, those words, " Where their

worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched." On Saturday

I was in London.

Mon. 10. I went to Canterbury, and preached in the even-

ing on, " Casting all your care upon Him." It was a word in

season. Tuesday, 14. Finding abundance of people troubled,

as though England were on the brink of destruction, I applied

those comfortable words, " I will not destroy the city for ten's

sake." Wednesday, 12. I preached at Chatham, and the next

day returned to London.

Friday, 21, weobserved all over England as aday of fasting

and prayer : And surely God will be entreated for a sinful

nation ! Friday, 28. By reading, in Thurloe's Memoirs, the

original papers of the treaty at Uxbridge, agnovi fatum Car-

thaginis ! * I saw it was then flatly impossible for the King to

escape destruction. For the Parliament were resolved to accept

no terms, unless he would, 1. Give up all his friends to beggary

or death ; and, 2. Require all the three kingdoms to swear to the

Solemn League and Covenant. He had no other choice. Who

then can blame him for breaking off that treaty ?

Tuesday, JANUARY 1, 1782.-I began the service at four

in West-Street chapel, and again at ten. In the evening many

ofus at the new chapel rejoiced in God our Saviour.

Sun. 6. A larger company than ever before met together to

renew their covenant with God ; and the dread of God, in an

eminent degree, fell upon the whole congregation.

Mon. 14-Being informed, that, through the ill conduct of

the Preachers, things were in much disorder at Colchester, I

went down, hoping to " strengthen the things which remained,

that were ready to die." I found that part of the Class- Leaders

were dead, and the rest had left the society ; the Bands were

totally dissolved ; morning preaching was given up ; and

hardly any, except on Sunday, attended the evening preaching.

This evening, however, we had a very large congregation, to

* I perceived at once the fate of the Monarchy.-EDIT.

March, 1782. ] 221

whom I proclaimed " the terrors of the Lord." I then told

them, I would immediately restore the morning preaching :

And the next morning I suppose an hundred attended. In the

day-time I visited as manyas I possibly could, in all quarters of

the town. I then inquired, who were proper and willing to

meet in Band; and who were fittest for Leaders either of

bands or classes. The congregation this evening was larger

than the last ; and many again put their hands to the plough.

O may the Lord confirm the fresh desires he has given, that

theymay no more look back !

Fri. MARCH 1.-We had a very solemn and comfortable

watch-night at West-Street. Sunday, 3. I tookcoach, and the

next evening had awatch-night at Bath. Tuesday and Wed-

nesday. After meeting the classes, I visited as manyas I could,

chiefly of the sick and poor. Thursday, 7. I preached about

eleven at Keynsham, and in the evening at Bristol. Friday,

18, and most of the following days, I visited Mr. C-n, just

hovering between life and death. What a blessing may this

illness be ! On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I visited

the classes, and found a little increase. Friday, 25. I opened

the new House at Freatford. In the afternoon I called at Mr.

Henderson's, at Hannam, and spent some time with poor, discon-

solate Louisa. Such a sight, in the space of fourteen years, I

never saw before ! Pale and wan, worn with sorrow,beaten with

wind and rain, having been so long exposed to all weathers, with

herhairrough and frizzled, and onlya blanketwrapped round her,

native beauty gleamed through all. Her features were small and

finely turned; her eyes had a peculiar sweetness ; her arms and

fingers were delicately shaped, and her voice soft and agreeable.

But her understandingwas in ruins. She appeared partly insane,

partly silly and childish. She would answer no question con-

cerning herself, only that her name was Louisa. She seemed to

take no notice of any person or thing, and seldom spoke above

aword or two at atime. Mr. Henderson has restored her health,

and she loves him much. She is in a small room by herself, and

wants nothing that is proper for her.

Some time since a gentleman called, who said he came two

hundred miles on purpose to inquire after her. When he saw

her face, he trembled exceedingly ; but all he said was,"She

was born in Germany, and is not now four-and-twenty years
old."

[March,1782.

In the evening I preached at Kingswood School, and after-

wards met the Bands. The colliers spoke without any reserve.

I was greatly surprised : Not only the matter ofwhat they spoke

was rational and scriptural, but the language, yea, and the

manner, were exactly proper. Who teacheth like Him ?

Mon. 18.-I left our friends at Bristol with satisfaction ; hav-

ing beenmuch refreshed among them. In the evening and the

next day, I preached at Stroud ; Wednesday, 20, at Glouces-

ter, Tewkesbury, and Worcester.

Fri. 22. About two in the morning we had such a storm as

I never remember. Before it began, our chamber-door clattered

to and fro exceedingly : So it sounded to us; although, in fact,

it did not move at all. I then distinctly heard the door open,

and, having a light, rose and went to it ; but it was fast shut.

Meantime the window was wide open : I shut it, andwent to

sleep again. So deep a snow fell in the night, that wewere

afraid the roads would be impassable. However, we set out in

the afternoon, and made shift to get to Kidderminster. We had

a large congregation in the evening, though it was intensely

cold ; and another at seven in the morning, Saturday, 23 ; and

all of them were deeply serious. It was with a good deal of

difficulty we got to Bridgenorth, much of the road being blocked

up with snow. In the afternoon we had another kind of diffi-

culty : The roads were so rough and so deep, that we were in

danger, every now and then, of leaving our wheels behind us.

But, by adding two horses to my own, at length we got safe to

Madeley.

Both Mr. and Mrs. Fletcher complained, that, after all the

pains they had taken, they could not prevail on the people to

join in society, no nor even to meet in a class. Resolving to
try, I preached to a crowded audience, on, " I am not ashamed

of the Gospel of Christ." I followed the blow in the afternoon,

by strongly applying those words, " Awake, thou that sleepest ; "

and then enforcing the necessity of Christian fellowship on all

who desired either to awake or keep awake. I then desired

those that were willing to join together for this purpose, to call

upon Mr. Fletcher and me after Service. Ninety-four or ninetyWe

five persons did so ; about as many men as women.

explained to them the nature of a Christian society, and they

willingly joined therein.

Mon. 25. I spent an agreeable hour at the Boarding-School

April, 1782. ]

in Sheriff- Hales. I believe the Misses Yeomans are well

qualified for their office. Several of the children are under

strong drawings. We then went on to Newcastle-under-Lyne.

(This is the name of a little river which runs near the town.)

Tuesday, 26. I found many at Burslem, too, under sad appre-

hensions of the public danger : So I applied to these also those

comfortable words, " I will not destroy it for ten's sake."

Thur. 28. Coming to Congleton, I found the Calvinists

were just breaking in, and striving to make havoc of the flock.

Is this brotherly love? Is this doing as we would be done to ?

No more than robbing on the highway. But if it is decreed,

they cannot help it : So we cannot blame them.

MARCH 29.-(Being Good-Friday.) I came to Macclesfield

just time enough to assist Mr. Simpson in the laborious service

of the day. I preached for him morning and afternoon ; andwe

administered the sacrament to about thirteen hundred persons.

While wewere administering, I heard a low, soft, solemn sound,

just like that of an Eolian harp. It continued five or six mi-

nutes, and so affected many,that theycould not refrainfrom tears.

It then gradually died away. Strange that no other organist

(that I know) should think of this. In the evening, I preached

at our Room. Herewas that harmony which artcannot imitate.

Sat. 30.-As our friends at Leek, thirteen miles from Mac-

clesfield, would take no denial, I went over, and preached about

noon to alovely congregation. God bore witness to his word in an

uncommon manner, so that I could not think much ofmy labour.

MARCH 31.-(Being Easter-Day.) I preached inthe church,

morning and evening, where we had about eight hundred com-

municants. In the evening, we had a love-feast ; and such an

one as I had not seen for many years. Sixteen or eighteen per-

sons gave a clear, scriptural testimony of being renewed in love.

Andmany others told what God had done for their souls, with

inimitable simplicity.

Mon. APRIL 1.-We set out in the morning for Chapel-en-

le-Firth . But such a journey I have seldom had, unless in

the middle of January. Wind, snow, and rainwe had in abun-

dance, and roads almost impassable. However, at last we got

to the town, and had agood walk from thence to the chapel,

through the drivingsnow, about half a mile. But I soon forgot

my labour, finding a large congregation that were all athirst for

God.


Tues. 2.-About ten I preached at New-Mills, to as simple

a people as those at Chapel. Perceiving they had suffered

much by not having the doctrineof Perfection clearly explained,

and strongly pressed upon them, I preached expressly on the

head ; andspoke to the same effect in meeting the society. The

spirits of many greatly revived ; and they are now " going on

unto perfection. " I found it needful to press the same thing at

Stockport in the evening. Thursday, 4. I preachedat noonin

the new preaching-house at Ashton, to as many as the House

would hold. The inscription over the door is, “ Can any good

come out of Nazareth ? Come and see." In the evening I

preached at Manchester.

Fri. 5.-About one I preached at Oldham ; and was surprised

to see all the street lined with little children; and such children

as I never saw till now. Before preaching they only ran round

me and before me ; but after it, a whole troop, boys and girls,

closed me in, and would not be content till I shook each of

them by the hand. Being then asked to visit a dying woman,

I no sooner entered the room, than both she and her companions

were in such an emotion as I have seldom seen. Some laughed;

some cried ; all were so transported, that they could hardly

speak. O how much better is it to go to the poor, than to the

rich ; and to the house of mourning than to the house of feast-

ing!

About this time I had a remarkable letter. Part of it was as

follows :-

" THE work of God prospers among us here : I never saw

anything equal to it. The last time I was at St. Just, the

Leaders gave me an account of seventy persons who had found

either pardon or perfect love, within the last fortnight : And the

night and morning I was there, twenty more were delivered.

One-and-twenty, likewise, were then added to the society ; most

ofwhom have found peace with God.

Sat. 19. I preached at St. Helen's, a small, but populous

town, ten or twelve miles from Liverpool, in Joseph Harris's

house ; who is removed hither from Kingswood, to take care of

the copper-works. Surely God has brought him hither for good.

The people seem to be quite ripe for the Gospel.

I waswaked at half-past two this morning, as was Mr. Broad-

bent also, by a very loud noise, like a vast crack of thunder,

April, 1782.]

accompaniedwitha flash of bright light. Itmadethe whole room

shake, and all the tables and chairs therein jar. But (what is

strange) none in the house, or in thetown, heard it, beside us.

Mon. 15.-I saw an uncommon sight,-the preaching-house

at Wigan filled, yea, crowded ! Perhaps God will cause fruit

to spring up even in this desolate place.

Ihad now leisure to transcribe a letter, wrote last May, from

Amherst, in Nova-Scotia, by a youngman whose father, some

years since, went thither with his whole family :-

" In the year 1779, I saw, if I would go to heaven, I must

lead anew life. But I did not know Iwanted an inwardchange,

or see the deplorable state I was in by nature, till I was at a

prayer-meeting, held at Mr. Oxley's. While they were praying,

myheart began to throb within me, my eyes gushed out with

tears, and I cried aloud for mercy; as did most that were in the

room, about fourteen in number. One, indeed, could not hold

from laughing, whenwe began to cry out ; but it was not long

before he cried as loud as any. In a few moments, it pleased

God to fill Mrs. Oxley with joy unspeakable. After this, we

went, almost every night, to Mr. Oxley's, to sing and pray.

Going thence one night, and seeing the Northern Lights, I

thought, What, if the Day of Judgment be coming ? ' I

threw myself down on the ground, and cried to the Lord for

mercy. On Sunday, Mr. Wells, an old Methodist, came to

Amherst, and gave us an exhortation ; inwhich he said, ' Sin

and repent, sin and repent, till you repent in the bottomless

pit. ' The words went like a dagger to my heart ; and I conti-

nued mourning after God for five weeks and four days, till our

monthly meeting. I was then strongly tempted to put an end

to my life ; but God enabled me to resist the temptation. Two

days after, an old Methodist, after praying with me, said, ' I

think you will get the blessing before morning.' About two

hours after, while we were singing a hymn, it pleased God to

reveal his Son inmy heart. Since that time, Ihave hadmany

blessed days, andmanyhappy nights .

"One Sunday night, after my brother Dicky and I were

gone to bed, I asked him, Can you believe ? ' He answered,

' No.' I exhorted him to wrestle hard with God, and got up

to pray with him. Buthe was unbelieving still : So I went to

sleep again. Yet, not being satisfied, after talking largely to

him, I got up again, and began praying for him ; being fully


persuaded that God would set his soul at liberty. And so he

did : He pardoned all his sins, and bade him ' go in peace.'

" It being now between twelve and one, I wakedmybrothers,

John and Thomas, and told them the glad tidings. They got

up. We went to prayer; and when we rose from our knees,

Tommy declared, 'God has blotted out all my sins.' I then

went to my father and mother, (who were both seeking salva-

tion,) and told them the joyful news. My father said, ' Willy,

pray for us.' I did ; and earnestly exhorted him to wrestle

with God for himself. So he did ; and it was not long before

God set his soul also at liberty. The next morning, it pleased

Him toshowmy sister Sally his pardoning love. Blessedbe his

name for all his benefits !

"Not long after, Mr. Oxley's son came to our house, and lay

withme, and complained of his hardness of heart. After I had

talked with him a little while, the Lord laid his hand upon him

in a wonderful manner, so that he rolled up and down, and

roared as in the agonies of death. But between one and two in

the morning, he likewise could rejoice in God his Saviour.

These are a few of the wonderful works of God among us:

But he is also working on the hearts of the inhabitants in

general.

" WILLIAM BLACK, Jun."

Mon. 22. I preached, about eleven, in Todmorden church,

thoroughly filled with attentive hearers ; in the afternoon, in

Heptonstall church ; and at the Ewood in the evening. Wed-

nesday, 24. The flood, caused by the violent rains, shut me up

at Longwood-House. But on Thursday the rain turned to

snow : So on Friday I got to Halifax ; where Mr. Floyd lay

in ahigh fever, almost dead forwant of sleep. This was pre-

vented by the violent pain inone of his feet, which was much

swelled, and so sore, it could not be touched. We joined in

prayer that God would fulfil his word, and give his beloved

sleep. Presently the swelling, the soreness, the pain, were

gone; and he had a good night's rest.

Sat. 27. As we rode to Keighley, the north-east windwas

scarce supportable ; the frost being exceeding sharp, and all the

mountains covered with snow . Saturday, 28. Bingley church

was hot, but the heatwas very supportable, both in themorning

and afternoon. Monday, 29. I preached at Skipton-in-Craven,

at Grassington, and at Pateley-Bridge. Tuesday, 30. I found

May, 1782.] JOURNAL. 227

Miss Ritchie, at Otley, still hovering between life and death.

Thursday, MAY 2. I met the select society ; all but two retain-

ing the pure love of God, which some of them received near

thirty years ago. On Saturday evening I preached to an

earnest congregation at Yeadon. The same congregation was

present in the morning, together with an army of little children ;

full as numerous, and almost as loving, as those that surrounded

us at Oldham.

Sun. 5. One of my horses having been so thoroughly

lamed at Otley, that he died in three or four days, I purchased

another: But as it was his way to stand still when he pleased,

I set out as soon as possible. Whenwe had gone three miles ,

the chaise stuck fast. I walked for about a mile, and then

borrowed a horse, which brought me to Birstal before the

Prayers were ended. I preached on those words in the Gospel,

" Do ye now believe ?" which gave me an opportunity of speak-

ing strong words, both to believers and unbelievers. In the

evening I preached at Leeds, on St. James's beautiful descrip-

tion of pure religion and undefiled: " To visit the fatherless

and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted

from the world."

Thur. 9. I preached at Wakefield in the evening. Such

attention sat on every face, that it seemed as if every one in the

congregation was on the brink of believing. Friday, 10. I

preached at Sheffield ; Saturday, 11, aboutnoon, at Doncaster ;

and in the evening at Epworth. I found the accounts I had

received of the work of God here, were not at all exaggerated.

Here is a little countrytown, containing a little more than eight

or nine hundred grown people ; andthere has been such a work

among them, as we have not seen in so short a time either at

Leeds, Bristol, or London.

Sun. 12.-About eight I preached at Misterton ; about one

at Overthorpe. Many of the Epworth children were there, and

their spirit spread to all around them. But the huge congrega

tionwas in the market-place at Epworth, and the Lord in the

midst of them. The love-feast which followed exceeded all.

I never knew such a one here before. As soon as one had done

speaking, another began. Several of them were children ; but

they spoke with the wisdom ofthe aged, though with the fire of

youth . So out of the mouth of babes and sucklings did God

perfect praise.

[June, 1782

Mon. 13. I preached at Thorne. Never did I see such a

congregation here before. The flame of Epworth hath spread

hither also: In seven weeks fifty persons have found peace with

God

Tues. 14. Some years ago four factories for spinning and

weaving were set up at Epworth. In these a large number of

young women, and boys, and girls were employed. The whole

conversation of these was profane and loose to the last degree.

But some of these stumbling in at the prayer-meeting were sud-

denly cut to the heart. These never rested till they had gained

their companions. The whole scene was changed. In three

of the factories, no more lewdness or profaneness were found ;

for God had put anew song in their mouth, and blasphemies

were turned to praise. Those three I visited to-day, and found

religion had taken deep root in them. No trifling word was

heard among them, and they watch over each other in love. I

found it exceeding good to be there, and we rejoiced together

in the God of our salvation.

Wed. 15.-I set out for the other side of Lincolnshire.

Thursday, 16. I preached in the new House at Barrow. Iwas

well pleased to meet with my old fellow-traveller, Charles Dela-

motte, here. He gave me an invitation to lodge at his house,

which I willingly accepted of. He seemed to be just the same

as when we lodged together, five-and-forty years ago. Only he

complained of the infirmities of old age, which, through the

mercy of God, I know nothing of.

Hence I wentby Hull, Beverley, Bridlington ; and then

hastened to Newcastle-upon-Tyne,where I preached on Sunday,

26. Monday, 27. I set out for Scotland, and Wednesday, 29,

reachedDunbar. Theweather was exceeding rough and stormy.

Yetwe had a large and serious congregation. Thursday, 30.

Finding the grounds were so flooded, that the common roads

were not passable, we provided a guide to lead us a few miles

round, by which means we came safe to Edinburgh.

Fri. 31. As I lodged with LadyMaxwell at Saughton-Hall,

(agood old mansion-house, three miles from Edinburgh,) she

desired me to give a short discourse to a few of her poor neigh-

bours. I did so, at four in the afternoon, on the story ofDives

and Lazarus. About seven I preached in our House at Edin-

burgh, and fully delivered my own soul. Saturday, JUNE 1.

I spent a little time with forty poor children, whom LadyMax-

June, 1782.] JOURNAL. 229

wellkeeps at school. They are swiftlybrought forward in reading

andwriting, and learn the principles of religion. But I observe

inthem all the ambitiosa paupertas. * Be they ever so poor,

theymust have a scrap of finery. Many of them have not a

shoe to their foot: Butthe girl in rags is not without her ruffles.

Sun. 2.-Mr. Collins intended tohave preached on the Castle-

hill, at twelve o'clock : But the dull Ministerkept us in the kirk

tillpast one. At six the House was well filled: And I did not

shun to declare the whole counsel of God. I almost wonder at

myself. I seldom speak anywhere so roughly as in Scotland.

Andyet most of the people hear and hear, and are just what

they were before.

Mon. 3.-I went on to Dundee. The congregation was

large and attentive, as usual. But I found no increase, either

of the society, or of the work of God. Tuesday, 4. The House

at Arbroath was well filled with serious and attentive hearers.

Only one or two pretty flutterers seemed inclined to laugh, if

anywould have encouraged them. Wednesday, 5. We set out

early, but did not reachAberdeen till between five and six in

the evening.

The congregations were large both morning andevening, and

manyof them much alive to God. Friday, 7. We received a

pleasing account of the work of God in the north. The flame

begins to kindle even at poor, dull Keith : But muchmore at a

little town near Fraserburg : And most of all at Newburgh, a

small fishing town, fifteen miles from Aberdeen, where the soci-

ety swiftly increases : And not only menand women, but a con-

siderable number of children, are either rejoicing inGod or pant-

ing after him.

Sat. 8-. I walked with a friend to Mr. Lesley's seat, less

than amile from the city. It is one ofthe pleasantest places of

the kind I ever saw, either in Britain or Ireland. He has laid

his gardens out on the side of a hill, which gives a fine prospect

both of sea and land: And the variety is beyond what couldbe

expected within so small a compass. But still

Valeat possessor oportet,

Si comportatis rebus bene cogitat uti .

Unless a manhave peace within, he can enjoy none of the things

That are round about him .

*The love of finery among the poor. EDIT.

[June, 1782.

Sun. 9.-We had a lovely congregation in the morning,many

ofwhom were athirst for full salvation. In the evening God

sent forth his voice, yea, and that amighty voice. I think few

of the congregationwereunmoved: And we never had amore

solemn parting.

Mon. 10. We went toArbroath ; Tuesday, 11, to Dun-

dee; and Wednesday, 12, to Edinburgh. We had such

congregations both that evening and the next, as had not been

on aweek-day for many years: Some fruit of our labours here

we have had already. Perhaps this is atoken that we shall

have more.

Fri. 14. We travelled through apleasant country to Kelso,

where we were cordially received by Dr. Douglas. I spoke

strong words in the evening, concerning judgment to come:

And some seemed to awake out of sleep. But how shall they

keep awake, unless they " that fear the Lord speak often

one to another ? "

Sat. 15.-As I was coming down stairs, the carpet slipped

from under my feet, which, I know not how, turned me round,

and pitchedmeback, with myhead foremost, for six or seven

stairs. Itwas impossible to recover myself till I came to the

bottom. My head rebounded once or twice, from the edge of

the stone stairs. But it felt to me exactly as if I had fallen on

a cushion or a pillow. Dr. Douglas ran out, sufficiently

affrighted. But he needed not. For I rose as well as ever ;

having received no damage, but the loss of a little skin from

one or two of my fingers. Doth not God give his angels

charge over us, to keep us in all ourways ?

In the evening, and on Sunday, 16, I preached at Alnwick.

Monday, 17. I preached at Rothbury in the Forest ; formerly

a nest of banditti ; now as quiet a place as any in the county.

About one I preached at Saugh-House, a lone house, twelve

miles from Rothbury. Though it was sultry hot, the people

flocked from all sides: And it was a season of refreshment to

many. In the evening I went to Hexham, and preached near

the old Priory, to an immense multitude. Very manywere

present again in the morning, and seemed to drink in everyword

that was spoken .

Tues. 18.-After preaching about one at Prudhoe, Iwent to

Newcastle.

Wednesday, 19, and the following days, I examined the

July, 1782.1

society. I found them increased in grace, though not in num-

ber. I think four in five, at least, were alive to God. Το

quicken them more, I divided all the classes anew, according to

their places of abode. Another thing I observed, the congrega-

tions were larger, morning and evening, than any I have seen

these twenty years.

Sun. 23. I preached about eight at Gateshead-Fell ; about

noon at Burnup-Field; and at the Garth-Heads in the evening.

Mystrength was as my day. Iwas no more tired at night, than

when I rose in the morning.

Mon. 24.-I came to Darlington just in time ; for a great

stumbling-block had lately occurred. But my coming gave the

people a newer thing to talk of. So I trust the new thing will

soon be forgotten.

Wed. 26. I preached at Thirsk ; Thursday, 27, at York.

Friday, 28. I entered into my eightieth year ; but, blessed be

God,my time is not " labour and sorrow." I find no more pain

or bodily infirmities than at five-and-twenty. This I still impute,

1. To the power ofGod, fitting me 'for what he calls me to.

2. To my still travelling four or five thousand miles a year.

3. To my sleeping, night or day, whenever I want it. 4. To

my rising at a set hour. And, 5. To my constant preaching,

particularly in the morning. Saturday, 29. I went on to Leeds,

and, after preaching, met the select society, consisting of about

sixty members ; most of whom can testify, that " the blood of

Jesus Christ cleanseth from all sin."

Mon. JULY 1. Coming to Sheffield, just at the time of the

Quarterly Meeting, I preached on Acts ix. 31 : " Then had the

churches rest , and were edified ; and walking in the fear of

the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multi-

plied." This is eminently fulfilled in all these parts ; at Shef-

field inparticular.

Tues. 2.-I found a serious, as well as a numerous, congre-

gation at Nottingham. Thursday, 4. I preached at Derby. I

trust the work ofGod will now prosper here also. All thejars

of our brethren are at an end, and they strive together for the

hope ofthe Gospel.

Sat. 6.-I came to Birmingham, and preached once more in

the old dreary preaching-house.

Sun. 7.-I opened the new House at eight, and it contained

the people well: But not in the evening ; many were then


constrained to go away. In the middle of the sermon, a huge

noise was heard, caused by the breaking of abench onwhich

some people stood. None of them was hurt ; yet it occasioned

a general panic at first : But in a few minutes allwas quiet.

Wed. 11.-I read Prayers and preached in the church at

Darlaston, and in the evening returned to Birmingham. Fri-

day, 12. I walked through Mr. Bolton's curious works. He

has carried every thing which he takes in hand to a high degree

of perfection, and employs in the house about five hundred men,

women, and children. His gardens, running along the side ofa

hill, are delightful indeed ; having alarge piece of water at the

bottom, in which are two well-wooded islands. If faithand love

dwell here, then there maybe happiness too. Otherwise allthese

beautiful things are as unsatisfactory as straws andfeathers.

Sat. 13. I spentan hourinHagley-Park ; I suppose inferior

to few, if any, in England. But we were straitened for time.

To take a proper view of it, would require five or six hours.

Afterwards I went to the Leasowes, a farm so called, four or

five miles from Hagley. I never was so surprised. I have seen

nothing in all England to be comparedwith it. It is beautiful

and elegant all over. There is nothing grand, nothing costly ;

no temples, so called ; no statues ; (except two or three, which

hadbetter have been spared;) but such walks, such shades,

such hills and dales, such lawns, such artless cascades, such

waving woods, with water intermixed, as exceed all imagination !

On the upper side, from the openings of a shady walk, is a most

beautiful and extensive prospect. And allthis is comprised in

the compass of three miles ! I doubt if it be exceeded by any

thing in Europe.

The father of Mr. Shenstone was a gentleman-farmer, who
This

bred him at the University, and left him a small estate.

he wholly laid out in improving the Leasowes, living in hopes

ofgreat preferment, grounded on the promises ofmanyrichand

great friends. But nothing was performed, till he died at forty-

eight; probably of a broken heart !

Sun. 14. I heard a sermon in theoldchurch, at Birmingham,

which the Preacher uttered with great vehemence against these

" hairbrained, itinerant enthusiasts." Buthe totally missed his

mark; having not the least conception ofthe persons whom he
undertook to describe.

Mon. 15. Leaving Birmingham early in the morning, I

Aug. 1782.]

preached at nine in alarge school-room at Coventry. About

noon I preached to a multitude of people, in the brick-yard, at

Bedworth. A few of them seemed to be much affected. In the

evening I preached at Hinckley, one of the civilest towns I have

seen.

Wed. 17.-I went on to Leicester ; Thursday, 18, to

Northampton ; and Friday, 19, to Hinxworth, in Hertford-

shire. Adjoining to Miss Harvey's house is a pleasant garden ;

and she has made ashady walk round the neighbouring mea-

dows. How gladly could I repose awhile here ! But repose is

not for me in this world. In the evening many of the villagers

flocked together, so that her great hall was well filled. I would

fainhope, some of them received the seed in good ground, and

will bring forth fruit with patience.

Sat. 20. We reached London. All the following week the

congregations were uncommonly large. Wednesday, 24. My

brother and I paid our last visit to Lewisham, and spent a few

pensive hours with the relict of our good friend, Mr. Blackwell.

We took one more walk round the garden and meadow, which

he took so much pains to improve. Upwards of forty years this

has been my place of retirement, when I could spare two or

three days from London. In that time, first Mrs. Sparrow

went to rest ; then Mrs. Dewall ; then good Mrs. Blackwell ;

now Mr. Blackwell himself. Who can tell how soon we may

follow them?

Mon. 29.-I preached at West-Street, on the ministry of

angels ; andmanywere greatly refreshed in considering the office

of those spirits that continually attend on the heirs of salvation.

Friday, AUGUST 2, we observed as a day of fasting and

prayer for a blessing on the ensuing Conference ; and I believe

God clothed his word with power in an uncommon manner

throughout the week ; so that, were it only on this account, the

Preachers, who came from all parts, found their labour was not

invain.

Tues. 13.-Being obliged to leave London a little sooner

than I intended, I concluded the Conference to-day; and desired

all our brethren to observe it as a day of solemn thanksgiving.

At three in the afternoon I took coach. About one on Wed-

nesday morning we were informed that three highwaymen were

on the road before us, and had robbed all the coaches that had

passed, some of them within an hour or two. I felt no uncasi

[Aug. 1782.

ness on the account, knowing that God would take care of us:

Andhe did so ; for,beforewe came to the spot, all the highway-

men were taken ; so wewent on unmolested, and early in the

afternoon came safe to Bristol.

Thur. 15.-I set out for the west ; preached at Taunton in

the evening ; Friday noon, at Collumpton ; and in the evening,

at Exeter. Here poorHugh Saunderson has pitched his stand-

ard, and declared open war. Part of the society have joined

him; the rest go on their way quietly, to make their calling and

election sure.

Sun. 18.-I was much pleased with the decent behaviour of

the whole congregation at the cathedral ; as also with the solemn

music at the post-communion, one of the finest compositions I

ever heard. The Bishop inviting me to dinner, I could not

but observe, 1. The lovely situation ofthe palace, covered with

trees, and as rural and retired as if it was quite in the country.

2. The plainness of the furniture, not costly or showy, but just

fit for a Christian Bishop. 3. The dinner, sufficient, but not

redundant ; plain and good, but not delicate. 4. The pro-

priety of the company,-five Clergymen and four of the Alder-

men; and, 5. The genuine, unaffected courtesy of the Bishop,

who, I hope, will be ablessing to his whole diocese.

We set out early in the morning, Monday, 19, and in the

afternoon came to Plymouth. I preached in the evening, and

at five and twelve on Tuesday, purposing to preach in the

Square at the Dock in the evening ; but the rain prevented.

However, I did so on Wednesday evening. A little before I

concluded, the Commanding Officer came into the Square with

his regiment ; but he immediately stopped the drums, and drew

upall his menin order on the high side of the Square. They

were all still as night; nor did any ofthem stir, till I hadpro-

nounced the blessing.

Thur. 22. I preached at St. Austle ; Friday, 23, at Truro,

and in the street at Helstone. Saturday, 24. I preached in

Marazion, at eleven ; in the evening, at Penzance.

Sun. 25. We prayed that God would " stay the bottles of

heaven;" and he heard our prayer. I preached at Mousehole

about nine, to a large congregation ; to a larger at Buryan,

about two : But that at St. Just in the evening exceeded both

ofthem put together. After visiting the other societies, I came

to Redruth on Saturday, 31. I preached there in the even
Sept. 1782.1 JOURNAL.

ing, and at noon on Sunday, SEPTEMBER 1. Afterwards I

expounded the Parable of the Sower at Gwennap, to how many

thousands I know not. But all (I was informed) could hear

distinctly. " This is the Lord's doing."

Mon. 2-. I went on to Port-Isaac. Tuesday, 3. I preached

inthe street at Camelford. Being informed here, that my old

friend, Mr. Thompson, Rector of St. Gennis, was near death,

and had expressed aparticular desire to see me, I judged no

time was to be lost. So, borrowing the best horse I could find,

I set out, and rode as fast as I could. On the way, I met with

awhite-headed old man,who caught me by the hand, and said,

" Sir, do you not know me ? " I answered, " No." He said,

"My father, my father ! I am poor John Trembath." I

desired him to speak to me in the evening at Launceston ;

which he did. He was for some time reduced to extreme

poverty, so as to hedge and ditch for bread; but in his dis-

tress he cried to God, who sent him an answer of peace. He

likewise enabled him to cure a gentleman that was desperately

ill, and afterward several others ; so that he grew into reputa-

tion, and gained a competent livelihood. " And now," said he,

" I want for nothing ; I am happier than ever I was in my life."

I found Mr. Thompson just alive, but quite sensible. It

seemed to me as if none in the house but himselfwas very glad

to see me. He had many doubts concerning his final state, and

rather feared, than desired, to die ; so that my whole business

was to comfort him, and to increase and confirm his confidence

in God. He desired me to administer the Lord's Supper, which

I willingly did ; and I left him much happier than I found him,

calmly waiting till his change should come.

January 19, 1786.

!
!

!

.

Wednesday, SEPTEMBER 4, 1782.-I preached in the market

house at Tiverton ; Thursday, 5, at Halberton, Taunton, and

South-Brent. Friday, 6. About ten I preached at Shipham, a

little town on the side of Mendiff, almost wholly inhabited by

miners, who dig up lapis calaminaris. I was surprised to see

such a congregation at so short awarning ; and their deep and

serious attention seemed to be a presage, that some ofthem will

profit by what they hear. In the afternoon we went on to

Bristol.

Sun. 8-Mybrother read Prayers, and I preached to a very

uncommon congregation. But a far more numerous one met

near King's Square in the evening, onwhom I strongly enforced,

" Ye cannot serve God and mammon." Permit me to observe

here, how you may distinguish agenuine small Field's Bible

from a spurious one : The genuine reads here, " Ye can serve

God andmammon." In the spurious, the " not " is supplied.

Mon. 9. About nine I preached at Paulton, where the flame

is abated, but not quenched. The same is the case at Shepton-

Mallet, where I preached in the evening. Tuesday, 10. I

went on to the simple-hearted colliers, at Coleford, abundance

of whom met at six in the evening, in agreen meadow, which
Wed-

was delightfully gilded by the rays of the setting sun.

nesday, 11. I preached to a large and serious congregation at

the end of the preaching-house at Frome.

After preaching at Roade, Pensford, Trowbridge, and Fresh-

ford, on Friday, 13, I preached at Bath. Sunday, 15. I had

a far greater number of communicants than usual. Both at

this time, and in the afternoon and the evening service, we had

no common blessing.

On Monday and Tuesday I preached at Chew-Magna, at

Sutton, Stoke, and Clutton : In mywaythither, I saw a famous

monument of antiquity, at Stanton-Drew ; supposed to have


remained there between two and three thousand years. It was

undoubtedly a Druid's temple, consisting of a smaller and a

larger circle ofhuge stones set on end, one would think by some

power morethan human. Indeed, such stones have been used for

divine worship, nearly, if not quite, from the time of the flood.

On the following days I preached at many other little places.

Sun. 22. After the service at Bristol, I hastened to Kings-

wood, and preached a funeral sermon on Jenny Hall; a lovely

young woman, who died in full triumph, and desired a sermon

might be preached on Rev. vii. 13, and following verses.

On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I visited theclasses ;

and was concerned to find, that, for these two last years, the

society has been continually decreasing. Thursday, 26, and

the following days, I visited the rest of the country societies.

For a day or two I was not well, but I went on with my work

till Sunday, when I preached morning and evening at the new

Room, and in the afternoon in Temple church.

Tues. OCTOBER 1.-I read amongthe letters, in the evening,
i

the striking account ofRobert Roe's death ; a burning and a

shining light while alive, but early numbered with the dead. Sa-

turday, 5. I visited several that are yet in the body, but long-
!

ing to depart and to be with Christ. But many have this year

stepped before them. For forty years I do not know that so
!

many have, in the space of one year, beenremoved to Abraham's

bosom.

Sun. 6-. I preached in Temple church, between our own

morning and evening service ; and I now found how to speak

here, so as to be heard by every one : Direct your voice to the

middle of the pillar fronting the pulpit.

Mon. 7.-I left Bristol with much satisfaction, firmly believ-

ing that God will revive his work there. I preached at the

Devizes about eleven ; and in the evening at Sarum ; Tuesday,

8, at Winchester, and at Portsmouth-Common. Wednesday,

9. We took a wherry for the Isle of Wight. There was sea

enough, which now and then washed over our boat. However,

in about an hour we landed safe, and walked on to Newport.

This place seems now ripe for the Gospel : Opposition is at an

end. Only let our Preachers be menof faith and love, and they
i will see the fruit oftheir labours.

Fri. 11. I returned to Portsmouth ; took chaise at two the

next morning, and in the afternoon came to London.

Oct. 1782.1 JOURNAL. 239

Mon. 14. I went to Wallingford. The House was filled in

the evening with much-affected hearers. Shall all our labour

herebe invain? Lord, thou knowest !

Tues. 15.-About noon I preached at Oxford. I have seen

no such prospect here for many years. The congregation was

large and still as night, although many gentlemen were among

them. The next evening the House would not contain the

congregation; yet all were quiet, even those that could not

come in: And I believe God not onlyopened their understand-

ings, but began a good work in some of their hearts.

Wed. 16.-I preached at Witney, one ofthe liveliest places

in the Circuit, where I always find my own soul refreshed.

I saw such agarden at Oxford as I verily believe all Eng-

land cannot parallel. It is three-square; and, I conjecture, con-

tains about an acre of ground : It is filled with fruit-trees of

various sorts, and all excellent in their kinds. But it is odd

beyond all description ; superlatively whimsical. The owner

hascrowded together pictures, statues, urns, antiques of various

kinds: For all which why should not Mr. Badcock's name, as

well as Mr. Roberts's, be consigned to posterity ?

Thur. 17.-I preached at Thame ; this evening and the next,

at High-Wycomb; and on Saturday, returned to London.

Mon. 21. I preached at Tunbridge-Wells ; Tuesday, 22,

at Sevenoaks. Wednesday, 23. I visited the house ofmourning

at Shoreham, and read the strange account at first hand. Not

long after his former wife died, Mr. H. paid his addresses to

Miss B. He had been intimately acquainted with her for some

years. By immense assiduity, and innumerable professions of

the tenderest affection, he, by slow degrees gained hers. The

time of marriagewas fixed: The ring was bought : The wed-

ding clothes were sent to her. He came one Thursday, a few

days before the wedding-day, and showed the most eager affec-

tion ; so he did on Saturday. He came again on the Wednes-

day following, sat down very carelessly on achair, and told her

with great composure, that he did not love her at all, and there-

fore could not think of marrying her. He talked a full hour in

the same strain, and then walked away !

Her brother sent a full account of this to Miss Perronet, who

read it with perfect calmness, comforted her niece, and strongly

exhorted her to continue steadfast in the faith. But the grief

which did not outwardly appear, preyed the more upon her


spirits, till, three or four days after, she felt a pain in her breast,

lay down, and in four minutes died. One of the ventricles of

her heart burst ; so she literally died of a broken heart.

When old Mr. Perronet heard that his favourite child, the

stay of his old age, was dead, he broke into praise and thanks-

giving to God, who had" taken another of his children out of

this evil world ! "

But Mr. H., meantime, has done nothing amiss. So both

himself and his friends say !

Fri. 25. I returned to London, andwas glad to find Mr.

Edward Smyth and his familyjustcomefrom Dublin, Sunday,

27. At ten I took coach ; reached Norwich on Monday noon,

and preached at six in the evening. I stayed there on Tuesday ;

and Wednesday, 30, went to Yarmouth, where were the largest

congregations I had seen for many years. Thursday, 31. I

went on to Lowestoft, which is, at present, far the mostcom-

fortableplace in thewhole Circuit. Friday, NOVEMBER 1. Mr.

Smyth and his wife gave us a strange account:-A little before

they were married,her brother Samuel was about eight years

old. One evening as she was with Mr. Smyth, in one of the

rows, at Yarmouth, both of them saw Samuel standing five or

six yards off. She cried out, " Sammy, come hither ; I want

you ; " but instantlyhewas gone. Just then he fell into the

river. A large water-dog, which was on the bridge, directly

leaped off, swam about, and sought him,but could not find him.

He then came out, and ran to his mother's house howling ; nor

would he leave her till he was put out by force.

Sat. 2-. About nine I preached at Cove, a village nine or

ten miles from Lowestoft: The poor people presently filled the

House, and seemed to devour every word. About one I preached

at Loddon ; and at Norwich in the evening.

Sun. 3.-I administered the Lord's Supper to about an

hundred and forty communicants. I preached at half-past two,

and again in the evening ; after which I requested them to go

away in silence, without any one speaking to another. They

took my advice: They went away in profound silence, so that

no soundwas heard but that of their feet.

Mon. 4.-At five in the morning the congregation was

exceeding large. That in the evening seemedso deeply affected,

that I hope Norwichwill again lift up its head. Atninewe took

coach ; and before eleven, on Tuesday, 5, reached Colchester.

Dec. 1782.] JOUR 2

In order to strengthen this poor feeble society, I stayed with

them till Friday, preaching morning and evening, and visiting

in the day as many as I could, sick or well. I divided the

classes anew, which had been strangely and irregularly jumbled

together ; appointed Stewards ; regulated temporal as well as

spiritual things ; and left them in a better waythan they had

been for several years.

Monday, 14, and the followingdays, I visited the societies in

and about London.

Sun. 24.-I preached at St. Clement's in the Strand, (the

largest church I ever preached in at London, except, perhaps,

St. Sepulchre's, ) to animmense congregation. I fullydischarged

my own soul, and afterwards took coach for Northamptonshire.

On Monday, 25, I preached at Towcester ; on Tuesday, at

Whittlebury, so called; but the true name of the town is
Whittle; on Wednesday, at Northampton ; and on Thursday

I returned to London. Friday, 29. I preached at Highgate,

in the palace built in the last century by that wretched Duke of
Lauderdale ; now one of the most elegant boarding-houses in

England. But, alas ! it is not Publow !

Mon. DECEMBER 3.-I preached at St. Neot's, in Hunting-

donshire ; Tuesday, 3, at Bugden about one ; and in the evening

atHuntingdon. Two Clergymen were there, with one ofwhom

Ihadmuch serious conversation. Wednesday, 4. I preached

with great enlargement of spirit, to my old congregation at

Bedford. Thursday, 5. With some difficulty I crossed the

country to Hinxworth, and preached to fifty or sixty plain

people, who seemed very willing to learn. In the afternoon, it

being impossible todrive a chaise straight round to Luton, I

was obliged to go many miles about, and sodid not reach it till

after six o'clock ; so I went directly to the preaching-house, and

beganwithout delay enforcing those solemn words, " To-day, if

ye will hear his voice,harden not your hearts."

Fri. 6.-I could procure no other conveyance to St. Alban's

but inan open chaise; andhence, (the frost being very sharp,)

I contracted a severe cold. Monday, 9. Ihad a better convey-

ance into Kent. In the evening I preached at Canterbury ;

on Tuesday at Dover ; the next day at Canterbury again. On

Thursday, 12, and on Friday morning, I preached at Chatham ;

and in the afternoon returned to London .

Sat. 15. I found the cold which I had contracted in the way


to St. Alban's, exceedingly increased,having adeep and violent

cough, which continued at intervals till spring.

Mon. 16. I retired to Hoxton for afew days. Thursday,

19. About eleven at night, a gun was fired at our chamber

window, and at the same time a large stone thrown through it.

(Probably in sport,by some that had been drinking.) I pre-

sently went to sleep again.

Sat. 21. I visited Mr. Maxfield, struck with a violent stroke

of palsy. He was senseless, and seemed near death ; but we

besought God for him, and his spirit revived, I cannot but

think, in answer to prayer. Sunday, 29. I buried the remains
of Thomas Forfit, a rich, and yet a generous man. Hewas

unwearied in welldoing; and in agood old age, without any

pain or struggle, fell asleep. Tuesday, 31. We concluded the

yearwith a solemn watch-night.

Wed. JANUARY 1, 1783.-May I begin to live to-day !

Sunday, 5. We met to renew our covenant with God. We

never meet on this occasion without a blessing ; but I do not

know that wehad ever so large acongregationbefore.

Fri. 10. I paid one more visit to Mr. Perronet, now in his

ninetieth year. I do not know so venerable a man. His under-

standing is little, if at all, impaired ; and his heart seems to be

all love. A little longer I hope he will remain here, to be a

blessing to all that see andhear him.

Sun. 19. I preached at St. Thomas's church in the after-

noon, and at St. Swithin's in the evening. The tide is now

turned ; so that I have more invitations to preach in churches

than I can accept of.

Sat. FEBRUARY 1.-I drank tea at Mr.A-'s, in the Maze-

pond, Southwark ; but both Mr. A- and his wife informed

me they were determined to quit the house as soon as possible,
by reason of strange noises, which they heard dayand night,

but in the night chiefly, as if all the tables and chairs had

been thrown up and down, in the rooms above and under

them.

Sun. 2.-Mr. Maxfield continuing ill, I preached this after-

noon at his chapel. Prejudice seems now dying away: God
grant it may never revive ! Tuesday, 11, I buried the remains

of Sarah Clay, many years a mother in Israel; the last ofthose

holy women, who, being filled with love, forty years ago devoted

themselves wholly to God, to spend and be spent in his service

Feb. 1783.1 JOURNAL. 243

Herdeath was like her life, calm and easy. She was dressing

herselfwhen she dropped down and fell asleep.

Mon. 17.-I had an opportunity of attending the Lecture of

that excellent man, Dr. Conyers. He was quite an original ;

his matter was very good, his manner very bad; but it is

enough that God owned him, both in the conviction and con-

version of sinners .

Thur. 20. I went to Dorking ; and in the afternoon took a

walk through the lovely gardens of Lord Grimstone. His

father-in-law, who laidthem out, is some time since numbered

with the dead ; and his son-in-law, living elsewhere, has not so

much as the beholding them with his eyes !

Fri. 21. At ouryearly meeting for that purpose, we exam-

ined our yearly accounts, and found the money received (just

answering the expense)was upwards of three thousand pounds a

year ; but that is nothing to me : What I receive of it yearly,

is neither more nor less than thirty pounds.

To-day Charles Greenwood went to rest. He had been a

melancholy man all his days, full ofdoubts and fears, and con-

tinually writing bitter things against himself. When he was first

taken ill, he said he should die, andwas miserable through fear

ofdeath ; but two days before he died, the clouds dispersed,

and he was unspeakably happy, telling his friends, " God has

revealed to me things which it is impossible for man to utter."

Just when he died, such glory filled the room, that it seemed to

be a little heaven ; none could grieve or shed a tear, but all

present appeared to be partakers of his joy.

Mon. 24. I buried the remains of Captain Cheesement, one

who, some years since, from a plentiful fortune, was by a train

of losses utterly ruined ; but two or three friends enabling him

to begin trade again, the tide turned ; he prospered greatly, and

riches flowed in on every side. A few years agohe married one

equally agreeable in her person and temper. So what had he

to do but enjoy himself? Accordingly, he left off business,

took a large, handsome house, and furnished it in a most elegant

manner. A little while after, showing his rooms to a friend, he

said, " All this will give small comfort inadying hour." A

few days after, he was taken with a fever. I saw him twice :

He was sensible, but could not speak. In spite of all means, he

grew worse and worse, and in about twelve days died. So

within a few days we lost two of our richest, and two of our


holicst, members,-Sarah Clay, and good old George Hufflet,

who had been, for many years, a burning and ashining light.

He lay fourteen weeks praising God continually, and had then

atriumphant entrance into his kingdom.

Sun. MARCH 2.-In the evening I took coach, and the next

evening preached at Bath. Thursday, 6. I went on to Bristol,

and found a family of love, so united as it hadnot been for

some years. The next week I met the classes ; and on Friday

hadawatch-night at Kingswood ; but I was far from being

well, the cold which I hadcaught in coming from Lutonrather

increasing than decreasing. Saturday, 15. I had a deep, tear-

ing cough, and was exceeding heavy and weak. However, I

made shift to preach at Weaver's Hall, and to meet the peni-

tents . Sunday, 15. 1 foundmyself considerably worse. How-

ever, I preached in the morning ; but had such a fever in the

afternoon, that I was obliged to take my bed.

I now knew not what to do, having fixed the next morning

for beginning myjourney to Ireland,and sentnotice to Stroud,

Gloucester, and various other places, of the days wherein I

purposed to visit them. But Mr. Collins kindly undertook to

supply my place at Stroud, and the other places, as far as

Worcester.

Lying down in bed, I took part (being able to swallow no

more) ofa draught which was prepared for me. It gave me

four or five and twenty stools, and amoderate vomit ; after

which I fell fast asleep. Monday, 17. Mr. Collins set out.

About six in the morning, finding myselfperfectly easy, I set
out in the afternoon, and overtook him at Stroud. But it was

as much as I could do ; for I was in a high fever, though with-

out any pain. Aftergiving a short exhortation to the society,

I was very glad to lie down. My fever was exactly ofthe same

kind with that I had in the north of Ireland. On Monday,

Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, I was just the same :

The whole nervous system was violently agitated. Hence arose

the cramp, with little intermission, from the time I lay down in

bed till morning : Also a furious, tearing cough, usually recur-

ring before each fit ofthe cramp. And yet I had no pain in

my back, or head, or limbs, the cramp only excepted. But I
had no strength at all, being scarce able to move, and much

less to think. In this state I lay till Friday morning, when

a violent fit ofthe cramp carriedthe fever quite away. PerceivMay, 1783.1 JOURNAL.

ing this, I took chaise without delay, and reached Worcester in

the afternoon. Here I overtook Mr. Collins again, who had

supplied all my appointments, and with a remarkable blessing

to the people. But being much exhausted, I found rest was

sweet. Saturday, 22. In the morning I gave a short exhorta-

tion, and thenwent on to Birmingham .

Sun. 23. Finding still some remains of the fever, with a load

and tightness across my breast, and a continual tendency to the

cramp, I procured a friend to electrify me thoroughly, both

through the legs and the breast, several times in the day. God

so blessed this, that I had no more fever or cramp, and no more

load or tightness across my breast. In the evening I ventured

to preach threequarters of an hour, and found no ill effect at all.

Tues. 25. In the afternoon I reached Hilton-Park, about six

miles north of Wolverhampton. Here I found my old acquaint-

ance, Miss Freeman, (whom I had known almost from a child,)

with Sir Philip Gibbes's lady, and his two amiable daughters,

in a lovely recess. With these I spent this evening and the

next day, both profitably and agreeably.

Thur. 27-. I crossed over the country to Hinckley, and

preached in the evening, in the neat, elegant preaching-house.

So I did, morning and evening, on the three following days, to

a serious, well-behaved people.

Here Imetwith Dr. Horne's " Commentary on the Psalms : "

I suppose the best that ever was wrote. Yet I could not com-

prehend his aggrandizing the Psalms, it seems, even above the

New Testament. And someofthem hehardlymakes anything

of; the eighty-seventh in particular.

Tues. APRIL 1, &c.-I went through several of the societies

till I reached Holyhead, on Friday, 11. We went on board

without delay, and on Sunday morning, the 13th, landed at

Dunleary ; whence (not being able to procure a carriage) I
walked on to Dublin.

Here I spent two or three weeks with much satisfaction, in

myusual employments. Monday, 21. I spent an hour with

Mr. Shelton ; I think, full as extraordinary a man as Mr. Law ;

of full as rapid agenius ; so that I had little to do but to hear;

his words flowing as a river.

Tues. 29. Our little Conference began, and continued till

Friday, MAY 2. All was peace and love ; and I trust the same

spirit will spread through the nation.

[May, 1783.

Sat. 3.-I made a little excursion to a Nobleman's seat, a few

miles from Dublin. It may doubtless vie in elegance, if not in

costliness, with any seat in Great Britain : But the miserable

master of the whole has little satisfaction therein. God hath

said, " Write this man childless." For whom then does he

heap up these things ? He is himself growing old:-

Andmustheleave this paradise ? Then leave

These happy shades, and mansions fit for Gods ?

Sun. 4. There was an Ordination at St. Patrick's. I admired

the solemnity wherewith the Archbishop went through the Ser-

vice: But the vacant faces of the ordained showed how little

they were affected thereby. In the evening multitudes met to

renew their covenant with God. But here was no vacant face

to be seen ; forGodwas in the midst, and manifested himself to

many ; particularly to adaughter of good William Pennington.

Mon. 5. We prepared for going on board the packet ; but

as it delayed sailing, on Tuesday, 6, I waited on Lady Arabella

Denny, at the Black Rock, four miles from Dublin. It is one

of the pleasantest spots I ever saw. The garden is everything

in miniature. On one side is a grove, with serpentine walks ; on

the other, a little meadow and a green-house, with a study
(which she calls her chapel) hanging over the sea. Between

these is a broad walk, leaning down almost to the edge of the

water ; along which run two narrow walks, commanding the

quay, one above the other. But it cannot be long before this

excellent lady will remove to anobler paradise.

The unusually large congregation in the eveningwas plenti-

fully watered with the dew of heaven. I found a particular

concern for the children, many ofwhom willingly attended.

Wed. 7.-The packet still delaying, I exhorted a large con-

gregation, in the evening, to take care how they built their

house upon the sand; and then cheerfully commended them to

the grace ofGod.

Thur. 8.-We rose at one, went down to the quay at two,

and about four went on board the Hillsborough packet. About

five the wind turned fair, and, between five and six in the even-

ing, brought us to Holyhead. About seven we took coach, and

the next evening met our friends at Chester.

Mon. 12.-About eight I preached at Preston-in-the-Hill;

about twelve, in Warrington ; and in the evening, at Liverpool

May, 1783.] 247

Here the scandal of the cross seems to be ceased, and we are

grownhonourablemen. Thursday, 15. I preached about noon

atWigan, and in the evening at Bolton, to a people much alive

to God. Saturday, 17. I went on to Manchester. Sunday,

18. Mr. Bayley came very opportunely to assist me in the Morn

ing Service. Such a sight, I believe, was never seen at Man-

chester before. It was supposed there were thirteen or fourtee

hundred communicants, among whom there was such a spirit as

I have seldom found; and their whole behaviour was such as

adorned the Gospel.

Tues. 20.-I met the select society, consisting of between

forty and fifty members. Several of these were lately made

partakers of the great salvation ; as several were above twenty

years ago. I believe there is no place but London, where we

have somany souls so deeply devoted to God; and his hand is

not shortened yet, but his work rapidly increases on every side.

About noon I preached at Stockport ; and in the afternoon,

in the new church at Macclesfield. This society seems as lively

as even that at Manchester, and increases nearly as fast. Not

aweek passes wherein some are not justified, and some renewed

inlove. Wednesday,20. I met a few of these, and found them
indeed

Allpraise, all meekness, and all love.

In theevening I exhorted them all to expect pardon or holiness

to-day, not to-morrow. O let their love never grow cold !

Fri. 23. I set out for Derby ; but the smith had so effectu-

ally lamed one ofmyhorses, that manytold me he would never

be able to travel more. I thought, " Even this may be made

matter of prayer; " and set out cheerfully. The horse, instead

ofgrowing worse and worse, went better and better ; and in the

afternoon (after I had preached at Leek by the way) brought

me safe toDerby.

Sat. 24. Being desired tomarry two of our friends at Bux-

ton, two-and-thirty miles from Derby, I took chaise at three,

and came thither about eight. I found notice had been given

ofmypreaching in the church ; and the Minister desired me to

read Prayers. By this means I could not leave Buxton till

eleven, nor reach Nottingham till after seven ; whereas I was to

have preached at six. But Mr. Brackenbury came to town just

in time to supply my place.


Sun. 25.-I had an easy day's work, as Mr. Bayley assisted

me, by reading Prayers, and delivering the wine at the Lord's

Table.

Tues. 27.-I preached at Loughborough in themorning, and

at Mountsorrel at one. While I was preaching, the rain, which

was so wanted, began, and continued for eight-and-forty hours.

In the evening I preached at Leicester, where I always feel
:

much liberty, and yet see but little fruit. After preaching at

Northampton, Bedford, and Hinxworth, on Saturday, 31, I

returned to London.

Sun. JUNE 1.-I was refreshed by the very sight ofthe con-

gregation at the new chapel. Monday, 2, and the following
i

days, I employed in settling my business, and preparing for my

little excursion. Wednesday, 11. I took coach with Mr. Brackenbury, Broadbent, and Whitfield; and in the evening we

reached Harwich. I went immediately to Dr. Jones, who

received me inthe most affectionate manner. About nine in

the morning we sailed ; and at nine on Friday, 13, landed at

Helvoetsluys. Herewe hired acoach for Briel, but were forced

to hire a wagon also, to carry a box which one of us could have

carried on his shoulders. At Briel we took a boat to Rotterdam.

We had not been long there, when Mr. Bennet, a bookseller,

who had invited me to his house, called uponme. But as Mr.

" Loyal, the Minister ofthe Scotch congregation,had invited me,

he gave up his claim, andwent with us to Mr. Loyal's. I found

a friendly, sensible, hospitable, and, I am persuaded, a pious

man. We took a walk together round the town, all as clean as

agentleman's parlour. Many of the houses are as high as those

in the main street at Edinburgh; and the canals, running

through the chief streets, make them convenient, as well as plea-

sant ; bringing the merchants' goods up to their doors. Stately

trees grow on all their banks. The whole town is encompassed

with a double row of elms ; so that onemaywalk all round it in

the shade.

Sat. 14. I had much conversation with the two English

Ministers, sensible, well-bred, serious men. These, as well as

Mr. Loyal, were very willing I should preach in their churches ;

but they thought it would be best for me to preach in the Epis-

copal church. By our conversing freely together, many prejudices were remove,d and all our hearts seemed to be united

! together.

June, 1783. ] JOURNAL. 249

In the evening we again took a walk round the town, and I

observed, 1. Many ofthe houses are higher than most in Edin-

burgh. It is true they have not so many stories; but each story

is far loftier. 2. The streets, the outside and inside of their

houses in every part, doors, windows, well-staircases, furniture,

even floors, are kept so nicely clean thatyou cannot find a speck

of dirt. 3. There is such agrandeur and elegance in the fronts

of the large houses, as I never saw elsewhere ; and such apro-

fusion of marble within, particularly in their lower floors and

staircases, as I wonder other nations do not imitate. 4. The

women and children (which I least of all expected) were in

general the most beautiful I ever saw . They were surprisingly

fair, and had an inexpressible air of innocence in their counte-

nance. 5. This was wonderfully set off by their dress, which

was simplex munditiis, plain and neat in the highest degree.

6. It has lately been observed, that growing vegetables greatly

resist putridity ; so there is an use in their numerous rows of

trees which was not thought of at first. The elms balance the

canals, preventing the putrefaction which those otherwise might

produce.

One little circumstance I observed, which I suppose is pecu-

liar to Holland : To most chamber-windows a looking-glass is

placed on the outside of the sash, so as to show the whole street,

with all the passengers. There is something very pleasing in

these moving pictures. Are they found in no other country ?

Sun. 15. The Episcopal church is not quite so large as the

chapel in West-Street. It is very elegant both without and

within. The Service began at half-past nine. Such a congre-

gationhad not often beenthere before. I preached on, "God

created man inhis ownimage." The people seemed, " all but

their attention, dead." In the afternoon the church was so filled

as (they informedme) it had not been for these fifty years. I

preached on, "God hath given us eternal life; and this life is

in his Son." I believe God applied it to many hearts. Were

it only for this hour, I am glad I came to Holland.

One thing which I peculiarly observed was this, and the same

in all the churches in Holland: At coming in, no one looks on

the right or the left hand, or bows or courtesies to any one ; but

all go straightforward to their seats, as if no other person was

inthe place. During the service none turns his head on either

side, or looks at anything but his book or the Minister ; and

[June,1783.

in going out, none takes notice of any one, but all go straight

forward till they are in the open air.

After church an English gentleman invited me to his country-

house, not half a mile from the town. 1 scarce ever saw so

pretty a place. The garden before the house was in three par-

titions, each quite different from the others. The house lay

between this and another garden, (nothing like any of the

others,) from which you looked through a beautiful summer-

house, washed by a small stream, into rich pastures filled with

cattle. We sat under an arbour of stately trees, between the

front and the back gardens. Here were four such children (I

suppose seven, six, five, and three years old) as I never saw

before in one family : Such inexpressible beauty and innocence

shone together !

In the evening I attended the service of the great Dutch

church, as large as most of our cathedrals. The organ (like

those in all the Dutch churches) was elegantly painted and

gilded; and the tunes that were sung were very lively, and yet

solemn.

Mon. 16. We set out in a track-skuit for the Hague. By

theway we saw a curiosity : The gallows near the canal, sur-

rounded with a knot of beautiful trees ! So the dying man will

have one pleasant prospect here, whatever befalls him hereafter !

At eleven we came to Delft, a large, handsome town, where we

spent an hour at a merchant's house, who, as well as his wife, a

very agreeable woman, seemed both to fear and to love God.

Afterwards we saw the great church ; I think nearly, if not

quite, as long as York Minster. It is exceedingly light and

elegant within, and every part is kept exquisitely clean. The

tomb of William the First is much admired ; particularly his

statue, which has more life than one would think could be

expressed in brass.

Whenwe came to the Hague, though we hadheardmuch of

it, we were not disappointed. It is, indeed, beautiful beyond

expression. Many of the houses are exceeding grand, and are

finely intermixed with water and wood; yet not too close, but so

as to be sufficiently ventilated by the air.

Being invited to tea by Madam de Vassenaar, (one of the

first quality in the Hague,) I waited upon her in the afternoon.

She received us with that easy openness and affability which is

almost peculiar to Christians and persons of quality. Soon after

June, 1783.]

came ten or twelve ladies more, who seemed to be of her own

rank, (though dressed quite plain,)and two most agreeable gen-

tlemen; one of whom, I afterwards understood, was a Colonel

in the Prince's Guards. After tea I expounded the three first

verses of the thirteenth of the first Epistle to the Corinthians.

CaptainM. interpreted, sentence by sentence. I then prayed,

and Colonel V. after me. I believe this hour was well employed.

Tues. 17. As we walked over the Place we saw the Swiss

Guards at their exercise. They are a fine body of men, taller,

I suppose, than any English regiment; and they all wear large

whiskers, which they take care to keep as black as their boots

Afterwards we saw the gardens at the Old Palace, beautifully

laid out, with alarge piece of water in the middle, and a canal

at each end : The open walks in it are pleasant, but the shady

serpentine walks are far pleasanter.

Wedined at Mrs. L's, in such a family as I have seldom

seen. Her mother, upwards of seventy, seemed to be continu-

ally rejoicing inGod her Saviour : The daughter breathes the

same spirit ; and her grandchildren, three little girls and aboy,

seem to be all love. I have not seen four such children together

in all England. Agentleman coming in after dinner, I found

a particular desire to pray for him. In alittle while he melted

into tears, as indeed did most of the company. Wednesday, 18.

In the afternoon Madam de Vassenaar invited us to a meeting

at a neighbouring lady's house. I expoundedGal. vi. 14, and

Mr. M. interpreted as before.

Thur. 19.-We took boat at seven. Mrs. L. and one of

her relations, being unwilling to part so soon, bore us company

to Leyden ; a large and populous town, but not so pleasant as

Rotterdam . In the afternoon we went on to Haerlem, where a

plain, good man and his wife received us in amost affectionate

manner. At six we took boat again. As itwas filled from end

to end, I was afraidwe should not have a very pleasantjourney.

After Mr. Ferguson had told the people who we were, we made

a slight excuse, and sung anhymn. They were all attention

We then talked a little, by means of our interpreter, and desired

that any of them who pleasedwould sing. Four persons did so ;

and sung well. After awhile we sung again: So did one or

two of them ; and all our hearts were strangely knit together,

so that when we came to Amsterdam they dismissed us with

abundance of blessings.

1 .

[June, 1783

Fri. 20. We breakfasted at Mr. Ferguson's, near the heart

of the city. At eleven we drank coffee (the custom in Holland)

at Mr. J's, a merchant, whose dining-room is covered,

both walls and ceiling, with the most beautiful paintings. He

and his lady walked with us in the afternoon to the Stadt-House;

perhaps the grandest buildings of the kind in Europe. The

great hall is a noble room indeed, near as large as that of Christ-

Church in Oxford. But I have neither time nor inclination to

describe particularly this amazing structure.

At five in the evening we drank tea at another merchant's,

Mr. G's, where I had a long conversation with Mr. de H.;

one of the most learned as well as popular Ministers in the city ;
"

and (I believe, what is far more important) he is truly alive to

God. He spoke Latin well, and seemed to be one of a strong

understanding, as well as of an excellent spirit. In returning

to our inn, we called at a stationer's ; and though we spent but

a few minutes, it was enough to convince us of his strong affec

tion, even to strangers. What a change does the grace of God

make in the heart ! Shyness and stiffness are now no more !

Sat. 21. We breakfasted with avery extraordinary woman,

who lamented that she could not talk to us but by an interpreter.

! However, she made us understand, that she had a little child

some years since, three or four years old, that was praying con-

tinually : That one morning, having just dressed her, she said,

"Will you go kiss your sister ? " She said, " Yes, mamma; and

I will kiss you too ;" and threw her arms about her mother's

neck ; who said, " My dear, where willyou go now ? " She said,

" I will go to Jesus ;" and died.

At eleven I spent an hour with awoman of large fortune,

who appeared to be as much devoted to God as her. Wewere

immediately as well acquainted with each other, as if we had

known each other for many years. Butindeed an easy good-

breeding (such as I never expected to see here) runs through

all the genteeler people of Amsterdam. And there is such a

child-like simplicity in all that love God, as does honour to the

religion they profess .

About two we called upon Mr. V -n, and immediately

fell into close conversation. There seems to be in him a pecu-

liar softness and sweetness of temper; and a peculiar liveliness

in Mrs.Vn. Our loving dispute, concerning deliverance

from sin, was concluded within anhour: And we parted, ifthat

June, 1783.] 253

could be, better friends than we met. Afterwards we walked to

Mr. J's house inthe Plantations, a large tract of ground,

laid out in shadywalks. These lie within the city walls : But

there are other walks, equally pleasant, without the gates.

Indeed nothing is wanting but the power of religion, to make

Amsterdam a paradise.

Sun. 22.-I went to the new church, so called still, though

four or five hundred years old. It is larger, higher, and better

illuminated, than most of our cathedrals. The screen that

divides the church from the choir is of polished brass, and

shines like gold. I understood the Psalms that were sung, and

the text well, and a little of the sermon ; which Mr. de H.

delivered with great earnestness. At two I began the Service

at the English church, an elegant building, about the size of

West-Street chapel. Only it has no galleries ; nor have any of

the churches in Holland. I preached on Isaiah lv. 6, 7; and I

am persuaded many received the truth in the love thereof.

After service I spent another hour at Mr. V-'s. Mrs.

V- again asked me abundance of questions, concerning

deliverance from sin ; and seemed a good deal better satisfied,

with regard to the great and precious promises. Thence we

went to Mr. B., who had lately found peace with God. He was

full offaith and love, and could hardly mention the goodness of

God without tears. His wife appeared to be exactly of the

same spirit, so that our hearts were soon knit together. From

thence we went to another family, where alarge company were

assembled. But all seemed open to receive instructions, and

desirous to be altogether Christians.

After dinner Mrs. J took me in acoach to the Mere,

andthence round the country to Zeeburgh. Inever saw such a

country before : I suppose there is no such summer country in

Europe. From Amsterdam to Mere is all a train of the most

delightful gardens. Turning upon theleft, youthen openupon

the Texel, which spreads into a sea. Zeeburgh itself is a little

house built on the edge of it, which commands both a land and

sea prospect. What iswanting to makethe inhabitants happy,

butthe knowledge and love ofGod ?

Tues. 24. We took a view of the new Workhouse, which

stands on one side ofthe Plantations. It much resembles Shore-

ditchWorkhouse : Onlyit is considerablylarger. And the front

of it is so richly ornamented, that it looks like a royal palace.


About four hundred are now in the house, which is to receive

four hundred more : Just half as many as are in the Poorhouse

at Dublin, which now contains sixteen hundred. We saw many

of the poor people, all at work,knitting, spinning, pickingwork,

orweaving. And the women in one room were all sewing,

either fine or plain work. Many of these had been women of

the town : For this is a Bridewell and Workhouse in one. The

head keeper was stalking to and fro, with a large silver-hilted

sword by his side. The bed-chambers were exceeding neat :

The beds are better or worse as are those that use them. We

saw both the men in one long room, and the women in another,

at dinner. In both rooms, they sung a Psalm and prayed,

before and after dinner. I cannot but think the managers in

Amsterdam wiser than those in Dublin : For certainly a little

of the form of religion is better than none at all !

Afterwards we spent an hour at Mrs. V's, a very extra-

ordinary woman. Both from her past and present experience,

I can have no doubt but she is perfected in love. She said,

" I was born at Surinam; and came from thence when I was

about ten years old. But when I came hither, my guardian

would not let me have my fortune, unless I would go back to

Surinam. However, I got acquainted with some pious people,

andmade shift tolive, till I was about sixteen : I then embarked

for Surinam ; but a storm drove us to the coast of England,

where the ship was stranded. I was in great distress, fearing I

haddonewrong in leaving the pious people : But just thenGod

revealed himselfto my soul. I was filled withjoy unspeakable ;

and boldly assured the people, who despaired of life, that God

would preserve them all. And so he did: Wegot on shore at

Devon; but we lost all that we had.

" After a time I returned to Amsterdam, and lived four years

in service: Then I married. Seven years after, it pleasedGod

to work a deeper work in my heart: Since then I have given

myselfwholly to Him. I desire nothing else. Jesus is myAll.

I am always pleased with his will : So I was, evenwhen my

husband died. I had not onediscontented thought ; I was still

happy in God. "

Wed. 25. We took boat for Haerlem. The great church

here is a noblestructure, equalled by few cathedrals inEngland,

either in length, breadth, or height : The organ is the largest I

ever saw, and is said to be the finest in Europe. Hence we went

June, 1783.]

to Mr. Van Ka's, whose wife was convinced of sin and

justified by reading Mr. Whitefield's Sermons.

Here we were as at home. Before dinner we took awalk in

Haerlem Wood. It adjoins to the town, and is cut out in many

shady walks ; with lovely vistas shooting out every way. The

walk from the Hague to Scheveling is pleasant ; those near

Amsterdam more so; but these exceed them all.

We returned in the afternoon to Amsterdam; and in the

evening took leave of as many ofour friends as we could. How

entirely were we mistaken in the Hollanders, supposing them to

be of a cold, phlegmatic, unfriendly temper ! I have not met

with amore warmly affectionate people in all Europe ! No, not
in Ireland !

Thur. 26. Our friends having largely provided us with

wine and fruits for our littlejourney, we took boat in a lovely

morning for Utrecht, with Mr. Van 's sister, who in the

way gave us a striking account : " In that house," said she,

(pointing to it as we went by,) " my husband and I lived ; and

that church adjoining to it was his church. Five years ago,

we were sitting together, being in perfect health, when he

dropped down, and in aquarter of anhour died : I lifted up my

heart and said, ' Lord, thou art my husband now ; ' and found

no will but his." This was a trial worthy of a Christian: And

she has ever since made her word good. We were scarce got to

our inn at Utrecht, when Miss L-came. I found herjust

such as I expected. She came on purpose from her father's
I observe of all the

country-house, where all the family were.

pious people in Holland, that, without any rule but the word of

God, they dress as plain as Miss Marchdidformerly, and Miss

Johnson does now ! And considering the vastdisadvantage they

areunder, having no connexion with each other, and being under

no such discipline at all as we are, I wonder at the grace of
God that is in them !

Fri. 27. Iwalked over to Mr. L'scountry-house, about

threemiles from the city. It is a lovely place, surrounded with

delightful gardens, laid out with wonderful variety. Mr. L

is of an easy genteel behaviour, speaks Latin correctly, and is

no stranger to philosophy. Mrs. L-is the picture offriend-

liness and hospitality ; and young Mr.L-seems to be cast

in the same mould. We spent a few hours very agreeably.

Then Mr. L-would send me back in his coach.


Being sick of inns, (our bill at Amsterdam alone amounting

to near ahundred florins,) I willingly accepted of an invitation

to lodge with the sons-in-law of James Oddie.

Sat. 28-. We went over to Zeist, the settlement of theGer-

man brethren. It is a small village, finely situated, with woods

on every side, andmuch resembles one of the large Colleges in

Oxford. Here I met with my old friend Bishop Antone, whom

I had not seen for near fifty years. He did not ask me to eat

or drink ; for it is not their custom, and there is an inn; but

they were all very courteous ; and we were welcome to buyany

thing that we pleased at their shops ! I cannot see how it is

possible for this community to avoidgrowing immensely rich.

I have this day lived fourscore years ; and, by the mercy of

God, my eyes are not waxed dim: And what little strength of

body or mind I had thirty years since, just the same I have
now.

Godgrant I may never live to be useless ! Rather may I

Mybody with my charge lay down,

And cease at once to work and live.

Sun. 29.-At ten I began the Service in theEnglish church

in Utrecht. I believe all the English in the city were present, and

forty or fifty Hollanders. I preached on 1 Cor. xiii.; I think, as

scarchingly as ever in my life. Afterwards a merchant invited

me to dinner : For six years he had been at death's door by

an asthma, andwas extremely ill last night ; but this morning,

without any visible cause, he was well, and walked across the

city to the church. He seemed to be deeply acquainted with

religion, and made me promise, if I came to Utrecht again, to

make his house my home.

In the evening a large companyofus met atMiss L.'s, where

I was desired to repeat the substance of my morning sermon.

I did so : Mr. Toydemea (the Professor of Law in the Uni-

versity) interpreting it sentence by sentence. They then sung
a Dutch hymn; and we an English one. Afterwards Mr.

Regulet, a venerable old man, spent some time in prayer, for

the establishment of peace and love between the two nations.

Utrecht hasmuch the look of an English town. The streets are

broad, and have many noble houses. In quietness and stillness

it much resembles Oxford. The country all round is like agarden:

And the people I conversed with are not only civil and hospi-

table, but friendly and affectionate, even as those atAmsterdam.

July, 1783.] 257

Mon. 30. We hired acoach for Rotterdam, at half-a-crown

per head. We dined at Gouda, at M. Van Flooten's, Minister

ofthe town, who received us with all possible kindness. Before

dinnerwe went into the church, famous for its paintedwindows ;

butwe had not time to survey a tenth part ofthem : We could

only observe, in general, that the colours were exceeding lively,

and the figures exactlyproportioned. In the evening we reached

once more the hospitable house ofMr. Loyal, at Rotterdam.

Tues. JULY 1.-I called on asmany as I couldofmy friends,

andwe partedwith much affection. We then hired a yacht,

which brought us to Helvoetsluys, about eleven the next day.

At two we went on board ; but the wind turning against us, we

did not reach Harwich till about nine on Friday morning.

After a little rest we procured a carriage, and reached London

about eleven at night.

I canby no means regret either the trouble or expense which

attended this little journey. It opened me away into, as it

were, a new world ; where the land, the buildings, the people,

the customs, were all such as I had never seen before. But as

those with whom I conversed were of the same spirit with my

friends in England, I was as much at home in Utrecht and

Amsterdam, as in Bristol and London.

Sun. 6.-We rejoiced to meet once more with our English

friends in the new chapel ; who were refreshed with the account

of the gracious work which God is working in Holland also.

Wed. 9. I spent a melancholy hourwith Mr. M., and several

others, who charged him with speaking grievous things of me,

which he thenknew to be utterly false. If he acknowledges his

fault, I believe he will recover ; if not, his sickness is unto death.

These four days, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Fri-

day, were as hot as the midsummer days in Jamaica. The

summer heat in Jamaica usually raises the thermometer to about

eighty degrees. The quicksilver in my thermometer now rose

toeighty-two.

Mon. 14. I took a littlejourney into Oxfordshire, and found

the good effects of the late storms. The thunder had been

uncommonly dreadful ; and the lightning had tore up a field

near High-Wycomb, and turned the potatoes into ashes. In the

evening I preached in the new preaching-house at Oxford, a

lightsome, cheerful place, and well filled with rich and poor,

scholars as well as townsmen. Tuesday, 15. Walking through


the city, I observed it swiftly improving in everything but reli-

gion. Observing narrowly the Hall at Christ-Church, I was

convinced it is both loftier and larger than that of the Stadt

House in Amsterdam. I observed also, the gardens and walks

in Holland, although extremely pleasant, were not to be com-

pared with St. John's, or Trinity gardens ; much less with the

parks, Magdalen water-walks,&c., Christ-Church meadow, or

the White-walk.

Wed. 16.-I went on to Witney. There were uncommon

thunder and lightning here last Thursday ; but nothing to that

which were there on Fridaynight. About ten the storm was

just overthe town ; and both the bursts of thunderand lightning,

or rather sheets of flame, were without intermission. Those that

were asleep in the town were waked, and many thought the day

of judgment was come. Men, women, and children, flocked

out of their houses, and kneeled down together in the streets.

With the flames, the grace of God came down also in a manner

never known before ; and as the impression was general, so it

was lasting : It did not pass awaywith the storm ; but the spirit

of seriousness, with that of grace and supplication, continued.

Aprayer-meeting being appointed on Saturday evening, the

people flocked together ; so that the preaching-house was more

than filled; and many were constrained to stand without the

door andwindows. On Sunday morning, before the usual time

of Service, the church was quite filled. Such a sight was never

seen in that church before. The Rector himself was greatly

moved, and delivered a pressing, close sermon, with uncommon

earnestness. When I came on Wednesday, the same serious-

ness remained on the generality of the people. I preached in

the evening at Wood-Green, where a multitude flocked together,

on the Son of man coming in his glory. The word fell heavy

upon them, and many of their hearts were as melting wax.

Thursday, 17. At five they were still so eager to hear, that the

preaching-house wouldnot near containthe congregation. After

preaching, four- and-thirty persons desired admission into the

society ; every one ofwhomwas (for the present, at least)under

very serious impressions : And most of them, there is reason to

hope, will bring forth fruit with patience. In the evening I

preached to a lovely congregation,at Stroud; and on Tuesday

afternoon came to Bristol.

Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, Ispent at Bath. Thurs-

Aug. 1783. ] 259

:

day, 24. I went with a few friends to Blase-Castle. The woods

on the side of the hill, cut through various directions, are the

pleasantest I ever saw, little inferior to the Leasowes ; and, bythe

beautiful prospects, far superior to Stow gardens. Afterwards

we took a view of Lord Clifford's woods, at King's Weston.

They are amazingly beautiful : I have seen nothing equal to

them in the west of England, and very few in any other parts.

In the evening I read to the congregation an account of our

brethren in Holland, and many thanksgivings were rendered to

God on their account.

Tues. 29. Our Conference began, at which two important

points were considered : First, the case of Birstal House ; and,

Secondly, the state of Kingswood School. With regard to

the former, our brethren earnestlydesired that I would go to

Birstal myself, believing this would be the most effectual way of

bringing the Trustees to reason. With regard to the latter, we

all agreed, that either the School should cease, or the Rules of

itbeparticularly observed : Particularly, that the children should

never play; and that amaster should be always present with
them.

Tues. AUGUST 5.---Early in the morning I was seized with a

most impetuous flux. In a few hours it was joined by a violent

and almost continual cramp; first, in my feet, legs, thighs ;

then, in my side and my throat. The case being judged

extreme, a grain and a half of opium was given me in three

doses : This speedily stopped the cramp ; but, at the same time,

took awaymyspeech, hearing, and power of motion ; and locked

meupfromhead to foot ; so that I lay amere log. I then sent

for Dr. Drummond, who from that time attended me twice a

day. For some days I wasworse and worse ; till, on Friday, I

was removed to Mr. Castleman's. Still my head was not

affected, and I had no pain,although in a continual fever. But

I continued slowly to recover, so that I could read or write

an hour or two at a time. On Wednesday, 12, I took a

vomit, which almost shook me to pieces ; but, however, did me

good. Sunday, 17, and all the followingweek,my fever gradu-

ally abated ; but I had a continual thirst, and little or no

increase of strength : Nevertheless, being unwilling to be idle,

on Saturday, 23, I spent an hour with the penitents ; and,

finding myself no worse, on Sunday, 24, I preached at the

newRoom, morning and afternoon. Finding my strength was

[Sept. 1783.

now in some measure restored, I determined to delay no longer ;

but setting out on Monday, 25, reached Gloucesterin the after-

noon : In the evening I preached in the Town-Hall ; I believe,

not in vain. Tuesday, 26. Iwent on to Worcester, where many

young people are just setting out in the ways ofGod. I joined

fifteen ofthem this afternoon to the society; all ofthem, I believe,

athirst for salvation. Wednesday, 27. I preached at Birming-

ham,andhadacomfortable season. Thursday, 28. I paid another

visit to the amiable family at Hilton-Hall. Friday, 29. About

ten I preached for the first time at Stafford, to a large anddeeply

attentive congregation. It is now the dayof small things here ;

but the grain ofmustard-seed may grow up into a great tree.

Hence I rode to Congleton. I had received abundance of

complaints against the Assistant ofthis Circuit,-James Rogers.

Saturday, 30. I heard all the parties face to face, and encou-

raged them all to speak theirwhole mind. I was surprised ; so

much prejudice, anger, and bitterness, on so slight occasions, I

never saw. However, after they had had it out, theywere much

softened, if not quite reconciled. Sunday, 31. I preached in

the new church at Macclesfield, both morning and afternoon.

I believe we had seven hundred communicants.

Mon. SEPTEMBER 1.-We clambered over the mountains to

Buxton. In the afternoon I preached in Fairfield church,

about half amile from the town; it was thoroughly filled with

serious and attentive hearers. Tuesday, 2. We went to Leeds,

where I was glad to find several Preachers .

Wed. 3. I consulted the Preachers, how it was best to pro-

ceed with the Trustees of Birstal House, to prevail upon them

to settle it on the Methodist plan. They all advised me to

beginby preaching there. Accordingly, I preached on Thurs-

day evening, and met the society. I preached again in the

morning. Friday, 5. About nine I met the nineteen Trustees ;

and, after exhorting them to peace and love, said, " All that I

desire is, that this Housemay be settled on the Methodist plan;

and the same clause may be inserted in your Deed which is

inserted in the Deed of the new chapel in London ; viz., ' In

case the doctrine or practice of any Preacher should, in the

opinion of the major part of the Trustees, be not conformable to

Mr. W-'s Sermons and Notes on the New Testament, on

representing this, another Preacher shall be sent within three

months.""

Oct. 1783.] JOURNAL. 261

Five of the Trustees were willing to accept of our first propo-

sals ; the restwere not willing.

Although I could not obtain the end proposed ; and, in that

respect, had only my labour for my pains ; yet I do not at all

repent ofmyjourney : I have done my part ; let others bear

their own burden. Going back nearly the sameway I came, on

Saturday, 13, I reached Bristol. I had likewise good reward

for my labour, in the recovery of my health, by a journey of

five or six hundred miles .

On Wednesday, 17, and the two following days, I visited

several of the country societies ; and found most of them, not

only increasing in number, but in the knowledge and love of
God.

Fri. 26. Observing thedeep poverty ofmanyof our brethren,

I determined to do what I could for their relief. I spoke sever-

ally to some thatwere ingood circumstances, and received about

forty pounds. Next I inquired who were in the most pressing

want, andvisited them at their own houses. I was surprised to

find no murmuring spirits among them, but many that were

truly happy in God; and all of them appeared to be exceeding

thankful for the scanty reliefwhich they received.

Sun. 28. It being a fair day, I snatched the opportunity of

preaching abroad to twice or thrice as many as the Roomwould

have contained. Wednesday, ОсTOBER 1. I preached at Bath,

to such acongregation as I have not seen there of a long season.

All my leisure hours this week I employed in visiting the

remaining poor, and in begging for them. Having collected

about fifty pounds more, I was enabled to relieve most of those

that were in pressing distress.

Mon. 6.-Leaving the societyin a more prosperous way than

it had been for several years, I preached in the Devizes about

noon, and at Sarum in the evening. Captain Webb lately

kindled a flame here, and it is not yet gone out. Several persons

were still rejoicing in God; and the people in general were

much quickened. Tuesday, 7. I found his preaching in the

street at Winchester had been blessed greatly. Many were

more or less convinced of sin, and several had found peace with

God. I never saw the preaching-house so crowded before with

serious and attentive hearers. So was that at Portsmouth also.

Wednesday, 8. We took a wherry for the Isle of Wight.

Before we were half over, the sea rose, and the water washed

[Oct. 1783.

over us.
However, we got safe to Watton-Bridge, and then

walked on to Newport. There is much life among the people

here ; and they walk worthy of their profession.

Thur. 9.-I went to Newtown, (two miles from Newport.)

supposed to be the oldest town in the isle ; but itsglory ispast !

The church lies in ruins, and the town has scarce six houses

remaining. However, the preaching-house was thoroughly

filled; and the people appeared to be all of one rank ; none

rich, and none extremely poor ; but all were extremely serious

and attentive.

Fri. 10. I crossed over to Southampton ; and found two or

three there also who feared and loved God. Then I went to

Winchester, and had the pleasure of dining with Mr. Lowth,

and supping with Mrs. Blackwell. Her six lovely children are

in admirable order ; it is a pleasure to see them. A Clergyman

having offered me his church, I purposed beginning at five ;
but the key was not to be found ; SO I made a virtue of

necessity, and preached near the Cross-Street ; probably to

double the congregation which would have been in the

church.

Many of the Dutch prisoners remaining here, I paid them a

short visit. When they were brought hither first, one of them

prayed with as many as desired it,and gave them aword of

exhortation. Presently one found peace withGod, and joined

him in that labour of love. These increased, so that theyhave

now five exhorters : Many are justified, and many more con-

vinced of sin. About two hundred of them were met together

when I came : They first sung a hymn in their own language;

I then gave them ashort exhortation inEnglish, forwhich they

were extremely thankful.

Sat. 11. Just at twelve (the same hour as at Bristol) I was

taken exceeding ill, and so continued till three. I then took

chaise, as I had appointed, and was better and better every

stage, and quite wellwhen I came to London.

Mon. 13. I preached at Wallingford. Tuesday, 14. I went

on to Oxford, and found both the congregation and society

increased in zeal as well as in number. Wednesday, 15. I came

to Witney. The flame which was kindled here by that provi-

dential storm of thunderand lightning, is not extinguished; but
has continued ever since,with no discernible intermission. The

preaching-house is still too small for the congregation. Thurs

Oct. 1783.1

day, 16. I preached at High-Wycomb ; and on Friday

returned to London.

Sun. 19. I took the diligence for Norwich, and preached there

the next evening, to more than the House would contain ; and

both this night and the following, we sensibly felt that Godwas

in the midst of us. Wednesday, 22. I went to Yarmouth.

Often this poor society had been well nigh shattered in pieces ;

first, by Benjamin Worship, then a furious Calvinist, tearing

away near half ofthem; next, by John Simpson, turningAnti-

nomian, andscattering most that were left. It has pleased God,

contrary to allhuman probability, to raise a new society out of

the dust ; nay, and to give them courage to build a new

preaching-house, which is well finished, and contains about five

hundred persons. I opened it this evening ; and as many as

could get in, seemed to be deeply affected. Who knows but

God is about to repair the waste places, and to gather a people

that shall be scattered no more ?

Thur. 23-. We went to Lowestoft, where the people have

stood firm from the beginning. Observing in the evening, that

forty or fifty people were talking together, as soon as the service

was over, (amiserable custom that prevails in most places of

public worship, throughout England and Ireland,) I strongly

warned the congregation against it ; as I had done those at

Norwich and Yarmouth. They received it in love ; and the

next evening, allwent silently away. But this warning must be

givenagainand again in every place, or it will not be effectual.

Sat. 25. I preached in Lowestoft at five ; at eight to an

earnest, lively people at Cove; and at one to a more numerous,

but notmore lively, congregationat Loddon. The most numer-

ouswas that at Norwich in the evening, many ofwhom were

truly alive to God.

Sun. 26. I gave the sacrament at seven ; at nine I preached

at Bear-Street, where I am in hopes considerable good will be

done. The most serious congregation in our House we had at

two ; but the most numerous at six ; though not above half of

those that came could get in. Those that could hear, did not

lose their labour ; for God " satisfied the hungry with good

things."

Mon. 27-. I talked at largewith M. F. Such a case I have not

known before. She has been in the society nearly from the begin-

ning. She found peace with God five-and-twenty years ago ; and

[Nov. 1783.

the pure love of God afewyears after. Above thirty years she

has been a Class and aBand Leader, and of very eminent use.

Ten months since she was accused of drunkenness, and of reveal-

ing the secret of her friend. Being informed of this, I wrote to

Norwich, (as I then believed the charge,) that she must be

no longer a Leader, either ofa band or a class. The Preacher

told her further, that, in his judgment, shewas unfit to be a

member of the society. Upon this she gave up her ticket,

together with the band and her class-papers. Immediately all

her friends (of whom she seemed to have a large number) for-

sook her at once. No one knew her, or spoke to her. She was

as a dead thing out ofmind !

Onmaking a more particular inquiry, I found that Mrs.

W (formerly a common woman) had revealed her own

secret, to Dr. Hunt, and twenty people besides. So the first

accusation vanished into air. As to the second, I verily believe,

the drunkenness with which she was charged,was, in reality, the

falling down in a fit. Sowe have thrown away one of the most

useful Leaders we ever had, for these wonderful reasons !

Wed. 29.-I crossed over to Lynn, and found things much
i

better than I expected. The behaviour of Mr. G-, which

one would have imagined would have done much harm, had

rather done good. People in general cried, " Let that badman

go, they will do better without him." And the House was suffi-

ciently crowded with serious hearers. NOVEMBER 1. I returned

to London.
In the two following weeks I visited the classes both in Lon-

don and the neighbouring societies. Sunday, 16. Being much
importuned, I preached in the evening at Mr. Maxfield's chapel.

But I dare not do so again, as it cannotcontainone third ofthat

congregation at the new chapel.

Mon. 17-. I preached at Sevenoaks, and on Tuesday, 18,

at Mount-Ephraim, near Tunbridge-Wells. Wednesday, 19,

I came once more to the lovely family at Shoreham. A little

longer that venerable oldman is permitted to remain here, that

the flock may not be scattered.

When I was at Sevenoaks I made an odd remark. In the

year 1769, I weighed an hundred and twenty-two pounds. In

1783, I weighed not a pound more or less. I doubt whether

| such another instance is to be found in Great Britain.

Mon. 24. I preached at Canterbury, and again on Wednes

Jan. 1784 R A . 2

day ; on Tuesday, 25, at Dover ; Thursday, 27, at Sheerness,

where Mr. Fox read Prayers, and I preached on those words in

the Second Lesson, " To-day, if ye will hear his voice, harden

notyour hearts."

Fri. 28. I returned to London. Tuesday, DECEMBER 2.

I married Mr. Rutherford and Miss Lydia Duplex. Wednes-

day, 3. I took a little journey into Hertfordshire ; and having

preached at Hinxworth, and Wrestlingworth, on Friday, 5, I

preached at Barnet, and on Saturday, 6, returned to London.

Inow inquired more carefully and particularly into the strange

case of poor Mr. M. But the more I inquired, the worse the

matter appeared to be. It was plain,by the evidence of many

unexceptionable witnesses, that he had told innumerable lies ;

affirming, denying, and affirming again! And this man, who

has lived above twenty years in a constant course of lying and

slandering, tells you,he enjoys constant communion with God;

and that nothing canmake him happier, but heaven !

Thur. 18.-I spent two hours with thatgreatman, Dr. John-

son, who is sinking into the grave by agentledecay. Wednes-

day, 24. While we were dining at Mr. Blunt's, his servant-maid,

ill ofa sore throat, died. Saturday, 27. I dined at Mr. Awbrey's,

with Mr. Wynantz, son ofthe Dutch merchant at whose house

I met with Peter Böhler and his brethren, forty-five years ago.

Wed. 31.-We concluded the year at the new chapel, with

the voice of praise and thanksgiving.

Thur. JANUARY 1, 1784.-I retired for two or threedays to

Peckham. Sunday, 4. Though it rained violently, we had, I

believe, upwards of eighteen hundred people, at the renewal of

the Covenant : Many found an uncommon blessing therein. I

am sure I did, for one.

Tues. 6. At noon I preached at Barking, and in the even-

ing at Purfleet, to apeople thatwere all alive. Wednesday, 7.

Iwent on to Colchester ; and on Friday, 9, returned to London.

Mon. 12.-Desiring to help some that were in pressing want,

butnot having any money left, I believed it was not improper,

in such a case, to desire help from God. A few hours after,

one from whom I expected nothing less, put ten pounds into

myhands.

Wed. 21.-Beingvehemently accused, by awell-meaning man,

of very many things, particularly of covetousness and uncourt-

cousness , I referred the matter to three of our brethren. Truly

[March,1784,

in these articles, " I know nothing by myself. But he that

judgeth me is the Lord."

Sat. 24. I beganvisiting the classes in the town and country.

Sunday,25. I preached in the afternoon in St. George's, South-

wark ; a very large and commodious church. Thursday, FEB-

RUARY 4. I went down to Nottingham, and preached a charity

sermon for the General Hospital. The next day I returned to

London. In the following week I visited the country societies.

Saturday, 14. I desired all our Preachers to meet, and consider

thoroughly the proposal of sending Missionaries to the East

Indies. After the matter had been fully considered, we were

unanimous in our judgment, that we have no call thither yet,

no invitation, no providential opening of any kind.

Thur. 19.-I spent an agreeable hourwith the modern Han-

nibal, Pascal Paoli; probably the most accomplished General

that is now in the world. He is of a middle size, thin, well-

shaped, genteel, and has something extremely striking in his

countenance. How much happier is he now,with his moderate

pension, than he was in the midst of his victories !

On Saturday, having a leisure hour, I made an end of that

strange book, " Orlando Furioso." Ariosto had doubtless an

uncommon genius, and subsequent poets have been greatly

indebted to him : Yet it is hard to say,whichwas the most out

ofhis senses, the hero or the poet. He has not the least regard

even to probability ; his marvellous transcends all conception.

Astolpho's shield and horn, and voyage to the moon, the lance

that unhorses every one, the all-penetrating sword, and I know

not how many impenetrable helmets and coats of mail,-leaves

transformed into ships, and into leaves again, stones turned

into horses, and again into stones, are such monstrous fictions

as never appeared in the world before, and, one would hope,

never will again. O who, that is not himself out of his senses,

cancompareAriosto with Tasso !

Mon. MARCH 1.-I went to Newbury, and preached in the

evening to a large and deeply affected congregation. Tuesday,

2, and Wednesday, 3, I preached at Bath, and on Thursday,

4, went on to Bristol. Friday, 5. I talked at large with our

Masters in Kingswood School, who arenow just such as I wished

for. Atlength the Rules of the House are punctually observed,

and the children are all in good order.

Sat. 6.-I spent a few melancholy minutes at Mr. Hender-

March, 1784.1 267

son's, with the lost Louisa. She is now in a far more deplorable

case than ever. She used to be mild, though silly : But now

she is quite furious. I doubt the poor machine cannot be

repaired in this life.

The next week I visited the classes at Bristol. Friday, 12,

being at Samuel Rayner's, in Bradford, I was convinced of two

vulgar errors ; the one, that nightingales will not live in cages ;

the other that they only sing amonth or two in the year. He

has now three nightingales in cages ; and they sing almost all

day long, from November to August. Saturday, 13. About

nine I preached at Trowbridge, where a large congregation

quietly attended. Returning to Bristol, I lodged once more at

E-J's, a genuine old Methodist. Godhas latelytaken

awayher only brother, as well as her beloved sister. But she

was still able to say, " It is the Lord : Let him do what seemeth

him good."

Mon. 15. Leaving Bristol after preaching at five, in the

evening I preached at Stroud; where, to my surprise, I found

the morning preaching was given up, as also in the neighbour-

ing places. If this be the case while I am alive, what must it

bewhen I am gone ? Give up this, and Methodism too will

degenerate into a mere sect, only distinguished by some opinions

and modes ofworship.

Tues. 16. I preached in Painswick atnoon,and at Glou-

cester in the evening. The Room was full at five in the morn-

ing, andboth the Preachers and people promised to neglect the

early preaching no more. Wednesday, 17. We went to Chel-

tenham, which I had not seen for many years. I preached at

noon to half a houseful of hearers, most of them cold and dead

enough. I expected to find the same at Tewkesbury, but was

agreeably disappointed. Not only the congregation was much

larger, but I admired their teachableness. On my mentioning

the impropriety ofstanding at prayer, and sitting while we were

singing praise to God, they all took advice ; kneeling while we

prayed, and stood up while we sung Psalms.

Thur . 18.-We crossed over to Bengeworth, where Mr.

Cooper read Prayers, and I preached. Friday, 19. Being

informed that my chaise could pass part of the way to Broad-

marston, I went boldly for a while, and then stuck fast. I

borrowed a horse, andwent on . At five I preached in Pebworth

church, and at five in the morning in our own chapel atBroad

[March, 1784.

marston . As we rode back to Bengeworth, the cold was so

intense, that it had an effect I never felt before, it made me

downright sick. However, I went on, and preached in the

church at eleven, and in the evening at Worcester. Sunday,

21. I preached to a crowded audience, in St. Andrew's church.

The Vicar read Prayers, and afterwards told me I should be

welcome to the use of his church, whenever I came to Worcester.

Mon. 22.-In the evening I preachedat Birmingham. Tues-

day, 23. I preached in the church at Quinton, to a congregation

gathered from all parts. Not many appeared to be unaffected;

for the power of God was eminently present.

After preaching at various other places, on Saturday, 27, I

went to Madeley ; and, at Mr. Fletcher's desire, revised his

Letters to Dr. Priestley. I think there is hardly anotherman

inEngland so fit to encounter him. Sunday, 28. Notwithstand-

ing the severe weather, the church was more than filled. I

preached onpart ofthe Epistle; (Heb. ix. 13, &c.;) inthe after-

noon, on " the grace of God that bringeth salvation ; " and I

believe God applied it to many hearts.

Mon. 29.-I gave an exhortation at Sheriff-Hales, inmyway

to Stafford. When I came thither, I found no notice had been

given: So I had only asmall company, in a deplorable hole,

formerly a stable. Hence we went to Lane-End, a village two

or three miles from Newcastle-under-Lyne. It was still pierc-

ingly cold ; but the preaching-house would not hold a fourth

part of the people. So I preached in the open air; the moon

giving us clear light, though not much heat. The House was

filled at five in the morning ; and God again applied his word.

Tues. 30.-I preached in the new preaching-house at Henley-

Green; but this was far too small to hold the congregation.

Indeed, this country is all on fire, and the flame is still spread-

ing from village to village. The preaching-house at Newcastle

justheld the congregation,many being kept away by the elec-

tion ; especially the Gentry. But still the poor heard theGospel

preached, and received it with all readiness ofmind.

Tues. 31. I reached Burslem, wherewe had the first society

in the country ; and it is still the largest, and the most in ear-

nest. I was obliged to preach abroad. The House would but

just contain the societies at the love-feast ; at which many, both

men and women, simply declared the wonderful works of God.

I did not find so lively a people at Congleton. Although the

April, 1784. ]

wounds made by prejudice were nearly healed, yet a faintness

anddeadness remained. I found the same sad effects ofprejudice

at Macclesfield : But there are so many here truly alive to God,

that his work goes on still; only not in so rapid a manner as it

might otherwise have done.

Sun. APRIL 4.-I preached at the new church, morning and

evening, to a London congregation. Monday, 5. About noon I

preached at Alpraham, to an unusually large congregation. I

was surprised, when I came to Chester, to find that there also

morning preaching was quite left off, for this worthy reason:

"Because the people will not come, or, at least, not in the win-

ter." If so, the Methodists are a fallen people. Here is proof.

They have " lost their first love;" and they never will or can

recover it, till they "do the first works."

As soon as I set foot in Georgia, I began preaching at five in

the morning; and every communicant, that is, every serious

person in the town, constantly attended throughout the year : I

mean, came every morning, winter and summer, unless in the

case of sickness. They did so till I left the province. In the

year 1738, whenGod began his greatwork inEngland, I began

preaching at the same hour, winter and summer, and never

wanted acongregation. If they will not attend now, they have

lost their zeal ; and then, it cannot be denied, they are a fallen

people.

And, in the mean time, we are labouring to secure the

preaching-houses to the next generation ! In the name ofGod,

let us, if possible, secure the present generation from drawing

back to perdition ! Let all the Preachers that are still alive to

God join together as one man, fast and pray, lift up their voice

as a trumpet, be instant, in season, out of season, to convince

them they are fallen ; and exhort them instantly to " repent, and

do the first works : " This in particular,-rising in the morning,

without which neither their souls nor bodies can long remain in

health.

Wed. 7.-I crossed over the water to Liverpool. Here I

found a people much alive to God ; one cause of which was,

that they have preaching several mornings in a week, and prayer-

meetings on the rest ; all of which they are careful to attend.

On Good-Friday, APRIL 9, I went to Warrington. In the

morning I read Prayers, preached, and administered the Lord's

Supper, to a serious congregation. I preached at five again,


and believe few were present whodid not feel that God was

there of a truth.

Sat. 10. I preached to ahuge congregation at Manchester,

and to a far larger at ten in the morning, being Easter-Day.

It was supposed there were near a thousand communicants.

But hitherto the Lord has helped me in this respect also : I

have found no congregation which my voice could not com-

mand.

Mon. 12. I found alovely congregation at Stockport, much

alive to God. So was that at Oldham the next day, which was

not perceptibly lessened, though it blew a storm, and poured

down with rain. Here a young woman, of unblamable character,

(otherwise I should not have given her any credit,) gave me a
remarkable account. She said, " I had totally lost the sight

ofmy right eye, when I dreamed one night, that our Saviour

appeared to me ; that I fell at his feet, and he laid his headupon

my right eye. Immediately I waked, and from that moment

have seen as well with that eye as with the other."

I applied, to a very large congregation, the case of the Rechab-

ites . (Jer. xxxv.) I asked, 1. Does it appear that these owed
to Jonadab more than the Methodists owe to me? 2. Are

they as observant of my advices (although both scriptural and

rational ; to instance only in dress and rising early) as the

Rechabites were ofhis advices ? (Ofdrinking nowine, and living

in tents ; which had neither Scripture nor reason to support

them!)

I think every member of the society at Bolton does take my

advice, with respect to other things, as well as with respect to

dress and rising early; in consequence of which they are con-

tinually increasing in number as well as in grace.

Fri. 16. I preached about ten at Wingate, a village five or

six miles from Bolton. I was constrained, by the multitude of

people, to preach abroad, though it was exceeding cold, on,

"All things are ready; come unto the marriage." Truly the

people were ready too. They drank in every word.

In the evening we had a very uncommon congregation at
Wigan. Only one gentlewoman behaved " as she used to do

at church ; " (so several afterwards informed me;) talking all

the time, though no one answered her ! But the rest were

deeply attentive ; and, I trust, will not be forgetful hearers. I

had designed to go from hence to Blackburn ; but hearing that

April, 1784. ] 271

one of our society, near Preston, was at the point of death, I

turned a little out of myway, to spend half an hour with her.

I found Mrs. Nuttal, alovely, patient creature, praising God

continually, though worn away with pining sickness and long-

continued pain. Having paid the last office of friendship here,

Iwent to Preston, and preached to a serious congregation. In

the evening I preached at Blackburn, where also the society is

lively, and continually increasing.

Sun. 18. After preaching at five to a numerous congrega-

tion, (but not one rich or well-dressed person among them,

either morning or evening ! Poor Blackburn !) I hastened on

to Gisburn. The church was so full that a few were obliged to

stand without the doors. The word was quick and powerful.

So it was afterward at Settle. Sufficient for this day was the

labour thereof.

Mon. 19. I went on to Ambleside ; where, as I was sitting

down to supper, I was informed, notice had been given of my

preaching, and that the congregationwas waiting. I would not

disappoint them; but preached immediately on salvation by

faith. Among them were a gentleman and his wife, who gave

me a remarkable relation. She said she had often heard her

mother relate, what an intimate acquaintance had told her, that

her husband was concerned in the Rebellion of 1745. He was

tried at Carlisle, and found guilty. The evening before he was

todie, sitting andmusing in her chair, she fell fast asleep. She

dreamed, one came to her, and said, "Go to such a part of the

wall, and among the loose stones you will find akey, which you

must carry to your husband." She waked ; but, thinking it a

common dream, paid no attention to it. Presently she fell

asleep again, and dreamed the very same dream. She started

up, put on her cloak and hat, and went to that part of the wall,

and among the loose stones found akey. Having, with some

difficulty, procured admission into the gaol, she gave this to her

husband. It opened the door of his cell, as well as the lock of

the prison door. So at midnight he escaped for life.
Tues. 20. We went to Whitehaven, where there is a fairer

prospect than hasbeen for many years. The society is united

in love, not conformed to the world, but labouring to experience

the full image of God, wherein they were created. The House

was filled in the evening, and much more the next, when we had

all the Church Ministers, and mostof the Gentry, in the town ;

[April, 1784.

but they behaved with as much decency as if they had been

colliers.

Thur. 22.-I preached in the market-house at Cockermouth.

In ourway thence, we had some of the heaviest rain I have seen

in Europe. The Sessions being at Carlisle, I could not have

the Court-House ; but we had agood opportunity in our own

House. Friday, 23. We travelled through a lovely country to

Longtown, the last town in England ; and one of the best built

in it; for all the houses are new, from one end to the other. The

road from hence to Langholm is delightfully pleasant, running

mostly by the side of a clear river. But it was past seven before

we reached Selkirk.

Sat. 24. We had frost in the morning, snow before seven,

piercing winds allday long, and in the afternoon vehement hail ;

so that I did not wonder we had a small congregation at Edin-

burgh in the evening.

Sun. 25.-I attended the Tolbooth kirk at eleven. The sermon

was very sensible ; but having no application,was no way likely

to awaken drowsy hearers. About four I preached at Lady

Maxwell's, two or three miles from Edinburgh, and at six in our

own House. For once it was thoroughly filled. I preached on,

" God is a Spirit ; and they that worship him, must worship him

in spirit and in truth." I am amazed at this people. Use the

most cutting words, and apply them in the most pointed manner,

still they hear, butfeel no more than the seats they sit upon !

Mon. 26.-I went to Glasgow, and preached in the evening

to a very different congregation. Many attended in the morn-

ing, although the morning preaching had been long discontinued

both here and at Edinburgh. In the evening many were obliged

to go away, the House not being able to contain them. Wednes-

day, 28. We found the same inconvenience, but those who could

get in found a remarkable blessing. Thursday, 29. The House

was thoroughly filled at four; and the hearts of the people were

as melting wax. Afterwards I returned to Edinburgh, and in

the evening the House was well filled. So that we must not say,

" The people of Edinburgh love the word of God only on the

Lord's day."

Fri. 30. We went to Perth; now but the shadow ofwhat it

was, though it begins to lift up its head. It is certainly the

sweetest place in all North-Britain, unless perhaps Dundee. I

preached in the Tolbooth, to a large andwell-behaved congre

May,1784.] 273

gation. Many of them were present again at five in the morn-

ing, MAY 1. I then went to Dundee, through the Carse of

Gowry, the fruitfullest valley in the kingdom. And I observe a

spirit of improvement prevails in Dundee, and all the country

round about it. Handsome houses spring up on every side.

Trees are planted in abundance. Wastes and commons are con-

tinually turned into meadows and fruitful fields. There wants

only a proportionable improvement in religion, and this willbe

one of the happiest countries in Europe.

In the evening I preached in our own ground to a numerous

congregation : But the next afternoon to one far more numerous ;

onwhom I earnestly enforced, "How long halt ye between two

opinions ? " Many of them seemed almost persuaded to halt no

longer : But God only knows the heart.

Mon. 3.-I was agreeably surprised at the improvement of

the land between Dundee and Arbroath. Our preaching-house

atArbroath was completely filled. I spoke exceeding plain on

the difference of building upon the sand, and building upon the

rock. Truly these " approve the things that are excellent,"

whether they practise them or no.

I found this to be a genuine Methodist society : They are

all thoroughly united to each other. They love and keep our

Rules ; they long and expect to be perfected in love : If they

continue so to do, they will and must increase in number as

well as in grace.

Mon. 4. I reached Aberdeen between four and five in the

afternoon. Tuesday, 5. I found the morning preaching had

been long discontinued: Yet the bands and the select society

were kept up. But many were faint and weak for want of

morning preaching and prayer-meetings, ofwhich I found scarce

any traces in Scotland.

In the evening I talked largely with the Preachers, and

showed them the hurt it did both to them and the people, for

any one Preacher to stay six or eight weeks together in one

place. Neither can he find matter for preaching every morning

and evening, nor will the people come to hear him. Hence he

grows coldby lying in bed, and so do the people. Whereas, if

he never stays more than a fortnight together in one place, he

may find matter enough, and the people will gladly hear him.

They immediately drew up such a plan for this Circuit, which

they determined to pursue.


Thur. 6.-We had the largest congregation at five which I

have seen since I came into the kingdom. We set out imme-

diately after preaching, and reached Old-Meldrum about ten.

Aservant of Lady Banff's was waiting for us there, who desired

Iwould take post-horses to Fort-Glen. In two hours we reached

an inn, which, the servant told us, was four little miles from her

house. So we made the best of our way, and got thither in

exactly three hours. All the family received us with the most

cordial affection. At seven I preached to a small congregation,

all ofwhom were seriously attentive, and some, I believe, deeply

affected.

Fri. 7.-I took a walk round about the town. I know not

when I have seen so pleasant a place. One part of the house

is an ancient castle, situated on the top of a little hill. At a

small distance runs a clear river, with a beautiful wood on its

banks. Close to it is a shady walk to the right, and another on

the left hand. On two sides of the house there is abundance

ofwood : On the other, a wide prospect over fields and meadows.

About ten I preached again with much liberty of spirit, on,

" Love never faileth." About two I left this charming place,

and made for Keith. But I know not how we could have got

thither, hadnot Lady Banff sent me forward, through that miser-

able road, with four stout horses .

I preached about seven to the poor of this world : Not a silk

coat was seen among them : And to the greatest part of them

at five in the morning. And I did not at all regret my labour.

Sat. 8.-We reached the banks of the Spey. I suppose there

are few such rivers in Europe. The rapidity of it exceeds even

that of the Rhine : And it was now much swelled with melting

snow. However, we made shift to get over before ten; and

about twelve reached Elgin. Here I was received by adaugh-

ter of good Mr. Plenderleith, late of Edinburgh ; with whom

having spent an agreeable hour, I hastened toward Forres : But

we were soon at full stop again ; the river Findorn also was so

swollen, that we were afraid the ford was not passable. How-

ever, having a good guide, we passed it withoutmuch difficulty.
I found Sir Lodowick Grant almost worn out. Never was a

visit more seasonable. By free and friendly conversation his

spirits were so raised, that I am in hopes it willlengthen his life.

Sun. 9.-I preachedto a small company at noon, on, "His

commandments are not grievous." As I was concluding, Colonel

May, 1784.] JOURNAL .
Grant and his Ladycame in: For whose sake I began again,

and lectured, as they call it, on the former part of the fifteenth

chapter of St. Luke. We had a larger company in the after-

noon, to whom I preached on "judgment to come." And this

subject seemed to affect them most.

Mon. 10. I set out for Inverness. I had sent Mr. M'Allum

before, on George Whitfield's horse, to give notice of my com-

ing. Hereby I was obliged to take both George and Mrs.

M'Allum with me inmy chaise. To ease the horses, we walked

forward from Nairn, ordering Richard to follow us, as soon as

they were fed : He did so, but there were two roads. So, as we

took one, and he the other, we walked about twelve miles and a

halfof the way, through heavy rain. We then found Richard

waiting for us at a little ale-house, and drove on to Inverness.

But, blessed be God, I was no more tired than when I set out

from Nairn. I preached at seven to a far larger congregation

than I had seen here since I preached in the kirk. And surely the

labour was not in vain : For God sent amessage tomanyhearts.

Tues. 11. Notwithstanding the long discontinuance of

morning preaching, we had a large congregation at five. I

breakfasted at the first house I was invited to at Inverness,

where good Mr. M'Kenzie then lived. His three daughters

live in it now ; one of whom inherits all the spirit of her father.

In the afternoon we took a walk over thebridge, into one of the

pleasantest countries I have seen. It runs along by the side of

the clear river, and is well-cultivated and well-wooded. And

here first we heard abundance of birds, welcoming the return of

spring. The congregationwas larger this evening than the last :

Andgreat part ofthem attended in the morning. We had then

a solemn parting, as we could hardly expect to meet again in the

present world.

Wed. 12. I dined once more at Sir Lodowick Grant's, whom

likewise I scarce expect to see any more. His Lady is lately

gone to rest, andhe seems to be swiftlyfollowing her. Achurch

being offered me at Elgin, in the evening I had a multitude of

hearers, whom I strongly exhorted to " seek the Lord while he

may be found." Thursday, 13. We took a view of the poor

remains of the once-magnificent cathedral. By what ruins are

left, the workmanship appears to havebeen exquisitely fine. What

barbarians must they have been, who hastened the destruction

of this beautiful pile,by taking the lead off the roof !

[May, 1784.

The church was again well filled inthe evening, by those who

seemed to feel much more than the night before. In conse-

quence, the morning congregation was more than doubled;

and deep attention sat on every face. I do not despair of

good being done even here, provided the Preachers be " sons of
thunder."

Fri. 14. We saw, at a distance, the Duke of Gordon's new

house, six hundred and fifty feet in front. Well might the

Indian ask, " Are you white men no bigger than we redmen?

Then why do you build such lofty houses ?" The country

between this and Banff is well cultivated, and extremely plea-

sant. About two I read Prayers andpreachedin the Episcopal

chapel at Banff, one of the neatest towns in the kingdom. About

ten I preached in Lady Banff's dining-room, at Fort-Glen, to a

very serious, though genteel, congregation ; and afterwards spent

a most agreeable evening with the lovely family.

Sat. 15. We set out early, and dined at Aberdeen. On the

road I read Ewen Cameron's Translation of Fingal. I think

hehasproved the authenticity ofit beyondall reasonablecontra-

diction : But what a poet was Ossian ! Little inferior to either

Homer or Virgil ; in some respects superior to both. Andwhat

an hero was Fingal ! Far more humane than Hector himself,

whom we cannot excuse for murdering one that lay upon the

ground; and with whom Achilles, or even pious Æneas, is not

worthy to be named. Butwho is this excellent translator, Ewen

Cameron ? Is not his other name Hugh Blair ?

Sun. 16. I went to Newburgh, a small fishing-town, fifteen

miles north of Aberdeen. Here is at present, according to its

bigness, the liveliest society in the kingdom. I preached here in

a kind of Square, to a multitude ofpeople ; and the whole con-

gregation appeared to be moved, and ready prepared for the
Lord.

At two in the afternoon Mr. Black read Prayers, and I

preached, in Trinity chapel. Itwascrowded with people ofall

denominations. I preached from 1 Cor. xiii. 1, 2, 3, in utter

defiance of their common saying, " He is a good man, though

he has bad tempers." Nay, if he has bad tempers, he is no
more agood man than the devil is a good angel. Atfive I

preached in our own chapel, exceeding crowded, on the form

and power ofgodliness. I am now clear of these people, and
can cheerfully commend them to God.

May, 1784. ] JOURNAL .
Mon. 17-. I reached Arbroath, and inquired into that odd

event which occurred there in the latter end of the last war.

The famous Captain Fell came one afternoon to the side of the

town, and sent three men on shore, threatening to lay the town

in ashes, unless they sent him thirty thousand pounds. That

not being done, he began firing on the town the next day, and

continued it till night. But, perceiving the country was alarmed,

he sailed away the next day, having left some hundred cannon-

balls behind him ; but not having hurt man, woman, or child,

or anything else, save one old barn door.

Tues. 18.-I preached at Dundee. Wednesday, 19. I crossed

over the pleasant and fertile county of Fife, to Melval-House,

the grand and beautiful seat of Lord Leven. He was not at

home, being gone to Edinburgh, as the King's Commissioner ;

but the Countess was, with two of her daughters, and both her

sons-in-law. At their desire I preached in the evening, on,

" It is appointed unto man once to die ; " and I believe God

made the application. Thursday, 20. It blew a storm : Never-

theless, with some difficulty, we crossed the Queen's Ferry.

Friday, 21. I examined the society, and found about sixty

members left. Many of these were truly alive to God : So our

labour here is not quite in vain. Saturday, 22. I had some

close conversation with L. M., who appeared to be clearly saved

from sin, although exceedingly depressed by the tottering tene-

ment of clay. About noon I spent an hour with her poor

scholars ; forty of whom she has provided with a serious master,

who takes pains to instruct them in the principles of religion, as

well as in reading andwriting. A famous actress, just come

down from London, which, for the honour of Scotland, just

during the sitting of the Assembly, stole away a great part of

our congregation to-night. How much wiser are these Scots
than their forefathers !

Sun. 23. I went in the morning to the Tolbooth kirk ; in

the afternoon, to the old Episcopal chapel. But they have lost

their glorying ; they talked, the moment Service was done, as if

they had been in London. In the evening the Octagon was

well filled; and I applied, with all possible plainness, “ God

is a Spirit ; and they that worship him must worship him in
spirit and in truth."

Mon. 24. I preached at Dunbar. Tuesday, 25. I spent an
hour with Mr. and Mrs. F., a woman everyway accomplished.

[June, 1784.

Neither of them had ever yet heard a sermon out ofthe kirk ;

but they ventured that evening , and I am inhope theydidnot

hear in vain. Wednesday, 26. We went on to Berwick-upon-

Tweed. The congregation in the Town-Hall was very nume-

rous. So it was likewise at five in the morning. Thursday,

27. We travelled through a delightful country to Kelso. Here

the two Seceding Ministers have takentrue pains to frightenthe

people from hearing us, by retailing all the ribaldry of Mr.

Cudworth, Toplady, and Rowland Hill. But God has called

one of them to his account already, and in a fearful manner.

As no house could contain the congregation, I preached in the

church-yard; and a more decent behaviour I have scarce ever

seen. Afterwards we walked to the Duke of Roxburgh's seat,

about half a mile from the town, finely situated on a rising

ground, near the ruins of Roxburgh Castle. It has a noble

Castle ; the front, and the offices round, make it look like

a little town. Most of the apartments within are finished in an

elegant, but not in a costly, manner. I doubt whether two of

Mr. Lascelles's rooms, at Harewood House, did not cost more in

furnishing, than twenty ofthese. But the Duke's house is far

larger, containing no less than fortybed-chambers. But it is

not near finished yet, nor probably will be till the owner is no

more seen.

Fri. 28.-I entered into England once more, andin the even-

ing preached in the Town-Hall, at Alnwick. Saturday, 29. I

should have preached in the Town-Hall, at Morpeth; but it

was pre-engaged by a company of strolling players. So we

retired into our own preaching-house. In the afternoon I went

on to Newcastle.

MAY 30.-(Being Whitsunday.) The rain obliged us to be

in the Orphan-House, both morning and evening; but in the

afternoon I was forced to preach abroad at the Fell, by the

multitudes that flocked together ; partly moved by the death of
William Bell and his wife, one so soon after the other.

Tues. JUNE 1.-About nine I preached to a large number

of the poor people at Howden Pans ; at noon, in North-Shields;

and inthe morning, at Newcastle ; where I had nowgreat satis-

faction, the congregation, both morning and evening, being

larger than they had been for many years, and the society

being much alive, and in great peace and harmony. Friday,
4. I went over to Sunderland, and found the work of God here

June, 1784.] JOURNAL. 279

also in aprosperous state. Saturday, 5. I saw as many of the

people, sick or well, as I could, andwas much comforted among

them. Sunday, 6. I preached at eight in the Room ; at

eleven in Monk-Wearmouth church. I purposed preaching

abroad at Newcastle in the evening, but the weather would not

permit : So I preached in the House, on, " This is the record,

that God hath given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his
Son."

Mon. 7-. About noon I preached at Anham ; and in the

evening in the Town-Hall at Hartlepool, where I had not been

for sixteenyears.

Tues. 8.-I came to Stockton-upon-Tees. Here I found an

uncommonwork of God among the children. Many of them

from six to fourteen were under serious impressions, and ear-

nestly desirous to save their souls. There were upwards of

sixty who constantly came to be examined, and appeared to be

greatly awakened. I preached at noon, on, " The kingdom of

heaven is at hand; " and the people seemed to feel every word.

As soon as I came down from the desk, I was enclosed by a

body of children ; one ofwhom, and another, sunk down upon

their knees, until they were all kneeling : So I kneeled down

myself, and began praying for them. Abundance ofpeople ran

back into the House. The fire kindled, and ran from heart to

heart, till few, if any, were unaffected. Is not this a new thing

inthe earth ? God begins his work in children. Thus it has

been also in Cornwall, Manchester, and Epworth. Thus the

flame spreads to those of riper years ; till at length they all know !

him, andpraise him from the least unto the greatest.

Wed. 9. I went to Barnard-Castle. Here I was informed,

thatmyold school-fellow, Mr. Fielding, and his wife, were gone

to rest. His son, not choosing to live there, had let his lovely

house to a stranger : So in a little time his very name and mem-

orywill be lost !

Sun. 10. After preaching at five, I took horse for the Dales,

and about eight preached at Cutherston. Here I had the plea-

sure of seeing some of our brethren, who had been long at vari-

ance, cordially reconciled. Hence we rode through rain and

wind to Newbiggen in Teesdale. Being but a poor horseman,

and having a rough horse, I had just strength for my journey,

and none to spare ; but after resting awhile, I preached without

any weariness .

[June,1784.

Having then procured an easier horse, I rode over the great

mountain into Weardale. But I found not my old host : Good

Stephen Watson was removed to Abraham's bosom. Sowas

that mother in Israel, Jane Nattres ; (before Salkeld;) the great

instrument of that amazing work among the children. But God

is with them still : Most of the Leaders and many of the people

are much alive to God ; as we found in the evening, whenwe

had such a shower of grace as I have seldom known.

Fri. 11. About ten, riding through avillage called Middle-

ton, I was desired to preach there. So I began in the street

without delay. A large number of people came together, and

received the word with gladness. Afterwards we rode at leisure
:

to Barnard-Castle ; and on Saturday, 12, to Darlington.

! Sun. 13.-We had a sound, useful sermon at church. At

eight I preached in our own Room, designing to preach abroad

in the afternoon ; but the rain prevented. Monday, 14. About

noon I preached at Northallerton ; and, I believe, God touched

many hearts : As also at Thirsk, where I preached in the even-

ing to an attentive congregation.

Tues. 15. I preached once more to my old friends at Osmo-

therley. About noon I preached at Potto ; and in the evening

at Hutton-Rudby, where we had a glorious opportunity : Some

great persons who were present seemed to be struck, and almost

persuaded to be Christians. Wednesday, 16. I preached in

Stokesley about eight; in Guisborough at noon ; and in the

evening at Whitby.

The morning congregation filled the House. Indeed the

society here maybe apattern to all in England. Theydespise

all ornaments but good works, together with a meek and quiet

spirit. I did not see a ruffle, no, nor a fashionable cap, among

them ; though many of them are in easy circumstances. I

preached at the market-place in the evening, where were at least

thrice as many as the House could contain.

Sat. 19.-I met such a select society as I have not seen since

I left London. Theywere about forty, ofwhom I did not find

one who had not a clear witness ofbeing saved from inbred sin.

Several of them had lost it for a season, but could never rest till

they had recovered it. And every one of them seemed now to

walk in the full light of God's countenance.

About one I preached to another congregation ofplain people

atRobin Hood'sBay. Herewas the first society in all these parts,

June, 1784.]

several years before there was any in Whitby. But their con-

tinual jars with each other prevented their increase either in

grace or number. At present they seem to be all at peace : So

I hope we shall now havejoy over them.

In the evening I preached to a large congregation at Scar-

borough. Sunday, 20. The new Vicar showed plainly, why he

refused those who desired the liberty for me to preach in his

church. A keener sermon I never heard. So all I have done

to persuade the people to attend the church is overturned at

once ! And all who preach thus, will drive the Methodists from

the church, in spite of all that I can do. I preached in the

evening, on 1 Cor. xiii. 1, 2, 3 ; and God mightily confirmed

his word, applying it to the hearts ofmany ofthe hearers.

Mon. 21. The rain drove us into the House at Bridlington.

Tuesday, 22. Westopped at a little town, where Mr. Osbaldes-

ton lately lived, a gentleman of large fortune, whose lady was as

gay and fashionable as any ; but suddenly she ran from east to

west ; she parted with all her clothes, dressed like a servant, and

scarce allowed herself the necessaries of life. But who can con-

vince her that she is going too far ? I fear, nothing less than

Omnipotence.

About one I preached to a large and remarkably serious con-

gregation at Beverley ; about six, at Hull. Afterwards, I met

the society, and strongly exhorted them to " press on to the

prize of their high calling. " Thursday, 24. I preached about

one at Pocklington ; and in the evening at York, where I

enforced, " Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him

only shalt thou serve." Friday, 25. Manywere in tears, and a

fire seemed to run through the whole congregation, while I

opened that scripture, " They shall rest in their beds, each one

walking in his uprightness." Such another opportunity we had

in the evening, while I was explaining the words of our Lord to

the Centurion, " Go thy way ; and as thou hast believed, so be

it done unto thee."

Sat. 26.-About two I preached at Thorne, and inquired

what fruit remained of the great work of God there. Some, I

found, had drawn back to their sins ; but many held fast what

they received. Hence I rode to Epworth, which I still love

beyondmost places in the world. In the evening I besought

all them that had been so highly favoured, " not to receive the

grace ofGod invain."

June,1784,

Sun. 27.-I preached at Misterton, at eight ; and at Over-

thorpe about one. At four I took my stand in Epworth market-

place, and preached on those words in the Gospel for the day,

" There is joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more

thanover ninety and ninejust persons that need no repentance."

It seemed as if very few, if any, of the sinners then present
were unmoved.

Mon. 28. I inquired into the state of the work ofGod which

was so remarkable two years ago. It is not yet at an end ; but

there has been a grievous decay, owing to several causes : 1.
i

The Preachers that followed Thomas Tattershall were neither

so zealous nor so diligent as he had been. 2. The two Leaders,

to whom the young men and lads were committed, went up and

: down to preach, and so left them in a great measure to them-

selves ; or, rather, to the world and the devil. 3. The two

womenwhowere the most useful of all others, forsook them ;

the one leaving town, and the other leaving God. 4. The fac-

tories which employed so many of the children failed, so that all

of them were scattered abroad. 5. The meetings ofthe child-

ren by the Preachers were discontinued ; so their love soon

grew cold ; and as they rose into men and women, foolish desires

entered, and destroyed all the grace theyhad left. Nevertheless

great part of them stood firm, especially the young maidens,

and still adorn their profession. This day I met the children

myself, and found some of them still alive to God. And I do

not doubt, but if the Preachers are zealous and active, they

will recover most of those that have been scattered.

To-day I entered onmy eighty-secondyear, andfound myself

just as strong to labour, and as fit for any exercise ofbody or

mind, as I was forty years ago. I do not impute this to second

causes, but to the Sovereign Lord of all. It is He who bids

the sun of life stand still, so long as it pleaseth him.

I am as strong at eighty-one, as I was at twenty-one ; but

abundantly more healthy, being a stranger to the head-ache,

tooth-ache, and other bodily disorders which attended me in my

youth. We can only say, " The Lord reigneth ! " While we

live, let us live to him !

In the afternoon I went to Gainsborough, and willingly

accepted the offer of Mr. Dean's chapel. The audience was

large, and seemed much affected : Possibly some goodmay be

done even at Gainsborough ! Tuesday, 29. I preached in the

!

July, 1784.] 283

street at Scotter, to alarge and deeply attentive congregation.

Itwasasolemn and comfortable season. In the evening I read

Prayers andpreached in Owstone church; and again in the morn-

ing. Wednesday, 30. In the evening I preached at Epworth

In the residue of the week, I preached morning and evening in

several of the neighbouring towns.

Sun. JULY 4.-I read Prayers and preached in Owstone

church, so filled as probably it never was before ; and believe

every one, awakened or unawakened, felt that Godwas there.

The congregation in the afternoon, at Epworth market-place,

was thought to be larger than ever it was before ; and great

was the Holy One of Israel in the midst of them.

Mon. 5.-At twelve I preached in the elegant House at

Doncaster, for once pretty well filled ; and spoke more strongly,

indeed more roughly, than I am accustomed to do. It was

sultry hot (as it has been once or twice before) while we went

to Rotherham, where I preached abroad to alarger congregation,

both of rich and poor, than even at Epworth ; and earnestly

enforced on those who are called believers, " By their fruits ye

shall know them."

Tues. 6. I joined again the select society, which was fallen

inpieces ; and prayed them to be wiser for the time to come. I

breakfasted at that amiable old man's, Mr. Sparrow; elder brother

to his twin-soul whom I knew at Westminster. Thence I went

on to Sheffield, where the society is increased to near some hun-

dred members. How swiftly does the work ofGod spread among

those who earn their breadby the sweat of their brow !

Wed. 7.-It was supposed there were a thousand persons

present at five in the morning. Ayoung gentlewoman was with

us at breakfast, whowas mourning and refused to be comforted.

We prayed for her in faith, and in a few hours she was enabled

to rejoice in God her Saviour. In the afternoon the heat was

scarce supportable, and it seemed to increase every hour ; but

between two and three in the morning, Thursday, 8, came a

violent storm, followed by uncommon thunder, and a flood of

rain, which continued about three hours ; this entirely cooled

the air, and, ceasingjust as we set out, left us apleasantjourney

to Wakefield.

I recommended to thecongregation here,(and afterwardsmany

other places,) the example of the people in Holland, (at least,

wherever I have been,)whonevertalkin a place ofpublicworship,

(July, 1784.

either before or after the service. They took my advice. None

courtesied, or bowed, or spoke to any one ; but went out in as

decent a manner, and in as deep silence, as any I saw at Rotter-

dam or Utrecht.

Fri. 9.-I preached at Huddersfield in the morning ; at

Longwood-House, at noon ; and in the evening, at Halifax.

Sunday, 11. I preached in the morning at Greetland House ;

at one, and in the evening, at Halifax. The House would in

nowise contain the people; yet the wind was so high, that I

could not preach abroad.

Mon. 12. Mr. Sutcliffe read Prayers, and I preached atHep-

tonstall, where many poor souls were refreshed. Between one

and two I preached in Todmorden church ; and, at five, in our

own preaching-house, boldly situated on the steep ascent of a

tall mountain .

Tues. 13. I went to Burnley, a place which had been tried

for many years, but without effect. It seems, the time was now

: come. High and low, rich and poor, now flocked together from

all quarters ; and all were eager to hear, except one man,who

was the Town-crier. He began to bawl amain, till his wife ran

to him, and literally stopped his noise : She seized him with one

i hand, and clapped the other upon his mouth, so that he could

not get out one word. God then began awork, which, I am

persuaded, will not soon come to an end. Wednesday, 14. I

preached at Colne. Thursday, 15. I retired to Otley, and
:

rested two days. Sunday, 18. I preached, morning and after-

noon, in Bingley church ; but it would not near contain the

congregation. Before Service I stepped into the Sunday-school,

i which contains two hundred and forty children, taught every

Sunday by several masters, and superintended by the Curate.

So, many children in one parish are restrained from open sin,

and taught a little good manners, at least, as well as to read the

Bible. I find these schools springing up wherever I go. Per-

haps God may have a deeper end therein, thanmen are awareof.

Who knows but some of these schools may become nurseries for
Christians ?

Tues. 20.-Though it rained all day, in the morningwe had

agood congregation at five. Wednesday, 21. I met the society,

and found but one or two of the original members, most of them

being gone to Abraham's bosom. Iwas a little surprised to find

that only two or three of the rest had stood fast in the glorious
Aug. 1784.1 JOURNAL.

liberty. But, indeed, most of them recovered their loss four

years ago.

Thur. 22. Although it rained, yet I met the congregation

in the morning, and most of them were athirst for full salvation.

Friday, 23. Abundance of people were present at five in the

morning, and such acompany ofchildren as I have hardly seen

inEngland.

Sat. 24.-In the evening I went to Hanging-Heaton, a little

village near Dewsbury. Some months since, an uncommon

work of God broke out here ;-the whole town was in aflame.

There are now about two hundred in the society, and very few

that donot know God. I was obliged to preach abroad, by the

multitude that flocked together ; and many of them found that

Godwas there, to their unspeakable comfort.

Sun. 25. I preached to several thousands at Birstal, and to,

at least, as many at Leeds. Tuesday, 27. Our Conference

began; at which four of our brethren, after long debate, (in

which Mr. Fletcher took much pains,) acknowledged their fault,

and all that was past was forgotten. Thursday, 29, being the

public ThanksgivingDay, as there was not room for us in the old

church, I read Prayers, as well as preached, at our Room. I

admired the whole Service for the day. The Prayers, Scrip-

tures, and every part of it, pointed at one thing: " Beloved, if

God so loved us, we ought also to love one another." Having

five Clergymen to assist me, we administered the Lord's Supper,

as was supposed, to sixteen or seventeen hundred persons.

Sun. AUGUST 1.-We were fifteen Clergymen at the old

church.

Tues. 3.-Our Conference concluded in much love, to the

great disappointment of all. This evening I went as far as

Halifax, and the next day to Manchester. Thursday, 5. We

set out early, but, being obliged to go round about, could not

reach Shrewsbury till half-past seven. I began preaching

immediately, in memory of good John Appleton, lately called

away, on, " Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy

might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor

wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest." Friday, 6. I preached

at Birmingham ; and on Saturday, 7, at Worcester.

Sun. 8.-I preached in the afternoon in St. Andrew's church,

andwas agreeably surprised to observe the congregation deeply

attentive, while I applied the story of Dives and Lazarus.

[Aug. 1784.

Mon. 9-. I rode over Malvern-Hills, which affords one of
the finest prospects in the kingdom, to Ledbury ; then, through

miserable roads, to Ross. I preached in the evening at Mon-

mouth, to a very quiet and civil congregation. Tumults were

now at an end, as I lodged at the house of a gentleman whom

none cared to oppose ; and even in the morning we had a large

congregation, both of rich and poor.

Tues. 10.-I took a walk to what is called the Bowling-Green

House, not a mile from the town. I have hardly seen such a

place before. A gravel-walk leads through the most beautiful

meadows, surrounded on all sides by fruitful hills, to a gently-

rising ground, on the top of which is asmooth Green, on which

the Gentry of the townfrequently spend the evening indancing.

From hence spread various walks, bordered with flowers ; one of

which leads down to the river, on the back of which runs another

walk whose artless shades are not penetratedby the sun. These

are full as beautiful in their kind, as even the hanging-woods at

Brecknock. Wednesday, 11. It was with some difficulty that I

broke from this affectionate people, and went on, through amost

lovely country, to Brecon.

Thur. 12. I found the little flock were in great peace, and

increasing in number as well as in strength. I preached in

the Town-Hall. I never saw such a congregation in Brecknock

before ; no, not even when I preached abroad. And I scarce

ever found the power of God so present. It seemed as if every

one must know the Lord, from the least to the greatest.

Fri. 13. We went on to Carmarthen. After preaching, I

advised all the audience to copy after the decent behaviour of

the Hollanders, in and after public worship. They all took my
i

advice ; none opened their lips till they came into the open air.

Saturday, 14, was the hottest day we have had this summer.

We reached Tenby soon after one. After dinner we took a walk

through the town. I think there is not such a town in England.

It is the Killmallock of Great Britain. Two-thirds of the ancient

town are either in ruins, or vanished away. In the evening I

preached in the street, to a large congregation ofrich and poor,

all quiet and attentive. I cannot but think, salvation is at length

come to this town also. I preached again in the morning, Sun-

day, 15, and the word seemed to sink into the hearts of the

hearers. Thence we went by Pembroke to St. Daniel's. It

was a comfortable season. We had such another at Pembroke

Aug. 1784. | JOURNAL. 287

in the evening. Many mourned after God, and many rejoiced

with joy unspeakable.

Mon. 16. I preached at Haverfordwest. Tuesday, 17.

We rode over to Roach, eight miles from Haverford. The new

preaching-house was pretty well filled ; and I was glad to find

that a little ride did me no harm. Wednesday, 18. I went to

Admiral Vaughan's, at Tracoon, one of the pleasantest seats in

Great Britain. The house is embosomed in lofty woods, and

does not appear till you drop down upon it. The Admiral

governs his family, as he did in his ship, with the utmost punc-

tuality. The bell rings, and all attend without delay ; whether

at meals, or at morning and evening prayer. I preached at

seven, on Phil. iii. 8; and spent the evening in serious conver-

sation.

Thur. 19. I went on to Mr.Bowen's, at Llyngwair ; another

most agreeable place; but more so because of the company,-

Mr. and Mrs. Bowen, his brother, and six of their eleven child-

ren, two ofwhom are lately come from the University. Friday,

20. About eight I preached in the church at Newport, and

spoke strong words, if haply some might awake out of sleep.

Thence we went to Haverfordwest; it being the day when the

Bishop held his visitation. As I was returning in the afternoon

from visiting some of the poor people, acarriage in the street

obliged me to walk very near a Clergyman, who made me a low

bow: I did the same to him; though I did not then know the

Bishop ; who has indeed won the hearts of the people in general

by his courteous and obliging behaviour.

Sun. 22. I heard agood sermon in the church at Carmar-

then, (being the Assize sermon,) on, " There is no power but of

God." In the evening I preached in the market-place, to, I

think, the largest congregation I ever saw in Wales. Thurs-

day, 26. On the road I read over Voltaire's Memoirs of himself.

Certainly never was amore consummate coxcomb ! But even

his character is less horrid than that of his royal hero ! Surely

so unnatural a brute never disgraced athrone before !

Cedite, Romani Catamiti ! Cedite, Graii !* A monster that

madeit a fixed ruleto let no woman and no Priest enter his palace;

thatnot only gloried in the constant practice of Sodomy himself,

butmade it free for all his subjects ! What a pity that his father

*Ye Catamites among the Greeks and Romans, concede to this wretch the

palm of criminality.-EDIT .


had not beheaded him in his youth, and saved him from all this
sin and shame !

In the evening I preached in the Town-Hall at Cardiff, and

showed the scriptural meaningof that much-mistaken word, "A

Christian." Friday, 27. I preached at Newport. I hardly

know such another place ; the people hear, and hear, and are

as much moved as the benches they sit upon. I spoke as strong

as I possibly could, on, "Awake, thou that sleepest; " and I

judged, from the number who attended at five in the morning,

that it was not all lost labour.

Sat. 28. Being informed the boat would pass at eight, we

hastened to the New-Passage : But we were time enough; for

it did not set out till past six in the evening. However, we got
into the boat about seven, and before nine reached Bristol.

Tues. 31.-Dr. Coke, Mr. Whatcoat, and Mr. Vasey, came

down from London, in order to embark for America.

Wed. SEPTEMBER 1.-Being now clearinmyownmind, I took

a step which I had long weighed inmy mind, and appointed

Mr. Whatcoat and Mr. Vasey to go and serve the desolate

sheep in America. Thursday, 2. I added to them three more,

which, I verily believe, will be much to the glory of God.

Friday, 3. I preached at Guinea-Street ; and the word of God

was with power ; in consequence of which there was a large con-

gregation at five in the morning, although they had not been

accustomed before to any service at that hour. Saturday, 4.

In the evening I preached at Bath. Sunday, 5. I read Prayers,

preached, and administered the sacrament, to a large congrega-

tion; but it was larger in the afternoon, and largest of all in the

evening, when I opened and applied, " Thou shalt love thy
! neighbour as thyself." Andmany were laid in the balance and

foundwanting, even of those who had often appealed to this
:

very rule.

Wed. 8. I preached at Kendalshire, where I do not remem-

ber to have been for near forty years. On the two following

days, I preached at Chelton and Coleford. After preaching to

an earnest congregation at Coleford, I met the society. They

contained themselves pretty well during the exhortation ; but

when I began to pray, the flame broke out. Many cried aloud,

many sunk to the ground,many trembled exceedingly ; but all

seemed to be quite athirst for God, and penetrated by the pre-

sence of his power.

Sept. 1784. ] JOURNAL. 289

Sun. 12.-Dr. Coke read Prayers, and I preached, in the new

Room. Afterward I hastened to Kingswood, and preached

under the shade of that double row of trees which I planted

about forty years ago. How little did any one then think that

they would answer such an intention ! The sun shone as hot

as it used to do even in Georgia ; but his rays could not pierce

our canopy ; and our Lord, meantime, shone upon many souls,

and refreshed them that were weary.

Mon. 13. I visited one that was confined to her bed, and in

much pain, yet unspeakably happy, rejoicing evermore, praying

without ceasing, and in everything giving thanks ; yea, and

testifying that she had enjoyed the same happiness, without

any intermission, for two-and-twenty years.

Tues. 14. I preached at Bath and Bradford ; Wednesday,

15, at Trowbridge and Frome. Thursday, 16. I went to

Ditchet, a village near Castle-Cary, where I found a friendly,

hospitable family. I preached in the evening to a numerous

and earnest congregation. Friday, 17. The House would not

contain half the people. Hence we passed through a delightful

country to theNunnery, a mere elegant trifle, near King Alfred's

Tower ; a lofty , triangular building, standing in the height of

the country, on the very spot (as is supposed) where he drew up

his army against the Danes. About eleven I preached at

Castle-Cary, to a quiet and attentive multitude. In the evening

I preached at Shepton-Mallet, where the people at length know

the day of their visitation. Saturday, 18. I preached in the

neat, cheerful church at Midsummer-Norton.

Monday, 20, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I met the classes ;

but found no increase in the society. No wonder, for discipline

had been quite neglected ; and without this, little good can be

done among the Methodists . Thursday, 23. I preached at

Paulton about one ; and at Pensford in the evening. The

gentlemen at Chew-Magnahaving sent me word I was welcome to

preach in the church, I went thither the next morning ; but they

now sent me word they had changed their minds ; so I preached

in our ownpreaching-house, on, " If we let him alone, all men
will believe on him ."

Thur. 30.-I had a long conversation with John M'Geary,

one of our American Preachers, just come to England. He

gave a pleasing account of the work of God there continually

increasing, and vehemently importuned me to pay one more


visit to America before I die. Nay, I shallpaynomore visits

to new worlds, till I go to the world ofspirits.

Sat. OCTOBER 2.--It pleased God once more to pour out his

Spirit on the family at Kingswood. Many ofthe children were

much affected. I talked particularly with some who desired to

partake of the Lord's Supper. They did so thenext morning.

Afterwards I spent a little timewith all the children ; and easily

observed an uncommon awe resting upon them all. In the

evening we renewed our covenant with God in the new Room

at Bristol. It wassupposedwe had a thousand communicants ;

and I believe none went empty away.

Mon. 4.-I set out for London. About eleven I preached

at the Devizes ; and in the evening at Sarum. A grievous

stumbling-block was lately thrown in theway ofthis poorpeople.

Ayoung gentlewoman, after being deeply convinced of sin,

found peace with God in a glorious manner. Shewasunspeak-

ably happy ; but, not longafter, suddenly fell intoblack despair,

and afterwards into melancholy madness, wherein she continued

about two years. Here was an occasion of offence for them

that sought occasion, which they took care to improve.

Wed. 6.-About eleven I preached at Winchester ; and in

the evening at Portsmouth-Common. Thosewho could notget
in, at first made a little noise ; but in a short time all was quiet.

Thursday, 7. I crossed over to the Isle of Wight. In the

afternoon I preached at Newtown, once the largest town in the

Isle ; but now not having six houses together. In the evening

all the Ministers, and most ofthe Gentry at Newport, attended

the preaching. Who hath warned them to flee from the wrath

to come? Omay many " bring forth fruit with patience! "

Friday, 8. We returned to Portsmouth-Common ; and Satur-

day, 9, to London.

Mon. 18.-I set out for Oxfordshire ; and in the evening

preached at Wallingford. Tuesday, 19. I spent an hour at

Lord Harcourt's seat, near Newnham ; one of the pleasantest

spots I have seen . It stands on a gently rising hill, and com-

mands amost delightful prospect. The rooms are not sogrand

as some, but elegant in the highest degree. So is also the front

of the house, andwhat is called the flower-garden; a small

inclosure, surrounded by lofty trees, and filled with all the

beauties that nature and art can give.

The House at Oxford was thoroughly filled; and students as

i

Nov. 1784.1 JOURNAL. 291

well as townsmen were deeply serious. Thursday, 21. I

preached at Witney, on, "As thou hast believed, so be it done

unto thee. " Wehad a large congregation at five in the morn-

ing; at twelve I met the children, and was pleased to find that

the impression which was made on them by the storm last year,

isnotyet worn out ; and the whole society, still double to what

it was, appears to be much in earnest.

After preaching in the evening, I met the select society, and

foundmany of them who for several years have lost nothing of

what they had received, but do still love God with all their

heart ; and, in consequence, " rejoice evermore, pray without

ceasing, and in everything give thanks." Tuesday, 22. I

preached at High-Wycomb about noon ; and in the afternoon
went on to London.

Sun. 24. I preached at Shadwell church, which was exceed-

ingly crowded with rich and poor, who all seemed to receive the

truth in love. Inthe evening I took coach, and the next even-

ing preached at Norwich. Afterwards I advised the people to

go away in silence ; andthey did so: Neither man nor woman

spoke till they were out of the House. The following days I

visited the other societies in the Circuit ; and on Tuesday,

NOVEMBER 1, returned to London.

Fri. 5. We had a solemn watch-night. Saturday, 6. I was

an hour or two in conversation with thattrulygreat manPascal

Paoli ; who is a tall, well-made, gracefulman, about sixty years

of age ; but he does not look to be above forty. He appears to

have a real regard for the public good, and much of the fear of

God. He has a strong understanding, and seemed to be

acquainted with every branch of polite literature. On my

saying he had met with much the same treatment with that of

an ancient lover of his country, Hannibal, he immediately

answered, " But I have never yet met with a King of Bithynia."

Mon. 8. This week I visited the societies near London ; a

very heavy, but necessary, work. Thursday, 18. I visited two

persons in Newgate,who were under sentence of death. They

seemed to be in an excellent temper, calmly resigned to the will

ofGod. But how much stress can be reasonably laid on such

impressions, it is hard to say : So often have I known them

vanish away as soon as ever the expectation of death was
removed.

Sat. 20. At three in the morning two or three men broke

292 [Nov. 1784.

into our house, through the kitchen window. Thence they

came up into the parlour, and broke open Mr. Moore's bureau,

where they found two or three pounds : The night before I had

prevented his leaving there seventy pounds, which he had just

received. They next broke open the cupboard, and took away

some silver spoons. Just at this time the alarum, which Mr.

Moore, by mistake, hadset for half past three, (instead of four,)

went off, as it usually did, with a thundering noise. At this

the thieves ran away with all speed; though their work was not

half done ; and the whole damage which we sustained scarce

amounted to six pounds .

Mon. 22. I preached at Northampton ; and on Tuesday,

23, at Whittlebury. Here my servant was seized with a fever,

attended with eruptions all over, as big as pepper-corns. I took

knowledge of the Prickly-heat, as we called it in Georgia,

termed by Dr. Herberden, the Nettle-rash, and assured him he

would be well in four-and-twenty hours. He wasso ; and drove

us on to Banbury ; where, on Wednesday, 24, I met with a

hearty welcome from Mr. George, formerly a member of the

London society. The Presbyterian Minister offering me the

use of his meeting, I willingly accepted his offer. It was, I

believe, capable ofcontaining near as many people as the chapel

at West-Street ; but it would not near contain the congregation :

And God uttered his voice,yea, and that amighty voice ; neither

the sorrow nor thejoy which was felt that nightwill quickly be

forgotten.
Thur. 25. I desired the people would sit below in the morn-

ing, supposing not many would be present; but I was much

mistaken ; notwithstanding the darkness and rain, the House

was filled both above and below ; and never did I see a people

who appeared more ready prepared for the Lord. Returning

through Brackley, I was informed that notice had been givenof

my preaching there at nine in the Town-Hall : So I began with-

out delay. The congregation was large and attentive, but

seemed to understand me no more than if I had been talking

Greek; but the society seemed alive to God, and striving to

enter in at the strait gate.

In the evening I preached at poor, dead Towcester. But is

not God able to raise the dead ? There was a considerable

shaking among the dry bones. And who knows but these dry

bones may live ?

-

Dec. 1784.1 293

Fri. 26. I returned to London. Sunday, 28. I preached

acharity sermon at St. Paul's, Covent-Garden. It isthelargest

and the best-constructedparish church that I have preached in for

several years ; yet some hundreds were obliged to go away, not

being able to get in. I strongly enforced the necessity of that

humble, gentle, patient love, which is the very essence of true

religion. Monday, 29. In the evening I preached at Hinxworth,

in Miss Harvey's new House. Tuesday, 30. I visited my old

friends at Bedford; but found Mr. Hill was gone to rest, and

Mr. Parker was just quivering on the verge of life. However,

I rejoiced to find him clearly possessed of that perfect love which

he had so long opposed.

Wed. DECEMBER 1.-I preached at St. Neot's, to the largest

congregation I ever sawhere ; and I know notthat ever I knew

them so affected ; it seemed as if God touched all their hearts.

Thursday, 2. I preached about noon at Bugden ; and in the

evening to a crowded congregation at Binlington. I wondered

that I saw nothing here of a young Clergyman, who last year

professed much love and esteem ; but I soon heard that his

eyes were opened to see the decrees . So he knows me no more.

Fri. 3-. Partly riding, and partly walking, through wind and

rain, and water and dirt, we got at last to Luton, where I found

alarge congregation ; andwe greatly rejoiced in God our Saviour.

Saturday, 4. I went on to London.

Mon. 6.-I went to Tunbridge-Wells, but not without diffi-

culty; part of the road being made scarce passable, through

the abundance of rain. I preached in the large Presbyterian

meeting-house ; but the violent rain thinned the congregation.

Yet on Tuesday, 7, we set out in a lovely morning ; but in

about an hour, just as a pack of hounds came on in full cry, a

furious storm ofhail met them in the teeth, and utterly silenced

them. It soon turned snow ; which so covered the road, that we

could scarce get on, though we walkedgoodpart of the way ; so

that we could not get to Robertsbridge till after the time

appointed. The snow likewise so retarded us in our journey

to Rye, that we were above an hour in the night. However, the

House was well filled with serious hearers ; so that I did not

repent of my labour.

Wed. 8.-With great difficulty, with two pair ofgood horses,

we got on fifteen miles in five hours ; but we could not reach

Sevenoaks till the congregation had been long waiting. Thurs


day, 9. Going on to Shoreham, we found that venerable man,

Mr. Perronet, ninety-oneyears of age, calmly waiting for the

conclusion of a good warfare. His bodily strength is gone, but

his understanding is little impaired; and he appears to have

more love than ever. After preaching to an earnest congrega-

tion in the evening, and to great part ofthem in the morning, I

returned to London.

Monday, 13, and the two days following, I preached at Can-

terbury, Dover, and Sittingbourne. Thursday, 16. I went to

Sheerness ; where Mr. Fox read Prayers, and I preached on

those words in the Second Lesson, " If the righteous scarcely

be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear ? " I

hardly ever spoke stronger words. MayGodmake the applica-

tion! I never before found this society in such a state as they

were now ; being all, in general, athirst for God, and increasing

in number as well as in grace. Friday, 17. I preached at

Chatham, where likewise I found only peace and love ; and on

Saturday, 18, cheerfully returned to London.

Mon. 20.-I went to Hinxworth, where I had the satisfaction

ofmeeting Mr. Simeon, Fellow of King's College, in Cambridge.

He has spent some time with Mr. Fletcher, at Madeley ; two

kindred souls ; much resembling each other, both in fervour

of spirit, and in the earnestness of their address. He gave me

the pleasing information, that there are three parish churches

in Cambridge, wherein true scriptural religion is preached ; and

several young gentlemen who are happy partakers of it.

I preached in the evening on Gal. vi. 14. Tuesday, 21. I

spent a little time with the children at Miss Harvey's school,

whom she likewise carefully instructs herself. After dinner we

set out for Wrestlingworth ; and having a skilful guide, who rode

before the chaise, and picked out the best way, we drove four

miles in only three hours. Wednesday, 22. I returned to Lon-

don, and concluded myjourneys for the present year.

Sat. 25. We met, as usual, in the new chapel, at four : At

ten, and in the afternoon, I preached in West-Street ; and

afterwards spent a comfortable hour in meeting the society.
Sun. 26. I preached the condemned criminals' sermon in

Newgate. Forty-seven were under sentence ofdeath. While

they were coming in, therewas something very awful in the

clink of their chains. Butno soundwas heard, either from them

or the crowded audience, after the text was named, " There is

Jan. 1785. ] 295

joyin heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over

ninety and ninejust persons, that need not repentance." The

power of the Lord was eminently present, and most of the pri-

soners were in tears. Afew days after, twenty of them died at

once, five of whom died in peace. I could not but greatly

approve of the spirit and behaviour of Mr. Villette, the Ordi-

nary ; and I rejoiced to hear, that it was the same on all similar

occasions.

Fri. 31. We had asolemn watch-night, and ushered in the

new year with the voice ofpraise and thanksgiving.

Sat. JANUARY 1, 1785.-Whether this be the last or no,

mayit be thebest year of mylife ! Sunday, 2. A larger num-

ber of people were present this evening at the renewal of our

covenant with God, than was ever seen before on the occasion .

Tues. 4.-At this season we usually distribute coals and

bread among the poor of the society. But I now considered,

they wanted clothes, as well as food. So on this, and the four

following days I walked through the town, and begged two

hundred pounds, in order to clothe them that needed it most.

But it was hard work, as most of the streets were filled with

melting snow, which often lay ankle deep ; so that my feet were

steeped in snow-waternearlyfrommorning till evening : I held

it out pretty well till Saturday evening ; but Iwas laid up with

a violent flux, which increased every hour, till, at six in the

morning, Dr. Whitehead called upon me. His first draught

made me quite easy ; and three or four more perfected the
cure. If he lives some years, I expect he will be one of the

most eminent Physicians in Europe.

I supposed my journeys this winter had been over ; but I

could not decline one more. Monday, 17. I set out for poor

Colchester, to encourage the little flock. They had exceeding

little of this world's goods, but most of them had a better por-

tion. Tuesday, 18. I went on to Mistleythorn, a village near

Manningtree. Some time since, one of the shipwrights of

Deptford-yard, being sent hither to superintend the building of

some men-of-war,began to read sermons on a Sunday evening

in his own house. Afterwards he exhorted them a little, and

then formed a little society. Some time after, he begged one of

our Preachers to come over and help them. I now found a

lively society, and one of the most elegant congregations I had

seen formanyyears. Yet theyseemed as willing to be instructed,


as if they had lived in Kingswood. Wednesday, 19. I returned

to Colchester ; and on Thursday, 20, preached to a lovely con-

gregation at Purfleet, and the next morning returned to London.

Sun. 23. I preached morning and afternoon at West-Street,

and in the evening in the chapel at Knightsbridge : I think, it

will be the last time ; for I know not that I have ever seen a

worse-behaved congregation.

Tues. 25. I spent two or three hours in the House of Lords.

I had frequently heard that this was the most venerable assem-

bly in England. But how was I disappointed ! What is a

Lord, but a sinner, born to die !

Sun. 30. From those words, " Righteous art thou, O

Lord, and true are thy judgments," I endeavoured to point

out those sins which were the chief cause of that awful trans-

action we commemorate this day. I believe the chief sin which

brought the King to the block, was his persecuting the real

Christians. Hereby he drove them into the hands ofdesigning

men, which issued in his own destruction.

Sun. FEBRUARY 6.-Wehad alove-feast. I could not but

observe the manner wherein several of them spoke one after

! another. Not only the matter, but the language, the accent,

the tone of voice, wherewith illiterate persons, men and women,

young and old, spoke, were such as a scholar need not be ashamed

of. Who teacheth like Him ?
:

Sun. 13.-I met the single women, and exhorted them to

consider, to prize, and to improve, the advantages they enjoyed.

On the following days, I visited many of our poor, to see with

my own eyes what their wants were, and how they might be

effectually relieved.

Sun. 20.-I preached in Spitalfields church in the morning,

and in the afternoon at St. Ethelburg's, and in the evening at

the new chapel. On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I

visited the residue of the sick and poor. Friday, 25. I received

letters from the Preachers, Stewards, and Leaders at Plymouth-

Dock, informing me, that William Moore had renounced the

Methodists, hired a place to preach in, and drawn away about

forty of our members, to form a society for himself. They

therefore begged I would come down as soon as possible, to

quench the kindling fire. I saw no time was to be lost, and

therefore immediately took places in the Exeter diligence.

Sun. 27-. I preached in Stepney church, one of the largest

March, 1785.] 297

parish churches in England. Monday, 28. The diligence

reached Sarum about eight in the evening. About nine we left

it. So keen a frost, I hardly ever felt before : And our car-

riage let in the air on all sides, so that we hardly could preserve

life. However, soon after five on Tuesday evening, we got to

Exeter. Wednesday, MARCH 2. We went on to Plymouth-

Dock ; and found all that we had heard, confirmed. But I

verily believe, we are better without William Moore, than with

him; as his heart is not right with God.

To quiet the minds of many well-meaning persons, I preached

on those comfortable words, " Even the hairs of your head are

all numbered ; " and in the morning, on, " Despise not thou

the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of

him." Thursday, 3. In the evening I read to the whole con-

gregation, a plain state of the case, with regard to the Deed of

Declaration, which William Moore had so wonderfully misrepre-

sented : And I believe they were all fully satisfied.

Fri. 4.-I took a walk through the Royal Hospital for sick

and wounded sailors. I never saw any thing of the kind so

complete : Every part is so convenient, and so admirably neat.

But there is nothing superfluous, and nothing purely ornamen-

tal, either within or without. There seems to be nothing want-

ing, but aman full of faith and zeal, to watch over the souls of

the poor patients, and teach them to improve their affliction.

In the evening I preached to a large congregation at Ply-

mouth ; and it pleased God to give me uncommon liberty in

describing the power of faith. What a blessed proof of this

has there been here, since I was in the town before !

Preaching at the Dock in the evening, I besought all serious

people not to " grieve the Holy Spirit of God; " but to " put

away all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil-

speaking." I exhorted them, in particular, not to talk about

Mr. Moore at all, but to give him up to God.

Sun. 6. I preached at the Dock at seven. Between one and

two I began at Plymouth ; and asmany as could get in seemed

to be deeply affected, with the application of those words, " Go

thy way, and as thou hast believed, so be it done unto thee."

In the afternoon I accepted of an invitation from Dr. Gench,

the Physician of the Hospital ; and passed an agreeable hour

with a man of sense, and, it seems, of considerable learning. At

five I preached in the shell of the new House, on the form and

[March, 1785.

power of godliness. In the evening I met the society once

more, confirmed in the truth more than ever, and more deter-

mined to walk in the good old waywherein theyhad continued

from the beginning.

Mon. 7-. We had a pleasant journey to Exeter ; and on

Tuesday, to Bath. But the coach did not come in soon enough

for me to preach in the evening : Nevertheless, we had a large

congregation in the morning. Wednesday, 9. This society too

ismuch improved since Iwas here last. Manystumbling-blocks

are removed out ofthe way, and brotherly love is increased.

Thur. 10. After spending adayor two at Bristol, on Satur-

day, 12, I returned to Bath, and preached to a numerous con-

gregation. Great part of them were present again at six in the

morning. Sunday, 20. I went over to Kingswood, and preached

the funeral sermon ofAnn Noble, an old member of the society ;

who, having adorned the Gospel above forty years, died in the

full triumph offaith .

Mon. 21. I set out early, and dined at Stroud. The death

of Mr. Willis, snatched away in the midst of his years, but a

few days before, brought abundance of people to the preaching-

house; and most of them were deeply serious ; so that we had

a very solemn hour. Tuesday, 22. I preached in Painswick at

noon, and at six in the Court-House at Gloucester. Amulti-

tude of people flocked together, many of whom were of the

better sort ; and most of them appeared to be, for the present,

almost persuaded to be Christians. Wednesday, 23. About

eleven I preached at Tewkesbury, and in the evening at Wor-

cester. Thursday, 24. I breakfasted at Mrs. Price's, a Quaker,

who keeps a Boarding-School. I was much pleased with her

children, so elegantly plain in their behaviour, as well as apparel.

Iwas led, I know not how, to speak to them largely ; then to

pray; and we were all much comforted. The society is ingreat

peace, and striving together forthe hope of the Gospel. I have

not seen greater earnestness and simplicity inany society, since
we left London.

Iwas now considering how strangely the grain of mustard-

seed, planted about fifty years ago, has grown up. Ithasspread

through all Great Britain and Ireland ; the Isle of Wight, and

the Isle of Man; then to America, from the Leeward Islands,

through the whole continent, into Canada and Newfoundland.

And the societies, in all these parts, walk by one rule, knowing

March, 1785.] 299

religion is holy tempers ; and striving to worship God, not in

form only, but likewise " in spirit and in truth."

MARCH 25.-(Being Good-Friday.) I hastened to reach

Birmingham before the Church Service began. Asharper frost

I never knew : But indeed our House was hot enough in the

evening ; and I have not seen a more earnest people. Such an

advantage it is to be fully employed. In every place we find

labouringmen most susceptible of religion. Such a blessing

results from that curse, " In the sweat of thy brow shalt thou

eatbread."

Sat. 26.-I had designed to rest ; but notice had been given

ofmy preaching at Quinton at noon. As the House would not

hold the people, I was constrained, cold as it was, to preach

abroad; and they all seemed to feel that solemn question, " How

shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation ? "

In the evening myheart was enlarged in such amanner as I

have seldom known ; so that I detained the congregation consi-

derably longer than I am accustomed to ; and all the people

seemed determined to " glorify God with their body and their

spirit."

MARCH 27.-(Being Easter-day.) I preached at seven, on,

"The Lord is risen indeed," with an uncommon degree of free-

dom; andthenmet the LocalPreachers, several ofwhom seemed

tohave caught the fashionable disease,-desire of independency.

Theywere at first very warm ; but at length agreed to act by

the Rules laid down in the Minutes of the Conference.

The weather now changed. Small rain fell some hours, and

then turned into snow. This made it very dirty : However, the

poor people got through, and filled Darlaston church. Hence

I returned to Wednesbury ; but could not preach abroad, the

ground being covered with snow. As many as could crowded

into the House. A love-feast followed, at which many plain

people spoke without reserve. The artless propriety with which

they spoke must be truly astonishing to all who do not consider

that promise, " They shall be all taught of God."

Mon. 28. I preached a kind of funeral sermon on Sarah

Wood, one of the first membersof the society. For above fifty

years she adorned the Gospel, being a pattern of all holiness.

She was confined to her bed for several months. Being asked

if time did not hang upon her hands, she answered, " No ; the

Bible is my delight." "How can that be," said her friend,

[April, 1785.

"when you cannot see ? " " Very well," said she ; " for the

Lord brings it to my remembrance." So,without doubt or fear,

she delivered up her soul to her merciful and faithful Creator.

About eleven I preached at Wolverhampton, and spent the

afternoon with the amiable family at Hilton-Park. Tuesday,

29. At noon I preached in the Room at Stafford, to a deeply

affected congregation . This was the more strange, because

there are few towns in England less infected with religion than

Stafford. In the evening I preached at Newcastle, to a very

serious and much affected congregation. Wednesday, 30. We

found a difficulty at Lane-End. Even at noon the House con-

tained not a third of the congregation. The wind was piercing

cold ; nevertheless, I preached abroad, and God warmed our

hearts. In the evening I was greatly comforted among our

brethren at Burslem, well established in grace ; and such

another congregation I met with, Thursday, 31 , at Congleton.

Fri. APRIL 1.--I came to Macclesfield, where Mr. Simpson

had given notice ofmy preaching in his church. Here I fully

delivered my own soul ; and on Saturday, 2, went on to Man-

chester. Sunday, 3. Our brethren flocking in from all parts,

the House, large as it is,could not containthem. Itwas sup-

posed we had twelve hundred communicants. Monday, 4. I

preached to our old, loving congregation at Bolton. Tuesday,

5. At noon I preached at Wingate, in the open air. The con-

gregation were quite ripe for all the Gospel blessings, devouring

every word. In the evening I preached at Wigan. I never

before saw this preaching-house full; but it was more than full

to-night, and with deeply attentive hearers. Wednesday, 6. I

preached at Liverpool ; but I found no ship there ready to sail.

So, Thursday, 7, (after preaching at Warrington in the way,)

I hastened to Chester. Neither was there any ship at Parkgate

ready to sail ; so, Friday, 8, we took coach, and reached Holy-

head between four and five on Saturday in the afternoon.

Between nine and ten we went on board the Clermont packet :

But it was a dead calm till past ten on Sunday, 19, when the
company desired me to give them a sermon. After sermon I

prayed that God would give us a full and speedy passage.

While I was speaking the wind sprung up ; and in twelve
hours brought us to Dublin Bay. Does not our Lord still hear

the prayer ? I found such a resting-place at our own house,

as I never found in Ireland before ; and two such Preachers

April, 1785. ]

with two such wives, I know not where to find again. In the

evening, and so every evening beside, we had Sunday evening

congregations ; and in the morning they were larger, by a third

part, than those I had when I was here last.

On Tuesday, and the three following days, I examined the

society. I never found it in such a state before ; many of them

rejoiced in God their Saviour, and were as plain in their apparel,

both men and women, as those in Bristol and London. Many,

I verily believe, loveGod with all their hearts ; and the number

of these increase daily. The number of the whole society is

seven hundred and forty-seven. Above three hundred of these

have been added in a few months ;-a new and unexpected

thing ! In various places, indeed, we have frequently felt

The o'erwhelming power of saving grace ;

which acted almost irresistibly. But such a shower of grace

never continued long; and afterwards men might resist the

Holy Ghost as before. When the general ferment subsides,

every one that partook of it has his trial for life ; and the higher

the flood, the lower will be the ebb; yea, the more swiftly it

rose, the more swiftly it falls : So that if we see this here, we

should not be discouraged. We should only use all diligence

to encourage as many as possible to press forward, in spite of all

the refluent tide. Now, especially, we should warn one another

not to grow weary or faint in our mind ; if haply we may see

such another prodigy as the late one at Paulton, near Bath,

where there was a very swift work of God ; and yet, a year after,

out of an hundred converted, there was not one backslider !

The number of children that are clearly converted to God is

particularly remarkable. Thirteen or fourteen little maidens, in

one class, are rejoicing in God their Saviour ; and are as serious

and stayed in their whole behaviour, as if they were thirty or

forty years old. I have much hopes, that half of them will be

steadfast in the grace ofGod which they now enjoy.

Sun. 17. We had such a number of communicants at the

cathedral as was scarce ever seen there before. In the evening

manywere cut to the heart ; and, I believe, not a few comforted.

A love-feast followed ; at which many spoke what God had

done for their souls, with all plainness and simplicity.

Mon. 18.-I went through a delightful country to Prosperous ;

a little town, begun five years ago by Captain Brooke, just


returned from the East Indies. Here he introduced every

branch of the cotton manufactory, on a most extensive plan.

He built two rows of commodious houses, with all convenient

appurtenances ; and he now employs about two thousand men,

women, and children, on the spot, beside near the same number

in other places.

They had a very large Room, but not near large enough for

the congregation. All that got in seemed much affected, as

they did likewise at five in the morning. About fifty of them

are already joined in a society. Fair blossoms ! Butwhat will

the fruit be ?

Aremarkable circumstance, we were informed, occurred near

this place, about three weeks before :-Apoor woman, who owed

her landlord fourteen pounds, scraped seven together, which she

brought him. But he absolutely refused to take less than the

whole, yet detained her in talk till evening. She then set

out on a car. When she was within a mile of home, she over-

took a soldier, who said he was exceedingly tired, and earnestly

entreated her to let him ride with her on the car, to which she

at length consented. When they came to her house, finding

there was no town within two miles, he begged he might sit by

the fire-side till morning. She told him she durst not suffer it,

as hers was alone house, and there was none in it but herself

and her girl : But at last she agreed he should lie in the girl's

bed, and she and the girl would lie together. At midnight, two

men, who had blackened their faces, broke into the house, and

demanded her money. She said, " Then let me go into the

next room and fetch it." Going in, she said to the soldier, " You

have requited mewell for my kindness, by bringing your comrades

to rob my house." He asked, " Where are they ?" She said,

" In the next room." He started up, andran thither. The men

ran away with all speed. He fired after them, and shot one

dead; who, being examined, appeared to beher landlord ! So

that a soldier was sent to protect an innocent woman, and pun-

ish anhardened villain !

Tues. 19. I preached at ten to an uncommonly large and

serious congregation at Edinderry. In the evening I preached

at Tyrrel's Pass, where a small, dead society is all that now

remains. Such another I found at Coolylough, on Wednesday,

20. Thursday, 21. Going to Athlone, I found the scene

entirely changed ; there has not been for many years so much

April, 1785.]

life in the society. Many of the old dead members are quick-

ened again. Many are added to them ; and there is no jar of

anykind amoonng them ; they provoke one another only to love

and to good works.

Fri. 22. It is just seven years since I was here before ; and

I find little change inmany,only that they are more dead to the

world, and, consequently, more alive to God; and for a few that

have left them, God has given them double, that are either

alive to God, or athirst for him.

Sun. 24. In the afternoon I preached at the east end ofthe

market-house. I scarce ever saw so numerous a congregation

at Athlone ; and all were attentive : Not aword washeard, and

scarce any motion was to be seen . I trust the seed now sown

will not wither away, but grow up into everlasting life !

Mon. 25.-Being desired to preach at Ballinasloe, inmyway

to Aghrim, I stood, about eleven, in the shade of a large house,

and preached to a numerous congregation of Papists and Pro-

testants, equally attentive, on, " The kingdom of God is at

hand." As I entered Aghrim, the Rector, who was waiting at

his gate, welcomed me into the country ; and desired me to use

his church, both now, and whenever I pleased : I preachedthere

at six. It was thoroughly filled with well-behaved hearers. But

the society here, as well as that at Tyrrel's Pass, is well nigh

shrunk into nothing ! Such is the baleful influence of riches !

The same effect we find in every place. The more men increase

in goods, (very few excepted,) the more they decrease in grace.
Tues. 26.-I went on to Eyre-Court. Here, also, the Minis-

ter gave me the use of his church ; but the people seemed to

understand little of the matter. As I had not this privilege at

Birr, I went to the Square, where the owner of a large house

invited me to preach before it. The congregationwas exceeding

large; butmany of them wild as colts untamed. However, the

far greater part of them were seriously attentive. I am in hopes

the work of God will revive here also ; the rather, because he

has fully restored one of the most eminent backsliders in the

kingdom.

When I came to Tullamore, the Minister was willing that I

should preach in the church; where both the soldiers and all

the Officers attended, and our Great Captain was present also.

Thur. 28. I supposed the house at Portarlington would

havemore than contained the congregation ; but it would scarce

[May, 1785.

contain a third part ofthem. So I removed to the market-house,

and preached on the general judgment. The word was quick

and powerful, so that very few appeared to be unaffected.

In the evening I preached in the church at Mount-Mellick.

Perhaps such a congregation was never there before. But the

greater part of them seemed to be of Gallio's mind, to care for

none of these things.

Fri. 29. I preached in our own House at Kilkenny, to just

such another congregation. But those that attended in the

morning were ofa nobler spirit, and I found uncommon liberty

among them.

Sat. 30.-I preached at Waterford in the Court-House, one

ofthe largest in the kingdom. A multitude of people quickly

ran together, which occasioned some tumult at first ; but it was

quickly over, and all were deeply attentive. Surely God will

have much people in this city.

Sun. MAY 1.-At eight I preached in the Court-House to a

larger congregation than before. At eleven I went to the

cathedral, one of the most elegant churches in Ireland. The

whole Service was performed with the utmost solemnity. After

Service, the senior Prebend, Dr. Fall, invited me to dinner ; and

desired, when I came again, I would take a bed at his house.

Idoubt that will never be !

At four I preached at the head of the Mall, to a Moorfields

congregation, all quiet and attentive. Monday, 2. The con-

gregation at five in the morning was larger than that on Satur-

day evening ; and all ofthem appeared to have (for the present,

at least) a real concern for their salvation. O that it may not

pass away as the morning dew !

I took asolemn farewell of this affectionate people, concluding
with those awful words :-

Now on the brink ofdeath we stand ;

And if I pass before,

You all may safe escape to land,

Andhail me on the shore.

Tues. 3.-We set out for Dungarven-Ferry ; but in spite of

all the speed we could make, the road was so horrible, that we

could not reach Youghall before six in the evening. At seven,

the Court-House was filled from end to end: And such was

the attention of all, high and low, that I hope many of them will

bring forth fruit to perfection.

May, 1785.1

Wed. 4.-At five in the morning the Court-House was

thoroughly filled. So in the evening I preached in the Mall,

where the congregation was much the same as the last at Water-

ford ; only that they were in general Protestants, as are most in

the town ; who are also some of the most courteous and quiet

people in the kingdom.

Thur. 5.-Before I came half way to Cork, I was met by

about thirty horsemen. We dined at Middleton, and then

rode on through a pleasant, well-cultivated country to Cork .

In the evening, many in the crowded congregation were much

comforted.

Fri. 6.-I made an exact inquiry into the state of the society.

I found the number was about four hundred, many of whom

were greatly in earnest. Many children, chiefly girls, were

indisputably justified; some of them were likewise sanctified,

andwere patterns of all holiness.

But how shall we keep up the flame that is now kindled, not

only in Cork, but in many parts ofthe nation ? Not by sitting

still ; but by stirring up the gift of God that is in them ; by

uninterrupted watchfulness ; by warning every one and exhort-

ing every one ; by besieging the throne with all the powers of

prayer; and, after all, some will, and some will not, improve the

grace which they have received. Therefore there must be a

falling away. We are not to be discouraged at this ; but todo

all that in us lies to-day,leaving the morrow to God.

Sat. 7.-On this day that venerable saint, Mr. Perronet,

desired his grandaughter, Miss Briggs, who attended him day

and night, to go out into the garden, and take a little air. He

was reading, and hearing her read, the three last chapters of

Isaiah. When she returned, he was in a kind of ecstasy ; the

tears running down his cheeks, from a deep sense ofthe glorious

things which were shortly to come to pass. He continued

unspeakably happy that day, and on Sundaywas, if possible,

happier still. And indeed heaven seemed to be as it were

opened to all that were round about him. When he was inbed,

she went into his room to see if any thingwas wanting ; and

as she stood at the feet of the bed, he smiled, and broke out,

"God bless thee,my dear child, and all that belong to thee ! Yea,

He will bless thee ! " Which he earnestly repeated many times,

till she left the room. When she went in, the next morning,

Monday, 9, his spirit was returned to God!

[May, 1785.

So ended the holy and happy life of Mr. Vincent Perronet,

in the ninety-second year ofhis age. I follow hard after him in

years, being now in the eighty-second year ofmyage. O that I

may followhim inholiness ; andthatmylast endmaybe like his!

Sun. 8. In the afternoon I stood in the vacant space near

the preaching-house, capable of containing many thousands.

Animmense number assembled: There was no disturbance :

The days oftumult here are over ; andGod has now of a long

season made our enemies to be at peace with us.

Mon. 9.-About noon I preached at Kinsale, in the old

Bowling-green, which lies on the top ofthe hill, and commands

a large prospect,bothby seaand land. All behaved well, but

a few Officers, who walked up and down, and talked together

during the whole service. The poor in Ireland in general are

well-behaved : All the ill-breeding is amongwell-dressed people.

In the evening I preached in the main street at Bandon, to a very

numerous congregation: But some of them were better clothed

than taught ; for theylaughed and talkedgreat part of the time.

Such a transaction occurred here last week, as has not

occurred this century. Asoldier, walking over the bridge, met

a countryman, and taking a fancy to his stick, strove to wrench

it from him : His companion knocked the soldier down. News

'of this being carried to the barracks, awhole troop of soldiers

marched down, and without any provocation, fell upon the

countrymen coming into the town, pursued them into the houses

where they fled for shelter, and hacked and hewed them without

mercy : Two-and-forty were wounded, several maimed, and two

killed upon the spot.

Wed. 11.-I returned from Bandon to Cork; and after

endeavouring to confirm those that were much alive to God, on

Friday, 13, with some difficulty, I broke loose from my affec-

tionate friends, and in two long stages reached Kilfinnan. It

being too stormy to preach abroad, I preached in the Assembly-

Room: All the hearers were serious and well-behaved. I trust

some will bring forth fruit with patience.

Afterwards I took a survey of the Danish mount near the

town; the first I have seen, surrounded with a triple ditch ; but

it is not either so high or so large as that near Dundee. Is it

not strange, that the Irish, as well as the Scots, should so soon

have driven out those merciless robbers who defied all the

strength of England for so long a time ? Saturday, 14. I

May, 1785.] JOURNAL.
found a far greater curiosity, a large Druidical temple. I

judged by my eye, that it was not less than a hundred yards in

diameter ; and it was, if I remember right, full as entire as

Stonehenge, or that at Stanton-Drew. How our ancestors

could bring or even heave these enormous stones, what modern

cancomprehend ?

Inthe evening we found many of our old friends at Limerick

were removed to Abraham's bosom. MAY 12. (Being Whit-

sunday.) The Service at the cathedral began at eleven, and

lasted till three. It concluded a little sooner, by myassisting at

the Lord's Supper, at the request ofthe Clergymen. Between

five and six, I took my stand near the Custom-House, amidst an

innumerable multitude of people ; but they were

Wild as the untaught Indian's brood.

They made such a wonderful noise, that I judged it best to

give them the ground, and retire to our own House. Monday,

16. I restored the select society, whichhad been quite neglected.

In the evening I earnestly exhorted all our brethren to set out

again in the good old way ; and to runwith patience the race
that is set before them .

Thur. 17.-In myway to Gort, Iwas met by some of our

brethren of Killchrist, a village eight miles beyond it, givingme

an invitation from Colonel Pearse, to lodge at his house. He

sent me to Killchrist in one of his own carriages. There I

found a large number of plain people, to whom I preached in

the yard. Thence I returned to the Colonel's ; but the house

being full of genteel company, I was as out of my element ;

there being no room to talk uponthe only subject which deserves

the attention of a rational creature.

Wed. 18.-Learning that a little girl had sat up all night,

and then walked two miles to see me, I took her into the chaise ;

andwas surprised to find her continually rejoicing in God. The

person with whom the Preachers lodge, informed me, that she

has been two years possessed of his pure love. We breakfasted

at Athenry, once a populous city. But now seges est ubi

Troja fuit. In the afternoon we went on to Ballinrobe.

Having heard a remarkable account of the Charter-School

here, I resolved to see it with my own eyes. I went thither

*Corn is now growing on the spot where Troy formerly stood.- EDIT.

*

308 REV. J. WELSEY'S [May, 1785.

about five in the afternoon, but found no master or mistress .

Seven or eight boys, and nine orten girls, (the rest beingramb-

ling abroad,) dirty and ragged enough, were left to the care of

a girl, half the head taller than the rest. She led us through

the house. I observed first the school-room, not much bigger

than a small closet. Twenty children could not be taught there at

once, with any convenience. When we came into the bed-

chamber I inquired, " How many children now lodge in the

house ? " andwas answered, " Fourteen or fifteen boys, and nine-

teen girls ." For these boys, there were three beds, and five for

the nineteen girls. For food I was informed, the master was

allowed a penny-farthing aday foreach ! Thus they are clothed,

lodged, and fed. Butwhat are they taught ? As far as I could

learn, just nothing ! Of these things I informed the Commis-

sioners for these schools in Dublin. But I do not hear of any

alteration. If this be a sample of the Irish Charter-Schools,

what good can we expect from them ?

Inmyway from Limerick hither, I read and carefully con-

sidered Major Vallance's Irish Grammar, allowed to be the best

extant. And supposing him to give a true account of the Irish

language, it is not only beyond all comparison worse than any

ancient language I know any thing of; but below English,

French, German, Italian, Spanish, or any other modern lan-

guage. The difficulty of reading it is intolerable, occasioned

chiefly by the insufferable number of mute letters, both of

vowels and consonants ; the like ofwhich is not to be found in

any language under heaven. The number of pronouns, and

the irregular formation of the verbs, is equally insufferable.

But nothing is so insufferable as their poetry ; the whole con-

struction of which is so trifling and childish ; and yet requires

more pains to write, than either the modern rhyme, or the

ancient attention to long and short syllables. Friday, 20. I

went on to Castlebar. Here I generally find awelcome reception.

Almost all the inhabitants here love us well, and believe the

Methodists are good men.

Sat. 21. Mr. Browne of Relins, about three miles from

Castlebar, invited us to his house. It is one of the pleasantest

places I have seen in the kingdom: But it was not sopleasant

as when I was there first. For his lovely wife, and an amiable

daughter, are both gone into a better country.

MAY 22.-(Being Trinity-Sunday.) I preached in the morn-

May, 1785.1

ing on, " There are three that bear record in heaven." The con-

gregation at church were remarkably well-behaved; and the Rec-

tor preached a sound, useful sermon. At five I preached to an

exceeding numerous congregation, and afterwards administered

the sacrament to the society. Two Clergymen were with us,

the Curate of Castlebar, and the Curateof a neighbouring parish ;

one ofwhom already enjoys the peace of God, and the other was

earnestly seeking it.

Mon. 23. Aftera longday'sjourney, I preached in the new

Court-House at Sligo, to far the worst congregation that I have

seen since I came into the kingdom. Some (miscalled Gentry)

laughed and talked without fear or shame, till I openly reproved

them : And the rabble were equally rude near the door. In

the morning I preached in our own preaching-house, chiefly for

the sake of Mrs. Simpson, a mother in Israel, who has been

longconfined to her room. Walking, about noon, I was catched

in a heavy shower, and contracted a severe cold. However, I

preached in the evening to a far civiller congregationthan the

night before. So I think my labour here was not quite in vain.

Wed. 25. I preached about ten in the Court-House at

Manorhamilton ; and then rode over the Black-Mountain, now

clothed with green, and through adelightful road, to Mount-

Florence. Here I observed the party-coloured gates (as they

were some years since) to be painted plain red. The wind was

high and piercing cold; yet the multitude of people obliged me

to preach in the open air. Thursday, 26. I preached in the

Assembly-Room at Swadlingbar ; but not withoutdifficulty ; my

cold being so increased, that I could not sing, nor speak, but

just in one key. However, I made shift to preach in the church

at Ballyconnel in the evening, though it was very full, and con-

sequently very hot. Friday, 27. Feeling myself much as I was

eleven years ago, and not knowing how short my time of work-

ing might be, I resolved to do a little while I could : So I

began at five ; and though I could scarce be heard at first, yet

the more I spoke, the more my voicewas strengthened. Before

I hadhalf done, every one could hear. To God be all the glory.

About ten I preached at Killeshandra, to a multitude of

people. But my voice was now so strengthened, that every

one could hear. In the evening,there being no house at Kil-

more that could containhalf the congregation, I was obliged

again to preach abroad. There were several sharp showers, but

[May, 1785.

none went away: For it pleased the Lord to send therewith

gracious rain on the souls of them that feared him.

Sat. 22.-Atfive, though I had not quite recovered my

voice, I judged it best to speak as I could. So I preached in

Mr. Creighton's barn, and at seven in the ball-room at Cavan.

I had designed to go straight from hence to Clones ; but a

friend sending me word, that Mr. Sanderson was willing I

should preach in his church at Ballyhays, I altered mypurpose,

and went thither. Abundance of people were waiting for me:

But Mr. Sandersonhaving changed his mind, I preached in the

inn-yard, to a very well-behaved congregation of rich as well as

poor. Hence I went on to Clones, where I found such a soci-

ety, as I had hardly seen in Ireland, making it a point of con-

science to conform to all our Rules, great and small. The new

preaching-house was exceeding neat, but far too small to contain

the congregation. The first time I preached to-daywas with

difficulty ; the second and third with less ; the fourth with

none at all.

Sun. 29. The Morning Service, so called, began between
•twelve and one. At five, the storm was so high, that I could

not preach in the market-place, as I first designed. At length

we pitched upon a sloping meadow near the town, where we were

perfectly sheltered by the hill. I suppose the congregation

would have filled the House at Dublin, more than twice over.

We had several showers ; but the people regarded them not,

being wholly taken up with better things.

Mon. 30.-We went on to Caladon. Aconvenient preaching-

house is just built here ; which (after the forms were removed)

just contained the congregation. The power of God was very

unusually present among them. Many were cut to the heart ; and

refused to be comforted, till God spoke peace to their souls;

andmany did already rejoice with joy unspeakable.

• When we came to Armagh on Tuesday, the wind was

extremely high, and the air as cold as it used to be in Decem-

ber. However, we hadno place that could contain the congre-

gation, but Mr. M'Gough's avenue. And here the people,

crowding close together, did not seem to regard either cold or

wind. Tuesday, 31. We took a walk to the Primate's palace,

and had a full view of the house. It is elegant inthe highest

degree, and yet not splendid ; and it is furnished throughout

in ahandsome, though not ina costly, manner. Since I was

June, 1785. ] JOURNAL. 311

here before, he has added an obelisk a hundred feet high ; and

dairy-house, with manyotherconveniences ; and a chapel, never

yet used. But wewere informed, he designs to do many things

more ! How well then may it be said to him,

Tu secanda marmora

Locas sub ipsum funus, et sepulchri

Immemor struis domos !

At eleven I preached in the avenue again. It rained all the

time; yet the congregation was large and attentive. Afterwards

a decent woman, whom I never saw either before or since, desired

to speak with me ; and said, " I met you at Caladon. I hadthen

aviolent pain inmy head for four weeks ; but was fully per-

suaded I should be well, if you would lay your hand on my

cheek ; which I begged you to do. From that moment I have

been perfectly well." Ifso, giveGod the glory. In the even-

ing the rain drove us into the market-house, where we were a

little disturbed by two or three drunken men ; but all the rest

(numerous congregation) behaved with deep seriousness.

Wed. JUNE 1.-I took myleave ofmy coeval, Mr. M'Gough ,

whom I scarce expect to see again in this world. About ten I

preached in Blackwater Town, in Mr. Roe's yard, to a large and

elegant congregation ; and in the evening to a larger still, at

the side of the Fort at Charlemount. Mrs. T. was an unspeak-

able blessing to this town, while Mr. T. was stationed there ;

and the revival of religion, which began then, has been increas-

ing ever since.

In the road to and from Charlemount, I had a good deal of

conversation with that amiable woman, Mrs.R. God has indeed

dealt very mercifully with her ; and her soul is at present much

alive. I have great hopes that she, and all her lovely family,

will be patterns to all that are round about them.

Thur. 12.-Iwent to Mr. Caulfield's, the Rector ofKilleman,

three miles from Charlemount. His house is agreeably situated,

at the head of a beautiful avenue, in which I preached to a very

numerous congregation; most of whom seemed to be deeply

•The followingis Boscawen's translation of these lines from Horace :-

Daytreads onday with rapid pace ;

Moonshasten to theirwane by nature's doom ;

Whilst thou prepar'st the column's base

To rear thy palace,heedless of thy tomb !-EDIT.


affected. I sent my horses on to Mr. Cook's town, ten Irish

miles ; Mr. Caulfield sending me thither, Friday, 3, with a pair

of his. At ten I preached there, and then hastened forward:

But I could not reach Londonderry before seven. We then

found (notwithstanding they had but short notice) acongrega-

tion gathered from all parts.

The society here has not been so well established, for many

years, as it is now. What is principallywanting, is, zeal for God,

and entire self-devotion to him.

Sun. 5.-At eight I strongly applied the latter part of the

thirteenth chapter to the Romans. We had a very decent

congregation at church, but not so many communicants as I

expected. At six our Roomwas thoroughly filled with as serious

hearers as ever I saw. Monday, 6. We had a numerous con-

gregation, in the morning, of rich as well as poor. But who is

able effectually to warn these to flee from the wrath to come ?

At eleven I preached in an open place at Newtown, sixteen

miles from Londonderry. In the evening we had, at Coleraine,

a larger congregation than at Clones itself; and they seemed a

more intelligent people than most I have met with. Indeed,

the whole town is different from all that I have seen. There is

no hurry or noise, but all quiet and still, both by day and by

night ; so that nowonder somany here receive the Gospel of

peace, and " bring forth fruit unto perfection."

Tues. 7.-I accepted the offer of the Presbyterian meeting ;

and preached there at noon, and at six in the evening. Wed-

nesday, 8. After preaching in the morning, I left many of the

loving people in tears, andwent on to Ballymoney ; where I

preached in the Court-House, to a very civil, and avery dull,

congregation. From hence we went to Ballymena. In the after-

noon I walked over to Gracehill, the Moravian settlement.

Beside many little houses for them that are married, they have

three large buildings ; (on the same planwith that at Fulneck ;)

having the chapel in the middle, the house for the single men

onthe left hand, that for the single women on the right. We

spent one or two agreeable hours in seeing the several rooms.

Nothing can exceed the neatness of the rooms, or the courtesy

of the inhabitants: But ifthey have most courtesy, we have

more love. We do not suffer a stranger, especially a Christian

brother, to visit us, without asking him either " to bite or sup."

"But it is their way." Iam sorry to say, so itis When I

June, 1785.1

called on Bishop Antone, in Holland, an old acquaintance,

whom I had not seen for six-and-forty years, till both he and I

were grown grey-headed, he did not ask me so much as to wet

my lips . Is not this ashameful way ? Away, contrary not only

to Christianity, but to common humanity ? Is it not a way

that a Jew, a Mahometan, yea, an honest Heathen, would be

ashamed of?

Having now finished an ingenious book,LeVrayer's "Animad-

versions on the Ancient Historians," I thought a few passages

worth transcribing, as containing some uncommon remarks. He

says more for the veracity of Herodotus than ever I saw before ;

and convinces me that his authority is more to be relied on than

that of Polybius ; who, " contrary to the truth ofhistory, makes

Scipio an example ofcontinence, in giving up the fair captive to

the Spanish Prince ; whereas, in fact, he never would, nor did,

restore her to her husband."

"There is not amore incredible relation in all the Roman

History, than that Clelia, and all the Roman virgins who were

hostages to the Hetrurians, swam over the river Tiber to Rome.

Surely they would scarce have dared to look upon so rapid a

river, much less to plunge into it ; especially when there was no

necessity, for the peacewas then almost concluded.

" Some writers affirm, and it is earnestly believed, that Beli-

sarius was reduced to beggary. But it is a mere fable : On the

contrary, the Emperor Justinian heaped titles and honours upon

him to the last ; although he recalled him out of Italy, after he

had been defeated there by the French. Procopius, who wrote

largely concerning him, says not one word of his being reduced

topoverty."

Thur. 9.-Between nine and ten I preached in the Court-

House at Antrim, to a large staring congregation. Thence we

went on to Belfast, through miserable roads. O where is com-

mon sense ! At six I preached in the Linen-Hall, to a large

congregation, admirably well-behaved. I often wonder that,

among so civil a people, we candobutlittle good. Friday, 10.

We came to Downpatrick ; where, the preaching-house being

too small, we repaired, as usual, to the Grove ; a most lovely

plain, very near the venerable ruins ofthe cathedral. The con-

gregationwas as large as that at Belfast, but abundantly more

awakened. The people ingeneral were remarkably affectionate.

They filled the large preaching-house at five in the morning ;


and we seemed to be as closely united with them as with one of

our old societies in England.

Abouteleven, on Saturday, I preached in the Linen-Hall,

at Ballinahinch, to a numerous congregation. The country,

from hence to Lisburn, is wonderfully pleasant and fruitful. At

six I preached in the Presbyterian meeting, alarge and commo-

dious building ; and I was now with the most lively society that

I have seen for many days ; owing chiefly to the good provi-

dence of God bringing sister Johnson hither. She came indeed

in an acceptable time ; forJ W and his wife, whofor

many years had been pillars, had left the society. They had

one child, a son, about nineteen years old, of whom they were

fond enough ; by a fall from his horse he was killed in a moment,

leaving his parents inconsolable ; just then she came to Lisburn,

and visited them. God opened her mouth, both in exhortation

and prayer. They saw and acknowledged his hand. She was

enabled to give up her child to God ; he cried out, " Surely

God has sent an angel from heaven to comfort us ! " Both of

them joined the society ; and are more in earnest for salvation

than they have been for many years.
Sun. 12. We had a solemn opportunity in the morning.

In the afternoon, as no building could contain the people, I

stood abroad and proclaimed, " There is joy in heaven over one

sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just

persons who need no repentance." The hearers (allowing

five persons to a square yard) were seven or eight thousand.

At eleven I preached in the church-yard at Lurgan. The

sun shone extremely hot ; but we were sheltered from it, partly

by the church, and partly by the spreading trees. In the after-

noon I went on to Tanderagee, one of the pleasantest towns

in Ireland, surrounded by woods and fruitful hills, with a

clear river running between them. At six I stood in the Grove,

where the tall elms shaded both me and the numerous congrega-

tion. Several gentlemen and several Clergymen were among

them, and all behaved with serious attention.

I lodged at the Rev. Dr. L's, where my time seemed

exceeding short. Wednesday, 15. The scene changed from a

palace to a cottage at Derry-Anvil, a small village surrounded
by abog; but inhabited by lively Christians. About eleven I

preached in ashady orchard, to an exceeding large congrega-

tion ; and in the evening to a still larger at theGrange, a small

June, 1785.]

village on the top of a hill. Many showers went to the right

and the left while I was preaching, but only a few drops fell

upon us. Thursday, 16. About eight I preached at Rich-Hill,

where there were many backsliders, on, " How shall I give

thee up, Ephraim ?" In the afternoon I came to Newry, where

I never before had any tolerable place to preach in ; but the

Presbyterians now offered me the use of their large and hand-

some meeting-house : Perhaps it never was filled before. I

believe the occasion required me to speak very plain, which I

did from Elijah's question, " How long halt ye between two

opinions ? " And I applied it to the conscience of each person,

rich and poor, with all possible plainness.

Fri. 17. Many of our friends from Dublin gave us the

meeting at Drogheda ; alarge, handsome town, which seemed to

me to be little inferior to Waterford. After much opposition,

a small society is formed here. I preached in the Sessions-

House, a large commodious room, which was quickly filled with

rich and poor. The Mayor himself and several of the Aldermen

took care that none should make any disturbance. God gave

us an exceeding solemn season. After sermon I gave a short

account of the rise of Methodism. I believe all were so satisfied,

that there will scarce be any more persecution of the Methodists

at Drogheda.

Sat. 18.-Having visited all the places I proposed, I came

back to Dublin just as well as I set out, my strength having

beenasmyday.

Sun. 19. I exhorted a crowded audience to " bring forth

fruits meet for repentance ; " and afterwards pressed the exhorta-

tion on our own society. Monday, 20. I visited one ill of a

violent fever, and calmly triumphing over sickness, and pain,

and death. In the evening I received a letter from a Physician,

whom, the next morning, I carried to see her. He thoroughly

understood her case ; and from the day she followed his prescrip-

tion she began to recover. I feared very many of the society

would be lost before my return ; but I found only three : So

that seven hundred and thirty-seven of them remained.

Wed. 22. I went with twelve or fourteen of our friends on

the canal to Prosperous. It is a most elegantway of travelling,

little inferior to that of the track-skaits in Holland. We had

fifty or sixty persons in the boat, many of whomdesired me to

give them a sermon. I did so ; and they were all attention. In

[July,1785.

the evening I preached at Prosperous, to a numerous congrega-

tion, on the generaljudgment. After preaching at five in the

: morning, Thursday, 23, I took boat with a larger company

than before ; who, about eleven, desired me to preach ; for which

they appeared to be exceeding thankful.

Tues. 28. By the good providence of God, I finished the

eighty-second year ofmy age. Is anything too hard for God ?

It is now eleven years since I have felt any such thing as weari-

ness : Many times I speak till my voice fails, and I can speak

no longer : Frequently I walk till my strength fails, and I can

walk no farther; yet even then I feel no sensation of weariness ;

but am perfectly easy fromhead to foot. I dare not impute this

to natural causes : It is the will of God.

Fri. JULY 1.-Most of our Travelling Preachers met to

confer together on the things ofGod. We began and ended in

much peace and love; being all resolved not to "do the work

of the Lord so lightly." Sunday, 3. We had a larger congre-

gation than ever at St. Patrick's, where many of our brethren

found such a blessing, that they will not easily be so prejudiced

against the Church as they were in time past.

Wed. 6. We concluded our Conference. I remember few

such Conferences, either in England or Ireland: So perfectly

unanimous were all the Preachers, and so determined to give

themselves up to God.

Sun. 10. I went on board the Prince of Wales, one of

the neatest ships I ever was in. We left the work of God

increasing in every part of the kingdom, more than it has done

formany years. About two in the morning we sailed out of

Dublin-Bay, and came into Holyhead-Bay before one in the

afternoon on Monday, 11. That evening we went on to

Gwendy ; Tuesday, 12, to Kimmel, one of the pleasantest inns

in Wales ; surrounded with gardens and stately woods, which

their late proprietor must see no more ! Wednesday, 14. We

reached Chester. After preaching there between five and six in

the evening, I stepped into the stage-coach, which was just

setting out ; and, travelling day and night, was brought safe to

London on Thursday, 15, in the afternoon.

Sun. 17.-I preached both morning and evening, on the
education of children. I now spoke chiefly to the parents,

informing them that I designed to speak to the children at five

the next morning. Monday, 18. At five not only the morning

Aug. 1785.] 317

chapel was well filled, but many stood in the large chapel : I trust

they did not come in vain. The rest of the week I was fully

employed in writing for the Magazine, and preparing for the

Conference. Sunday, 24. I preached at West-Street, morning

and afternoon ; when both the largeness and earnestness of the

congregation gave me a comfortable hope of a blessing at the

ensuing Conference. Tuesday, 26. Our Conference began ; at

which about seventy Preachers were present, whom I had

invited by name. One consequence ofthis was, that we had no

contention or altercation at all; but everything proposed was

calmly considered, and determined as wejudged would be most

for the glory ofGod.

Mon. AUGUST 1.-Having, with a few select friends, weighed

the matter thoroughly, I yielded to their judgment, and set

apart three of our well-tried Preachers, John Pawson, Thomas

Hanby, and Joseph Taylor, to minister in Scotland ; and I

trust God will bless their ministrations, and show that he has

sent them. Wednesday, 3. Our peaceful Conference ended, the

God of power having presided over all our consultations.

Sun. 7-. After preaching in the morning at West-Street, and

in the afternoon at the new chapel, I took asolemn leave of the

society ; and on Monday, 8, went in the diligence to Portsmouth-

Common. Here I found a lively, and, consequently, an increas-

ing, society. Tuesday, 9. I crossed over to the Isle ofWight.

Here also the work of God prospers : We had a comfortable

time at Newport, where is a very teachable, though uncommonly

elegant, congregation. Wednesday, 10. We took awalk to the

poor remains of Carisbrook Castle. It seems to have been once

exceeding strong, standing on a steep ascent. But even what

little of it is left is now swiftly running to ruin. The window,

indeed, through which King Charles attempted to make his

escape, is still in being ; and brought to mymind that whole

train of occurrences, wherein the hand ofGod was so eminently
seen.

Thur. 11.-About noon I preached in a little court in the

town of Portsmouth. The people were all attention : So there

was amuch larger congregation in the evening, in St. George's

Square. Surely, after all the stumbling-blocks which have been

thrown in the way, God will have many souls in this place.

Fri. 12. I preached at Winchester ; and on Saturday, 13,

went on to Salisbury. As Captain Webb had just been there,

[Aug. 1785.

I endeavoured to avail myself of the fire which he seldom fails
:

to kindle. The congregation in the evening was very large, and

seemed to be deeply affected: So they did again at eight on

Sunday morning ; but I believe the greatest blessing was in

the evening ; particularly during the prayer, wherein God was

pleased to move many in an uncommonmanner.

Mon. 15. I preached in Shaftesbury at nine, to such a

congregation as I had not seen there before. I was glad to

see among them the gentleman who, thirty years ago, sent

his Officer to discharge me from preaching in his borough.

About two I preached at Castle-Carey, to as many as could well

hear ; and I believe there were very few who did not feel that

Godwas with us.

In the evening I preached at Shepton-Mallet, but the House

would not near contain the congregation. For many years this

society was remarkably dead ; but it is now one of the liveliest

inEngland.

Tues. 16.-We went on to Taunton, where I expected little

good. But I was agreeably disappointed : The House was

thoroughly filled. A solemn awe sat upon the whole congrega-

tion, and God spoke to their hearts. The House was nearly

filled at five in the morning,-a sight never seen here before.
:

Wednesday, 17. Collumpton House was more than filled,many

being constrained to go away ; and I found uncommon liberty

of speech here, as well as at Exeter in the evening.

Thur. 18.-I had apleasant journey to Plymouth-Dock, the

rain having but just laid the dust. The late separation here
seems to have done little hurt. A few turbulent men have left

us, but men of a more quiet spirit are continually added in their

stead : So that on the whole we are gainers by our loss. Such is

the wisdom of God !

Fri. 19. In the evening I preached in the new House at

Plymouth. This also was well filled. Sunday, 21. I preached

at the Dock at seven, and the House contained us pretty well;

but in the evening, it was thought, as manywent away as got

in. After preaching, I gave them aplain account of the begin-

ning and progress of that great work of God, vulgarly called
Methodism.

Mon. 22.-I took a cheerful leave of our brethren at the

Dock, leaving them well united together ; and on the following

days preached at Liskeard, St. Austle, Sticker, (a new place

Sept. 1785.1 JOURNAL . 319

near it,) Helstone, Marazion, and Penzance. Thursday, 25.

About nine I preached at Mousehole, where there is now one of

the liveliest societies in Cornwall. Hence we went to the Land's

End, in order to which we clambered down the rocks, to the

very edge of the water ; and I cannot think but the sea has

gained some hundred yards since I was here forty years ago.

In the evening I preached at St. Just, where are still many of

our eldest brethren, although many are gone to Abraham's

bosom.

Fri. 26. In the evening I preached in the market-place at .

St. Ives, to almost the whole town. This was the first place in

Cornwall where we preached, and where Satan fought fiercely

for his kingdom ; but now all is peace. I found old John

Nance had rested from his labours. Some months since, sitting

behind the Preacher, in the pulpit, he sunk down, was carried

out, and fell asleep !

Sat. 27.- About nine I preached at the copper-works, near

the Hayle, in the new preaching-house. I suppose such another

is not in England, nor in Europe, nor in the world. It is round,

and all the walls are brass ; that is, brazen slugs. It seems

nothing can destroy this, till heaven and earth pass away.

At two the Stewards of all the societies met at Redruth.

There is nothing but peace and love among them, and among

the societies from whence they came ; andyetno great increase !

At our love-feast in the evening, several of our friends declared

how Godhad saved them from inbred sin, with such exactness,

both of sentiment and language, as clearly showed they were

taught ofGod.

Sun. 28. At half-past eight I preached at St. Agnes, to the

largest congregation I ever saw there. Between one and two

I preached in the street at Redruth, to thousands upon thou-

sands ; and my strengthwas as my need : Yet I was afraid, lest

I should not be able tomake all those hear that assembled in the

evening. But, though it was supposed there were two or three

thousand more than ever were there before, yet they heard (I

was afterwards informed) to the very skirts of the congregation,

while I applied those solemn words, " One thing is needful."

Wed. 31. I preached at Launceston ; SEPTEMBER 1 , in the

market-place at Tiverton ; and on Friday, 2, opened the little

preaching-house at Wellington. At noon I preached in an

ancient, venerable building, once belonging to a Lord Chief

[Sept. 1785.

Justice. It is oddly called Cat-Hanger. Having a stupid people

to deal with, I spoke exceeding plain ; and I think many of

them, even Somersetshire farmers, felt as well as heard. Thence

we went on to Ditchet. The people here are all attentive ; so

that I had nothing to do but apply the promises. The society

is continually increasing, and more and more of the hearers are

convinced and justified. What is the strangest thing, is, there

is no opposer in the town, but rich and poor all acknowledge the

work ofGod. Saturday, 3. In the afternoon the good provi-

dence of God brought us once more well to Bristol.

Sun. 4.-Finding areport had been spread abroad, that I

was just going to leave the Church; to satisfy those that were

grieved concerning it, I openly declared in the evening, that I

had now no more thought of separating from the Church than I

had forty years ago.

Tues. 6. I preached at Paulton and Coleford ; Wednesday,

7, in an openplace near the road, at Mells. Just as I began,

a wasp, though unprovoked, stung me upon the lip. Iwas

afraid it would swell, so as to hinder my speaking ; but it did

not. I spoke distinctly, near two hours in all ; and was no worse

for it. In the evening I preached with much satisfaction at

Frome, to a mixed multitude of rich and poor ; and afterwards

strongly exhorted them that had believed to walk in love, after

the example of our Great Master. On Thursday, I preached

at Trowbridge ; and on Friday at Bradford, where the work of

God has much increased lately ; indeed, it has increased this

year through the whole Circuit, as it has not done for twenty

years before. On Saturday evening I preached at Bath.

Sun. 11. Mr. Bradburn preached at seven, and Mr. Collins

about two in the afternoon. I began the service at eleven, and

preached on part of the Epistle, Ephesians iii. 14, &c. Both

then and in the evening the word " distilled as the dew, and as

the rain on the tender herb."

Tues. 14. I preached at Stoke ; and in the evening at Pens-

ford ; where, I fear, after all the pains we have taken, the gen-

erality of the people know just as much of religion as the Hot-

tentots . Wdnesday, 14. I preached in the evening in the old

Temple church, on Psalm lxxiv. 12. In the old translation it

runs, " The help that is done upon the earth, God doeth it him-

self." A glorious and important truth ! In the new, " Working

salvation in the midst of the earth. " What a wonderful emen

Oct. 1785. ] JOURNAL. 321

dation ! Many such emendations there are in this translation :

Onewould think King James had made them himself.

Thur. 15. I went over to Hannam once more, andsawpoor

disconsolate Louisa, still wrapping herself up naked in her

blanket, and not caring to speak to any one. The late pretty

tale of her being the Emperor's daughter is doubtless a mere

catch-penny : Andher four-and-twenty examinations are as cre-

dible as Mahomet'sjourney through seventy thousand heavens.

Sun. 18. I read Prayers and preached at the new Room in

the morning ; at two under the sycamore inKingswood ; and at

five near King's Square in Bristol. In the following week I

visited the classes, and was amazed to find there is no increase

in the society, considering what able and diligent Preachers they

havehad the last year.

Tues. 27.-I visited the little flock at Amesbury, humble,

simple, andmuch devoted to God. Friday, 30. About eleven

I preached in the church at Midsummer-Norton, to a numerous

congregation. The Curate, Mr. Sims, read Prayers for me, and

read them admirably well. About five I began at Ditchet,

where it rained almost all the time I preached ; but this did not

much lessen the congregation : Indeed all of this town, hardly

one excepted, seem to have a liking to the truth. Saturday,

OCTOBER 1. I preached at Shepton to a crowded audience. In

the evening I preached at the Weavers' Hall to such a congre-

gation as I had not seen there for many years. Sunday, 2.

After reading Prayers and preaching, I administered the sacra-

ment to many hundred communicants. We then solemnly

renewed our covenant with God ; and while we solemnly avouched

him to be our God, I believe many felt with holy, humble joy,

that he avouched us to be his people : At four we went into the

mail-coach : At twelve, it being exceeding dark, the wheel of a

waggon touched ours, and the coachwas over in amoment; but

just on the spot were some rails which stopped it, so that it did

not fall to the ground; so that it was easily set right again,

without any hurt to man or beast. About seven we reached

Hyde-Park Corner, and the new chapel at eight. Tuesday, 4.

I made a little excursion into Hertfordshire ; and on Friday,

7, returned to London.

Mon. 10. Setting out for Oxfordshire, I preached at Wal-

lingford in the evening, and at five in the morning. I preached

in Oxford at noon; and in the evening at Witney, where the

322 [Oct. 1785.

power of God uses to be eminently present. Thursday, 13.

Returning to Oxford, I once more surveyed many of the gardens

and delightful walks. What is wanting but the love of God, to

make this place an earthly paradise ? I preached in the evening

to a very serious audience ; as also the next evening at High-

Wycomb. In all this Circuit the work ofGod appears both to

widen and to deepen .

Sat. 15.-1 returned to London. Sunday, 16. At nine in

the evening I set out for Norwich. Tuesday, 18, and the fol-

lowing days, I visited Yarmouth, and the other parts of the

Circuit.

Sat. 22. I returned to Norwich ; and in the evening spoke

home to an uncommonly large congregation ; telling them,

" Of all the people I have seen in the kingdom, for between

forty and fifty years, you have been the most fickle, and yet the

most stubborn." However, our labour has not been lost, for

many have died in peace ; and God is able to say to the residue

of these dry bones, " Live ! "

Sun. 23. I administered the Lord's Supper to about a hun-

dred and sixty communicants.

Tues. 25.-I crossed over to Lynn, which has been, of a long

season, a cold and comfortless place. But the scene is now

entirely changed: Twoyoung, zealous, active Preachers, strongly

urging the people to expect a full and present salvation, have

enlivened both the society and the congregation. But the diffi-

culty was, how to get to London. No coach set out till Friday

morning, nor got in before Saturday night. So I took a post-

chaise after preaching, and reached Downham between ten and

eleven : But here we were informed, that, in so dark a night,we

could not travel over Ely roads, which run between two banks,

across which are many bridges, where the coachman must drive

to an inch ; but we knew in whom we trusted, and pushed for-

ward, till about one on Thursday we reached London.

Mon. 31. I set out for Northamptonshire, and in the after-

noon came to Luton. For many years I had lodged at Mr.

Cole's in Luton ; but he was now gone to his long home. The

room prepared for me now was very large and very cold, and

had no fire-place in it . After dinner I called upon Mr. Hamp-

son, the Lawyer who had made Mr. Cole's will. He gave me,

with the utmost courtesy, all the information I wanted; and

afterwards invited me to lodge at his house, which I willingly

Nov. 1785.1

did. In the evening the preaching-housewas thoroughly filled ;

and we had ablessed season, both now and in the morning.

Tues. NOVEMBER 1.-When I came to Northampton, the

new Presbyterian meeting-house was offered me, twice as large

as our own. The congregation was numerous and deeply atten-

tive. Many attended again in the morning ; I trust, not with-

out a blessing. Wednesday, 2. I preached at Whittlebury.

Thursday, 3. I met with Peru's "Treatise upon the Gravel

and Stone. " I had long supposed that there could not be in

nature any such thing as a lithontriptic, amedicine that could

dissolve the stone, without dissolving the bladder ; but I am

now convinced ; there is no arguing against matter of fact ; the

facts here alleged are too recent to be denied, and too clear to

be evaded : Therefore I cannot but earnestly advise every one

that has this dreadful distemper, to try without delay, if he can

afford it, this sovereign remedy.

Fri. 4.-I returned to London. Sunday, 6. I preached a

funeral sermon for that great and good man, Mr. Fletcher ; and

most of the congregation felt that Godwas in the midst of them .

In the afternoon I buried the remains of Judith Perry, a lovely

youngwoman, snatched away at eighteen ; but she was ripe for

the Bridegroom, andwent to meet him in the full triumph of

faith. Sunday, 13. I preached at Shoreditch church. The

congregation was very numerous, and the collection unusually

large.

Mon. 14. This week I read over again, and carefully con-

sidered, Mr. Fry's tract upon Marriage. I wonder it is not

more known, as there is nothing on the head like it in the Eng-

lish tongue. I still think he has proved to a demonstration,

that no marriages are forbidden, either by the law of God or of

England, but those of brothers and sisters, and those in the

ascending and descending line. The contrary supposition seems

to be built wholly in a misinterpretation of that expression in

Lev. xviii. , " Thou shalt not uncover her nakedness." But

this, he clearly shows, does not mean to marry awoman, but to

deflower her.

Sun. 20. I preached in Bethnal-Green church, and spoke

as plain as I possibly could, on " having a form ofgodliness, but

denying the power thereof." And this I judged to be far more

suitable to such a congregation, than talking of justification by
faith.


Having promised our friends at Winchester to come and open

their preaching-house when it was ready, I set out on Thursday,

24, and preached there in the evening to a numerous congre-

gation ; but I have not seen a people less affected : They seemed

to be mere stocks and stones. However, I have cast my bread

upon the water : Possibly it may be found again after many

days . On Friday evening we went into the mail-coach, and

reached London at eight in the morning.

Sun. 27. As soon as I had concluded my sermon at the

new chapel, I hastened away to preach at St. Luke's, one ofthe

largest parish churches in London. It was thoroughly filled, as it

was seven years ago, when I preached there before. God enabled

me to speak strong words on the Epistle for the day; and I

believe some felt that it was now high " time to awake out ofsleep."

Mon. 28. I went to Canterbury : The chapel was more than

filled. On Tuesday I found at Dover also a considerable

increase of the work of God. Wednesday, 30. I went on to

Margate. Some years since we had asmall society here ; but a

Local Preacher took them to himself: Only two or three

remained, who from time to time pressed our Preachers to come

again ; and, to remove the objection, that there was no place to

preach in, with the help of a few friends they built a convenient

preaching-house. Thursday, I opened it in the evening; the

congregation was large, and perfectly well-behaved; and I can-

not but hope, that, after all the stumbling-blocks, there will be a

people here, who will uniformly adorn the Gospel of Christ. On

Friday I returned to London.

Monday, DECEMBER 5, and so the whole week, I spent

every hour I could spare, in the unpleasing but necessary work

of going through the town, and begging for the poor menwho

had been employed in finishing the new chapel. It is true, I am

not obliged to do this ; but if I do it not, nobody else will.

Sun. 11.-I strongly enforced St. James's beautiful descrip-

tion of " the wisdom from above." How hard is it to fix, even

on serious hearers, a lasting sense of the nature of true religion !

Let it be right opinions, right modes of worship, or anything,

rather than right tempers !

Thur. 22.-I preached at Highgate. Considering how

magnificent a place this is, I do not wonder so little good has

+ been done here. For what has religion to do with palaces ?

Sun. 25.-(Being Christmas-Day.) I preached at the new

Jan. 1786.1

chapel early in the morning, and in the evening ; about eleven

at West-Street. Monday, 26. I baptized a young woman

brought up an Anabaptist ; and God bore witness to his

ordinance, filling her heart, at the very time,with peace andjoy

unspeakable.

This week I endeavoured to point out all the errata in the

eight volumes ofthe Arminian Magazine. This must be done

by me : Otherwise several passages therein will be unintelligible.

Sun. JANUARY 1, 1786.-We began that solemn service,

the renewing of our covenant with God, not in the evening as

heretofore, but at three in the afternoon, as more convenient for

the generality of people. And Godwas with us of a truth.

Mon. 9. At leisure hours this week, I read the Life of Sir

William Penn, awise and good man. But I was much sur-

prised at what he relates concerning his first wife ; who lived, I

suppose, fifty years, and said a little before her death, " I bless

God, I never did any thing wrong in my life ! " Was she then

ever convinced of sin ? And if not,could she be saved on any

other footing than a Heathen ?

Tues. 24.-I was desired togo and hear the King deliver his

speech in the House of Lords. But how agreeably was I sur-

prised! He pronounced every word with exact propriety. I

much doubt whether there be any other King in Europe, that is

sojust and natural a speaker.

Tues. 30.-I had amore particular account of Joseph Lee

than ever I had before. When I went first to Newcastle-upon-

Tyne, I chose him, being aman full of faith and love, to be

one of the Leaders, Steward of the society, and Caterer for our

family. He discharged his trust with the utmost ability and

integrity. He walked humbly and closely with God ; and was

a pattern to all the town, as well as to all the society. But

after some time, he was persuaded to quit Newcastle, and settle

at Nottingham. There he fell among Antinomians, and, trust-

ing in his own strength, gradually sucked in their opinion, grew

less and less strict ; and lost first the power, and then the very

form, of religion. After he had lived some years openly and

avowedly without God in the world, while he was one evening

quite merry with his jovial companions, one ofthem said, " Why,

Mr. Lee, you was once very godly ; you was one of those mad

Methodists ! " He answered not a word, but leaned his arm on

the table, and died.

[Feb. 1786.

i

Sun. FEBRUARY 5.-In the morning, while I was applying

at the new chapel that solemn declaration, " The Lord's hand

is not shortened, that it cannot save ; nor his ear heavy, that

it cannot hear ; " he did indeed speak aloud in his word, so

that the stout-hearted trembled. I broke out into prayer : The

power of God came mightily upon us, and there was a general

cry. But the voice of two persons prevailed over all the rest ;

one praying, and the other shrieking as in the agonies of death.

God relieved the former in a few minutes ; the other, not till

evening.

This week, in travelling, I read over Dr. Stuart's History of

Scotland. He is a writer indeed ! as far above Dr. Robert-

son, as Dr. Robertson is above Oldmixon. He proves beyond

all possibility of doubt, that the charges against Queen Mary

were totally groundless ; that she was betrayed basely by her

own servants, from the beginning to the end; and that she was

not only one of the best Princesses then in Europe, but one of

the most blameless, yea, and the most pious women !

Mon. 13. I went to Mitcham, and found a little company

just started up, who were all on fire for God. The house

being too small, I preached at the front of ahouse adjoining

to the road ; where the earnestness of the people made amends
for the keenness of the north wind.

Sun. 19. I preached in Horsleydown church, where (to my

no small surprise)no man, woman, or child, seemed to knowme

either by face or by name ! But before I had done, many ofthe
numerous congregation knew that God was there of a truth.

Mon. 20. I paid my last visit to that saint of God, Ann

Sharland, dying of a cancer in her breast, in continual pain ; but
triumphing over pain and death .

Sun. 26. I took a solemn leave of the congregation at the

new chapel, at West-Street, and at Brentford. Monday, 27.

Wewent on to Newbury, with little interruption from the snow ;

and I had a comfortable opportunity, with a large and serious

congregation. But I have not passed such a night forthese

forty years, my lodging-room being just as cold as the outward

air. I could not sleep at all till three in the morning. I rose

at four, and set out at five. But the snow which fell in the

night lay so deep, it was with much difficulty we reached Chip-

penham. Taking fresh horses there, we pushed on to Bath ;

and found a larger congregation than could well be expected.

March, 1786.] 327

Wed. MARCH 1.-I had appointed to preach in Trowbridge

at noon. But we could not get thither till half an hour after. I

then preachedwithout delay ; and in the evening in Bristol, on,

"O death, where is thy sting ? O grave, where is thy victory ? "

Afterwards I visited one who could say with Mr. De Renty,

" I bear with me an experimental verity, and aplenitude ofthe

presence of the ever-blessed Trinity." In the afternoon I went

over to Kingswood, and found the school in excellent order.

Sunday, 5. I read Prayers and preached, and administered the

sacrament to about five hundred communicants. At three I

preached in Temple church ; at five in the new Room. On

Friday, I baptized a young Negro,who appeared to be deeply

serious andmuch affected; as indeed did the whole congregation.

Saturday, 11. I rode over to Churchill, about twelve miles

from Bristol ; whereDr. Barry read Prayers, and I preached to

a serious congregation.

Mon. 13.-I left Bristol, taking Mr. Bradburn with me ; as

Ijudged a change ofplace and of objects would be a means of

calming his mind, deeply affected with the loss of a beloved

wife. In the evening I preached at Stroud ; Tuesday, 14, at

noon in Painswick,with uncommon liberty ; and in the evening

at Gloucester. I preached in the old church (now vanished

away) belonging to St. Bartholomew's Hospital ; which I think

was very considerably larger than the new chapel in London.

Wed. 15.-Much snow fell in the night, and quite blocked

up the road. Yet with some difficulty we got through to

Tewkesbury, where I preached at noon. Abundance of snow

likewise fell in the afternoon ; but we pushed through it to

Worcester. Thursday, 16. It was not without some difficulty,

thatwemade ourwaythrough the snow to Bewdley. Prejudice

is here now vanished away. The life of Mr. Clark turned the

tide; and, much more, his glorious death. I preached about

noon; and at Worcester in the evening; wherewe had anuncom-

mon blessing while I was enforcing, " Thou shalt have no

other gods before me."

Fri. 17. At eleven I preached at Bengeworth ; and again at

six in the evening : I believe, not without effect. Saturday,

18. I went on straight to Birmingham. Sunday, 19. A large

congregation attended in the morning. At ten I went to St.
At

Mary's, where the Curate preached an admirable sermon .

five the preaching-house would not near contain the congrega-


tion. Afterwards I administered the Lord's Supper to about

five hundred communicants.

Mon. 20.-I met the select society ; most ofwhom are clearly

perfected in love. Tuesday, 21. At three in the afternoon I

preached at Quinton, in the new preaching-house ; and in the

evening at Birmingham. To-day I read Dr. Withering's

" Treatise on Foxglove." He says it frequently cures epilep-

sies, palsies, insanity, consumptions, and several other diseases.

Sunday, 26. The church, as usual, was far too small to contain

the congregation .

I preached on Rev. xiv. 1-7; and exhorted the congrega-

tion to cherish that divine ambition, of being found " faultless

before God." We had another large congregation inthe after-

noon ; and all serious as death. I spent the evening at a neigh-

bouring gentleman's house, in close conversation from the

beginning to the end.

Tues. 21. After calling at Sheriff-Hales, and giving them

a short exhortation, I hastened to Stafford, and found the con-

gregation waiting. I strongly enforced upon them, " The

kingdom of God is at hand; " and then went on to Lane-End.

It was past seven, and the windwas piercing cold. However, I

was constrained to preach abroad ; and none of us seemed to

regard the weather, for God warmed our hearts.

I forgot to mention that, the evening before, Madeley church

was thoroughly filled ; and God reserved the great blessing for

the last. We had a glorious opportunity. He poured the dew

of his blessing on many souls ; and caused many mourners to

rejoice withjoy unspeakable.

Wed. 29. We came to our old, steady friends at Burslem ;
but he with whom I used to lodge is no more seen. He trusted

the Americans with all his substance ; and they cheated him

out of all : So he came home anddied; leaving an amiablewidow,

and six or seven children.

Cold as it was, the multitude of people constrained me to

preach abroad ; but I believe nonewent away. I preached on,

" Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son

Jesus Christ." We have scarce seen such a time since we came

from London. The place seemed to be filled with his glory.

After visiting Newcastle and Congleton, on Saturday, APRIL

1, I came to Macclesfield. Here again I had the satisfaction

to find a people much alive toGod. Sunday, 2. We had a
April, 1786. ] JOURNAL .

large and serious congregation at the new church, both morning

and afternoon. The organ is one of the finest-toned I ever

heard ; and the congregation singing with it make a sweet

harmony. Monday, 3. About eleven I preached to a crowded

congregation in the new House near Chapel-en-le-Frith. Many

of these lively people came from among the mountains, and

strongly reminded me of those fine verses wherein Dr. Burton

paraphrases those plain words, " The hills are a refuge for the

wild goats ; and so are the stony rocks for the conies : "-

Te, domine, intonsi montes, te saxa loquentur

Summa Deum, dum amatjuga pendulus hircus,

Sarorumque colit latebrosa cuniculus antra.

It is chiefly among these enormous mountains that somany

have been awakened, justified, and soon after perfected in love ;

but even while they are full of love, Satan strives to push many

ofthem to extravagance. This appears in several instances :-

1. Frequently three or four, yea, ten or twelve, pray aloud all

together. 2. Some of them, perhaps many, scream all together

as loud as they possibly can. 3. Some of them use improper,

yea, indecent, expressions in prayer. 4. Several drop down as

dead; and are as stiff as a corpse ; but in awhile they start up,

and cry, " Glory ! glory ! " perhaps twenty times together. Just

so do the French Prophets, and very lately the Jumpers in

Wales, bring the real work into contempt. Yet whenever we

reprove them, it should be in the most mild and gentle manner

possible.

Tues. 4. In the evening I preached to alovely congregation

at Stockport. Friday, 5. I went on, as swiftly as I could,

through Manchester, Wigan, and Bolton. APRIL 16. (Being

Easter-Day.) I crossed over to Warrington ; where, having

read Prayers, preached, and administered the Lord's Supper, I

hastened back to Bolton. The House was crowded the more,

because of five hundred and fifty children, who are taught in

our Sunday-Schools : Such an army of them got about me when

I came out of the chapel, that I could scarce disengage myself

from them.

Mon. 17.-I went on to Blackburn, which was sufficiently

crowded; it being the fair-day. No House would contain the

people ; so I stood abroad, and expounded that awful scrip-

ture, " I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God." All

[May, 1786

were still as night, unless when they sung ; then their voices

were as the sound ofmany waters.

Tues. 18.-I preached at Padiham, Burnley, Southfield,

and Colne. Thursday, 20. I went to Otley, and found God

was there, both in the evening, andmorning service. Friday,

21. I preached at Yeadon ; where the work of God is rapidly

going forward. Such a company of loving children I have

nowhere seen, but at Oldham, near Manchester. Sunday, 23.

I preached in Haworth church in the morning ; and Bingley

church in the afternoon ; but as there were many hundreds that

could not get in, Mr. Atmore preached abroad at the same

time. In the evening I preached to an huge multitude at

Bradford. Surely the people of this town are highly favoured,

having both a Vicar and a Curate that preach the truth.

Mon. 24.-I preached at Halifax ; Tuesday, 5, at ten in

Heptonstall church: (the ugliest I know:) and in the afternoon

at Todmorden church. How changed are both the place and

the people since I saw them first !

" Lo ! the smiling fields are glad; and the human savages

are tame !"

Thur. 27. I preached at Greetland at ten; and at Hudders-

field in the evening. Friday, 28. I preached at Longwood-

House ; the owners ofwhich are a blessing to all the poor, both

in spirituals and temporals. Saturday, 29. The wind drove

us in the evening into the Cloth-Hall, in Gildersome ; where

I expounded and applied," The things that are seen are tem-

poral; but the things that are not seen are eternal. "

Sun. 30.-I preached in the new House at Dewsbury, as I

had intended. I could not preach abroad at Birstal at noon,

because of the boisterous wind. I got some shelter from it at

Wakefield, while I applied those words in one of the Psalms

for the day, " He healeth them that are broken in heart, and

giveth medicine to heal their sickness." On Monday, MAY 1,

and Tuesday, I preached at Leeds ; on Wednesday, at the

church at Horsforth, with a remarkable blessing. Thursday, 4.

Preaching at Tadcaster in the way, in the evening I preached

at York. Sunday, 7. In the morning I preached at St.

Saviour's church, thoroughly filled with serious hearers ; and in

the afternoon at St. Margaret's, which was over-filled ; many
being constrained to go away. We had a love-feast in the

evening, at which many artlessly testified what God had done

May, 1786.1

for their souls. I have not for many years known this society

in so prosperous a condition. This is undoubtedly owing, first,

to the exact discipline which has for some time been observed

among them ; and, next, to the strongly and continually exhort-

ing the believers to " go on unto perfection. "

Mon. 8.-I preached about one in the new House at Easing-

wood, and in the evening at Thirsk. Tuesday, 9. I went on to

Richmond. I alighted, according to his own desire, at Arch-

deaconBlackburne's house. How lively and active was he some

years ago ! I find he is two years younger than me ; but he is

now a mere old man, being both blind, and deaf, and lame.

Who maketh thee to differ ? He durst not ask me to preach

in his church, " for fear somebody should be offended." So I

preached at the head of the street, to a numerous congregation ;

all ofwhom stood as still, (although it rained all the time,) and

behaved as well, as if we had been in the church.

Wed. 10. I rode through a lovely country to Barnard-

Castle, and foundmuch life in the congregation. Thursday, 11 .

About noonwe came to Appleby, the county town of Cumber-

land. Avery large room being provided, I preached withmuch

liberty, and then cheerfully went on to Penrith .

Inmywayhither, I looked over Lord Bacon's " Ten Centu-

ries of Experiments." Many of them are extremely curious ;

andmanymay be highly useful. Afterwards I read Dr. Ander-

son's " Account of the Hebrides." How accurate and sensible

awriter ! Buthow clearly does he show that, through the ill-

judged salt [duty] , the herring-fishery there, which might be of

great advantage, is so effectually destroyed, that the King's reve-

nue therefrom is annihilated ; yea, that it generally, at least fre-

quently, turns out some thousand pounds worse than nothing !

Fri. 12.-I preached at Carlisle ; and Saturday, 13, after a

long day's journey, at Glasgow. After spending three days here

fully employed, on Wednesday, 17, we went on to Edinburgh.

Here likewise I hadmuch and pleasant work. On Friday, 19,

Iwent forward to Dundee ; and on Saturday, 20, to Arbroath;

where I spent the Lord's Day in the Lord's work.

Mon. 22. Having a long day's journey before us, we set out,

at half-hour past three : So we came early to Aberdeen. Wed-

nesday, 24. We had an exceeding solemn parting, as I reminded

them that we could hardly expect to see each other's face any

more, till we met in Abraham's bosom.


Thur. 25. We set out early ; but when we came to Bervie,

the innwas full ; there wasno room for man or beast; sowewere

constrained to go a double stage, to Montrose. But the storm

was so high, we could not pass for several hours. However, we

reached Arbroath soon after six ; and a large congregationwas

deeply attentive, while I applied, " To him that hath shall be

given; but from him that hath not shall be taken away even

what he assuredly hath."

The storm was still so high, that, unless we set out at night,

we could not pass till nine in the morning. So we went on

board at eleven. The wind was then so strong, that the boat

could scarce keep above water. However, our great Pilot

brought us safe to land between one and two in the morning.

Saturday, 27. About three we came to the New Inn, and rested

till between six and seven. Thence, going gently on to King-

horn, we had a pleasant passage to Leith. After preaching, I

walked to my lovely lodging at Coates, and found restwas sweet.

Sun. 28. I preached first at our own House, and atnoonon

the Castle-Hill. I never saw such a congregation there before.

But the chair was placedjust opposite to the sun : But I soon

forgot it, while I expounded those words, " I saw the dead,

small and great, stand before God." In the evening the whole

audience seemed to feel, " Without holiness no man shall see

the Lord."

Tues. 30.-I had the happiness of conversing with the Earl

ofH and his Lady, at Dunbar. I could not but observe

both the easiness of his behaviour, (such as we find in all the

Scottish Nobility,) and the fineness of his appearance, greatly

set off by a milk-white head of hair. Wednesday, 31. I took a

view of the stupendous bridge, about ten miles from Dunbar ;

which is thrown over the deep glen that runs between the two

mountains, commonly called the Peas. I doubt whether Louis

the Fourteenth ever raised such a bridge as this.

In the evening I preached at Berwick-upon-Tweed ; Thurs-

day, JUNE 1, at Alnwick. Friday, 3. I was desired to lay the

first stone of the preaching-house there. Avery large congre-

gation attending, we spent some time on the spot, in solemn

prayer, and singing praise to God. About noon I preached in

the Town-Hall at Morpeth ; in the evening, at Newcastle. How

different is the spirit of this congregation to that of most of

those I have seen lately !

June, 1786.]

JUNE 4.-(Being Whitsunday.) I preached at eight to an

amazing congregation, at the Ballast-Hills ; but it was doubled

by that at the Fell in the afternoon. But it was supposed that

at the Garth-Heads, in the evening, was as large as both

together.

On Monday and Tuesday the congregationwas larger than

I ever remember. Wednesday, 7. Atfivewe had asolemn parting.

About noon I preached at North-Shields, in a tent erected near

the town, to a very numerous congregation. In the evening I

preached at Sunderland. About eleven on Friday I preached

in the church at Monkwearmouth, on those words in the Second

Lesson, " If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him

that believeth." Friday, 19. I preached at Durham about

eleven, and in the evening at Hartlepool. I preached in the

Town-Hall, where many appeared to be very deeply affected.

Surely the seed will spring up at last even here, where we

seemed so long to be ploughing on the sand.

Sat. 10.-I went to Darlington. Since Iwas here last, Mr.

-died, and left manythousand pounds to an idle spendthrift,

but not one groat to the poor. O unwise steward of the mam-

mon of unrighteousness ! How much better for him had he

died a beggar !

Sun. 11.-I was obliged in the evening to preach abroad.

Afterward we had a love-feast ; at which many plain people

spoke the height and depth of Christian experience, in the most

plain and artless manner.

Mon. 12. We found still, at Stockton, much fruit of S.

Brisco's labours among the children. I preached here at noon,

and at Yarm in the evening. Tuesday, 13. The preaching-

house at Hutton-Rudby was well filled at nine. When I came

to Guisborough, where I had no thought of preaching, I found

the congregation waiting : So I began without delay ; and itwas

a time of love. Wehad a warm ride in the afternoon to Whitby ;

where it has pleased God fully to make up the removal of Wil-

liam Ripley, who was for many years a burning and a shining

light. In the evening the House was well filled with people, and

with the power of God ; and, after preaching four times, I was

no more tired than when I rose in the morning.

Thur. 15. I found the work of God at Scarborough more

lively than it had been for many years. Friday, 16. In the

evening I preached at Bridlington quay, to a numerous congre


gation. Saturday, 17. I found Mr. Parker at Beverley, in a

palace. The gentleman that owned it being goneabroad, it was

let at amoderate rent. I preached here at twelve ; about four

at Newlands ; and at sevenin Hull. Sunday,18. Iwas invited

by the Vicar to preach in the High Church, one of the largest

parish churches in England. I preached on the Gospel for the

day, the story of Dives and Lazarus. Being invited to preach

in the afternoon, the church was, ifpossible, more crowded than

before ; and I pressed home the Prophet's words, " Seek ye the

Lordwhile he maybe found ; callye uponhim while he is near."

Who would have expected, a few years since, to see me preach-

ing in the High Church at Hull? I had appointed to preach

at Swinfleet ; so Iwent as far as Beverley this evening, and on

Monday, 19, set out early ; but being vehemently importuned

to go round by Malton, I did so, and preached there atnine.

Thence I hastened to Pocklington ; and, finding the people

ready, stepped out of the chaise, and preached without delay.

We reached Swinfleet between six and seven,having gone, in

all, seventy-six miles. Anumerous congregation was assembled

under the shade of tall trees. Sufficient for this day was the

labour thereof: But still I was no more tired than when I rose

in themorning.

Tues. 20.-I preached in Crowle at noon ; and in the evening

at Epworth.

Wed. 21. I preached at Scotter at nine; and at oneinBrigg,

in an open part of the town. All were still as night ; the very

boys and girls standing as quiet as their parents : Indeed, it

seemed that the hearts of all were as melting wax before the

Lord. In the evening, the people flocking together on every

side, I was constrained to preach in the market-place at

Grimsby ; where every one behaved well, except the Calvinist
Preacher.

Thur. 22-In the evening I preached at Louth. I never

saw this people affected before. Friday, 23. At nine I preached

at Tealby, where many of the people felt that God was with

them in an uncommon manner.

Having now given a second reading to " Fingal," rendered

into heroic verse, I was thoroughly convinced it is one of the

finest Epic Poems in the English language. Many of the

lines are worthy of Mr. Pope ; many of the incidents are

deeply pathetic ; and the character of Fingal exceeds any in

June, 1786. ] 335

Homer, yea, and Virgil too. No such speech comes out of his

mouth as,

Sum pius Æneas,famâ super æthera notus : "

No such thing inhis conduct as the whole affair of Dido is in

the Trojan Hero. Meantime, who is Ewen Cameron ? Is it

not Doctor Blair ? And is not one great part of this publication

to aggrandize the character of the old Highlanders, as brave,

hospitable, generous men ?

In the evening I preached to a large congregation at Gains-

borough, in Sir Nevil Hickman's yard. But Sir Nevil is no

more, and has left no son ; so the very name of that ancient

family is lost ! And how changed is the house since I was

young, and good Sir Willoughby Hickman lived here ! One of

the towers is said to have been built in the reign of King

Stephen, above six hundred years ago. But it matters not ;

yet a little while, and the earth itself, with all the works of it,

will be burned up.

Sat. 24. I preached at New Inn ; afterwards at Newark,-

one of the most elegant towns in England; and in the evening

at Retford, on, " I saw the dead, small and great, stand before

God."

Sun. 25.-I preached at Misterton. I was grieved to see so

small a congregation at Haxey church. Itwas not sowhen

Mr. Harle lived here. O what a curse in this poor land are

pluralities and non-residence ! But these are evils that God

alone can cure.

About one I preached at Overthorpe, where the spreading
trees sheltered both me and the congregation. But we had a

far larger at Epworth, between four and five in the afternoon.

Surely God will visit this place yet again, and lift up them that

are fallen.

Mon. 26. I read Prayers and preached in Owstone church,

thoroughly filled with attentive hearers ; and again at nine in the

morning. Tuesday, 27. At one in the afternoon I preached at

Belton. While Iwas preaching, three little children, the eldest

six years old, the youngest two and a half, whom their mother

had left at dinner, straggled out, and got to the side of a well,

*The following is Warton's translation of this quotation from Virgil :-

The good Æneas am I call'd ; my fame,

And brave exploits, have reach'd the starry frame.-EDIT.

which was near the house. The youngest leaning over, fell in

The others striving to pull it out, the boardgaveway ; inconse-

quence of which, they all fell in together. The young one fell

under the bucket, and stirred no more; the others held for

awhile by the side of the well, and then sunk into the water,

where it was supposed they lay half an hour. One coming to

tell me, I advised,immediately to rub them with salt, and to

breathe strongly into their mouths. They did so, but the young

one was past help ; the others in two or three hours, were as

well as ever.

Wed. 28. I entered into the eighty-third year of my age.

I am a wonder to myself. It is now twelve years since I have

felt any such sensation as weariness. I am never tired, (such

is the goodness of God! ) either with writing, preaching, or

travelling. One natural cause undoubtedly is, my continual

exercise and change of air. How the latter contributes to health

Iknow not ; but certainly it does.

This morning, Abigail Pilsworth, aged fourteen, was born

into the world of spirits. I talked with her the evening before,

and found her ready for the Bridegroom. A few hours after,

she quietly fell asleep. Whenwe went into the room where her

remains lay, we were surprised. Amore beautiful corpse I never

saw : We all sung,

Ah, lovely appearance of death !

What sight upon earth is so fair ?

Not all the gay pageants that breathe

Canwith a deadbodycompare !

All the company were in tears ; and in all, except her mother,

who sorrowed, (but not as one without hope,) theywere tears of

joy. " O Death, where is thy sting ? "

LONDON, Jan. 20, 1789.

i

1,

Thur. JUNE 29, 1786.-I took a cheerful leave ofmy affec-

tionate friends at Epworth, leaving them much more alive than

I found them. About one I preached at Thorne, now one of

the liveliest places in the Circuit, to a numerous congregation ;

and in the evening at Doncaster. I know not that ever I saw

this preaching-house filled before ; and many of them seemed

to feel, as well as hear. It may be, some will bring forth fruit

withpatience.

Fri. 30. I turned aside to Barnsley, formerly famous for all

manner of wickedness. They were then ready to tear any

Methodist Preacher in pieces. Now not a dog wagged his

tongue. I preached near the market-place to a very large con-

gregation ; and I believe the word sunk into many hearts :

They seemed to drink in every word. Surely God will have a

people in this place.

Sat. JULY 1.-I went on to Bramley, about four miles from

Sheffield, where agentleman has built a neat preaching-house

for the poor people, at his own expense. As the notice was

short, I hadno need to preach abroad. The congregation was

deeply serious, while I explained what it was to build upon a

rock, and what to build upon the sand. In the evening I spoke

very plain to a crowded audience at Sheffield, on, " Now it is

high time to awake out of sleep." One of the hearers wrote me

*This part of Mr. Wesley's Journal was not transcribed and published by him-

self, but by those persons who had access to his papers after his decease. They

apologize for the imperfect form in which it appears, by saying, at the conclusion,

"We are not sure that Mr. Wesley carried onhis Journal any farther ; but ifany

more ofit should be found, it will be published in due time. There are unavoid-

able chasms in this Journal, owing to some parts being mislaid ; and it is proba-

blethatmany ofthe proper names of persons and places are not properly spelled ;

as the whole of the manuscript was so ill written as to be scarcely legible." It

should also be stated, that this part of the Journal contains some passages which

it is probable Mr. Wesley would never have committed to the press, and for the

publication ofwhich he should not be made responsible.-EDIT.

[July, 1786,

a nameless letter upon it. But he could remembernothing ofthe

sermonbut only, that " the rising earlywas good for the nerves !"

Sun. 2-. I read Prayers, preached, and administered the

sacrament to six or seven hundred hearers : It was a solemn

season . Ipreached soon after five in the evening, on, " There

is joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth." Afterwards I
gave an account of the rise of Methodism, (that is, old scriptural

Christianity,) to the whole congregation ; as truth will bear the

light, and loves to appear in the face of the sun.

Mon. 3. We had our Quarterly Meeting, followed by a

love-feast, at which many spoke without reserve ; and several of

them admirably well; showing that with the fear of the Lord

is understanding.

Tues. 4.-I met the select society, most ofthem walking in

glorious liberty. Afterwards I went to Wentworth-House, the

splendid seat of the late Marquis of Rockingham. He lately

had forty thousand ayear in England, and fifteen or twenty

thousand in Ireland. And whathas he now ? Six foot of earth.

Aheap ofdust is all remains of thee !

'Tis all thou art, and allthe proud shall be.

The situation of the house is very fine. It commands a

large and beautifulprospect. Before the house is an openview ;

behind, a few acres ofwood ; but not laid out with anytaste.

The green-houses are large; but I did not observe anything

curious in them. The front of the house is large and magnifi-

cent, but not yet finished. The entrance is noble, the saloon

exceeding grand, and so are several of the apartments. Fewof

the pictures are striking: I think none ofthem to be compared

with some in Fonmon Castle. The most extraordinary thing I

saw was the stables : A Square, fit for a royal palace, all built

of fine stone, and near as large as the old Quadrangle at Christ-

Church in Oxford. But for what use were these built ? To

show that the owner had near threescore thousand pounds

ayear! O how much treasure might he have laid up inheaven,

with all thismammonof unrighteousness ! About one I preached

at Thorpe, to three or four times as many as the preaching-

house would have contained; and in the evening to the well-

instructed and well-behaved congregation at Sheffield. O what

has God wrought in this town ! The leopard now lies down

withthekid.

Wed. 5.-Notice was given, without my knowledge, of my

July, 1786.] JOURNAL. 341

preaching at Belper, seven miles short of Derby. I was nothing

glad of this, as it obliged me to quit the turnpike-road, to hob-

ble over a miserable common. The people, gathered from all

parts, were waiting. So I went immediately to the market-

place ; and, standing under alarge tree, testified, " This is life

eternal, to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ

whom thou hast sent." The House at Derby was throughly

filled in the evening. As many of the better sort (so called)

were there, I explained, (what seemed to be more adapted to

their circumstances and experience,) " This only have I found,

that God made man upright; but they have found out many

inventions."

Thur. 6.-In going to Ilston we were again entangled in

miserable roads. We got thither, however, about eleven. Though

the church is large, it was sufficiently crowded. The Vicar read

Prayers with great earnestness and propriety : I preached on,

"Herways are ways ofpleasantness;" and the people seemed

all ear. Surely good will be done in this place; though it is

strongly opposed both by the Calvinists and Socinians.

We went on in a lovely afternoon, and through a lovely

country, to Nottingham. I preached to a numerous and well-

behaved congregation. I love this people: There is something

wonderfully pleasing, both in their spirit and their behaviour.

Fri. 7.-The congregation at five was very large, and con-

vinced me of the earnestness of the people. They are greatly

increased in wealth and grace, and continue increasing daily.

Saturday, 8. I walked through the General Hospital. I never

saw one so well ordered. Neatness, decency, and common sense,

shine through the whole, I do not wonder that many of the

patients recover. I prayed with two of them. One of them, a

notorious sinner, seemed to be cut to the heart. The case of

the other was quite peculiar: Both her breasts have been cut

off, andmany pins taken out of them, as well as out of her flesh

in various parts. " Twelve," the Apothecary said, " were taken

out of her yesterday, and five more to-day." And the Physi-

cians potently believe, she swallowed them all; though nobody

can tell when or how ! Which is the greater credulity ? To

believe this is purely natural ? Or to ascribe it to preternatural

agency?

In the evening many felt

The' o'erwhelming power of saving grace ;


andmanymore on Sunday, 9, when we had the largest num-

ber of communicants that ever were seen at this chapel, or per-

haps at any church in Nottingham. I took a solemn leave of

this affectionate congregation, at five in the morning, Monday,

10, not expecting to meet another such (unless at Birmingham)

till I came to London,

About nine I preached at Mount-Sorrel ; and though it was

the fair-day, I saw not one drunken person in the congregation.

It rained most of the way to Leicester, and some were afraid

there would be no congregation. Vain fear! The House was

extremely crowded with deeply attentivehearers, while I applied

our Lord's words to the Centurion, in effect spoken to us also,

" As thou hast believed, so be it done unto thee." In the after-

noonwe went on to Hinckley. It rained all the evening : Yet

wehadmore hearers than the House could contain; and hardly

a trifler among them. A more serious, well-behaved people, I

have seldom seen.

This evening (I believe before I had done preaching) a

remarkable instance of divine justice appeared. Aman in the

street was grievously cursing another, and praying God " to

blast his eyes." At that instant he was struck blind : So (I

suppose) he continues ever since.

Tues. 11. The poor, little flock at Coventry have at length

procured a neat, convenient Room : Only it is far too small. As

many of the people as could get in were all attention. How is

the scene changed here also ! I know not but now the Corpora-

tion, if it had been proposed, would have given the use of the

Town-Hall to me rather than to the dancing-master ! Inthe

evening I went on to Birmingham, and found the usual spirit in

the congregation. They are much alive to God, and conse-

quently increasing in number as well as in grace.

Wed. 12.-At noon I preached in the new chapel at De-

ritend. To build one here, was an act of mercy indeed; as

the church would not containa fifth, perhaps not a tenth, ofthe

inhabitants. At six I preached in our chapel at Birmingham,

and immediately after took coach to London.

Thur. 13.-We reached the town at two, and settled all our

business on this and the two following days. Sunday, 15. My
heart was greatly enlarged in exhorting avery numerous con-

gregation to " worship God in spirit and in truth." And we

had such a number of communicants as we have not had before,

July, 1786.1

since the covenant-night. I suppose fifty, perhaps ahundred

ofthem, never communicated before. In the afternoon I buried

the remains of Thomas Parkinson, (who died suddenly two or

three days before,) one of our first members, a manof an excel-

lent spirit, and unblamable conversation. Monday, 17. After

preaching at West-Street, where many were impressed with a

deep sense of the presence ofGod,I took coach for Bristol. We

had adelightful journey; but having the window at my side

open while I slept, I lost my voice, so that I could scarce be

heard across aroom. But before Wednesday morning (by apply-

ing garlic as usual) it was instantly restored.

Thur. 20. I preached at the new Room, on, " We have

this treasure in earthen vessels." And the hearts ofmany, who

had been vexed with needless scruples, were mightily refreshed.

Fri. 21.-I walked over to Kingswood School, now one of

the pleasantest spots in England. I found all things just

according to my desire ; the Rules being well observed, and the

whole behaviour of the children showing that they were now

managed with the wisdom that cometh from above.

Sun. 23. I preached in the morning on those words in the

Second Lesson, " Lazarus, come forth;" and I believe, many

that were buried in sin heard the voice of the Son of God. In

the evening I preached abroad on Matt. v. 20. In the middle

ofthe sermon it began torain; but not manywent away. This

putme inmind of that remarkable circumstance respecting the

late Pope. On that solemn day when the Pope rides on horse-

back to St. Peter's, a violent storm scattered his whole retinue.

When it abated, His Holiness was missing ; but they soon found

him sitting quietly in the church. Being asked how he

could ride through such a storm, he very calmly replied, " I

am ready to go, not only through water, but through fire also,

for my Lord's sake." Strange, that such a man should be

suffered to sit two years in the Papal chair !

Tues. 25. Our Conference began: About eighty Preachers

attended. We met every day at six and nine in the morning,

and at two in the afternoon. On Tuesday and on Wednesday

morning the characters ofthe Preachers were considered, whether

already admitted or not. On Thursday in the afternoon we

permitted any of the society to be present, and weighed what

was said about separating from the Church : But we all deter-

mined to continue therein, without one dissenting voice ; and I


doubt not but this determination will stand, at least till I am

removed into a better world. On Friday and Saturday most

ofour temporal business was settled. Sunday, 30. I preached

in the Room morning and evening; and in the afternoon at

Kingswood, where there is rather an increase than a decrease in

the work of God.

Mon. 31. The Conference met again, and concluded on

Tuesday morning. Great had been the expectations ofmany,

that we should havehad warm debates ; but, by the mercy of

God, we had none at all : Everything was transacted with great

calmness ; and we parted, as we met, in peace and love.

Tues. AUGUST 8-. At seven Mr. Brackenbury, Broadbent,

and I, took coach for Harwich, which we reached about eight in

the evening. Wednesday, 9. Between two and three in the

afternoon we went on board the Besborough packet, one of the

cleanest ships I ever saw, with one of the most obliging Cap-

tains. Wehad many gentlemen on board, whom I was agreea-

bly surprised to find equally obliging. Thursday, 10. The

wind continuing small, and the sea calm, they desired me to

give them a sermon. They were all attention. Who knows

but some among them may retain the impressions they then

received ? Friday, 11. For some timewehad adead calm ; so

that we did not reach Helvoetsluys till the afternoon, norRot-

terdam till between ten and eleven at night. We found Mr.

Loyalwas not returned from ajourney, which he had begun a

week or two before ; but Mrs. Loyal gave us a hearty welcome.

Sat. 12.-Mr. Williams, Minister of the Episcopal church,

and Mr. Scott, Minister of the Scotch church, both welcomed

me to Holland; but their kindness involved me in an awkward

difficulty : Mr. Scott had asked the consent of his Consistory,

for me to preach in his church on Sunday afternoon ; but Mr.

Williams had given notice of my preaching in his church, both

morning and afternoon; and neither of them being willing togive

up his point, I would fain have compromised thematter; buteach

seemed to apprehend his honour concerned, and would not in

anywise give up his point. I saw no possible way to satisfy

both, but by prolonging my stay in Holland, in order to preach

one Sunday, morning and afternoon in the Episcopal, and ano-

ther in the Scotch church : And possibly Godmay have more

work for me to do in Holland, than I am yet aware of.

Though Mr. Loyal,with whom I lodged when I was at llotAug. 1786.] JOURNAL.

terdam before, was not in town, being gone with a friend to

Paris, yet I was quite as at home, and went on in my work

without any interruption. Sunday, 13. The Service began

about ten. Mr. Williams read Prayers exceedingly well, and I

preached on those words in the First Lesson, " How long halt

ye between two opinions ? " All the congregation gave a serious

attention ; but I fear they only heard, but did not feel : But

many seemed to be much affected in the afternoon, while I opened

and applied those words, " There hath no temptation takenyou,

butwhat is common to men." In the evening, Mr. Scott called

uponme, and informed me, that the Elders of his church would

not desire me to stay in Holland on purpose to preach, but would

dismiss my promise. I then determined to follow my first plan ;

and (God willing) to return to England in a fortnight.

Mon. 14. Taking boat at eight, we went at our ease through

one of the pleasantest summer countries in Europe, and reached

the Hague between twelve and one. Beingdetermined to lodge

at no more inns, I went with brother Ferguson to his own lodg-

ing, and passed a quiet and comfortable night. A few pious

persons came to us in the evening ; with whose spirits we quickly

took acquaintance. I have not found any persons since we

crossed the sea, who seemed so much devoted to God.

Tues. 15. Making the experiment when we took boat, I

found I could write as well in the boat as in my study: So

from this hour I continued writing whenever I was on board.

Whatmode of travelling is to be compared with this ? About

noon we called on Professor Roers, at Leyden, a very sensible

and conversible man : As he spoke Latinvery fluently, I couldwil-

lingly have spent some hours with him ; but I had appointed to

be at Amsterdam in the evening. We came thither between

seven and eight, and took up our abode with William Ferguson ,

who continued to lodge us all with tolerable convenience .

Wed. 16. I spent the day very quietly in writing, and visit-

ing a few friends, who knew not how to be affectionate enough.

In the evening I spoke to a little company at my own lodgings,

on, " It is appointed unto men once to die."

Thur. 17.-I breakfasted with a little company of truly pious

people, and afterwards went to see the manner wherein the

Deacons of Amsterdam relieve their poor weekly. I suppose

there were two or three hundred poor, but the whole was trans-

acted with the utmost stillness and decency.

[Aug. 1786.

To-day likewise I visited more ofmy friends,who showed all

possible affection. Friday, 18. We went to Haerlem, and

spent an agreeable day with a few agreeable friends. We
i

lodged at Mr. Vancampen's, a florist, and were perfectly at

home. Both Mr. and Mrs. Vancampen seemed deeply devoted

to God, as much as any I have seen in Holland.

In the afternoon we met a little company inthe town, who

seemed to be truly alive toGod : One Miss Rouquet in particu-

lar, whose least recommendation was, that she could speak both

Dutch, French, and English. She spent the evening at Miss

Falconberg's, the chief gentlewoman in the town. Here we

supped. The manner was particular : No table-clothwasused,

but plates, with knives and forks, and napkins, to each person,

and fifteen or sixteen small ones ; on which were bread, butter,

cheese, slices ofhung beef, cakes, pancakes, and fruit ofvarious

kinds. To these were added music upon an excellent organ,

one of the sweetest tones I ever heard.

Sat. 19. We took a walk in Haerlem wood. So delightful

aplace I scarce ever saw before. I judged it to be about a

mile broad, and two or three miles deep. This is divided into

almost innumerable walks, some broad and some narrow, but

diversified in a wonderful manner, and skirted with elegant

houses on both sides. In the afternoon we returned to Amster-

dam. Inthe evening Mr. Shranten, abookseller, (whose daugh-

ter had comewith us in the boat to Amsterdam,) an Elder of

the Holland's church, invited us to supper, and desired me to

expound a portion of Scripture, which Idid with liberty of spirit.

Afterward Mr. Brackenbury repeated to them in French the

substance ofwhat Ihad said.

Sun. 20. I expected to have preached in the English church,

as I did before ; but some of the Elders were unwilling: So I

attended there as ahearer; and I heard as miserable a sermon

as most I have heard in my life. It might have been preached

either amongJews, Turks, or Heathens, without offending them

at all. In the afternoon I expounded to acompany ofserious

Christians, our Lord's account of building ourhouse upon a

rock. Jonathan Ferguson interpreted sentence by sentence ;

andGod applied it to the hearts of the hearers.

Mon. 21. I spent an hour with great satisfaction at Mr.

Noltanu's country-house. Such a couple as him and his wife, I

never saw since I left London ; and both their children appeared

Aug. 1786.1 347

to be worthy of their parents, both as to person, understanding,

and temper.

Tues. 22.-I spent great part ofthe day at Mr. Vankennel's

country-house, having agreed with him to give me a private

room to write in, before and after dinner. At ten, a very sensi-

ble Clergyman came in, with whom I conversed very largely, as

he talked elegant Latin, and exceeding fluently, beyond any I

have lately seen on the Continent.

Having seen all the friends I proposed to see, on Thursday,

24, I took my leave of this loving people, and the pleasant city

ofAmsterdam, very probably for ever ; and, setting out at seven

inthe morning, between two and three in the afternoon came to

Utrecht. Mr. Vanrocy, the gentlemanwho had engaged me to

lodge, sent acoach to wait for me at my landing; and receivedme

with the courtesy and cordiality of an old Yorkshire Methodist.

Fri.25-. I kept close to my work all the day. I dined at

Mr. Loten's, where was such variety of food as I never saw at

any Nobleman's table, either in England or Ireland. In the after-

noon we took a view of a widow lady's gardens, in the suburbs

ofUtrecht. I believe, from the house to the end of the grand

vista is about a mile. I think the gardens are not half as broad ;

but such exquisite beauty and symmetry I never saw before .

In grandeur it is not to be named with a few places in England ;

but in elegance and variety, I verily believe it equals, if not

exceeds, any place of the size in Europe.

In the evening I expounded to a select company of very

honourable ladies, Matt. vii. 24 ; Miss Loten interpreting for

me sentence by sentence : And I know not but God might bless

this poorway of preaching to the Dutch, as he did that to the

Indians by David Brainerd.

Sat. 26. I had a long conversation with a gentlemanwhom

almost all the religious world take for a madman. I do not

know that I have found one of so deep experience since I left

London. I have no doubt of his being perfected in love : He

has aclear witness of it, and has had many years, without any

interruption. I had now an opportunity of being throughly

informed concerning the University of Utrecht. As the young

gentlemen are scattered over this town, and live without the

least control, they do anything, or nothing, as they please ;

and as they have no tutors, they have none to check them.

Most of them lounge from morning to night, doing nothing, or


doing worse. Well,bad as they are, Oxford and Cambridge are

not Utrecht yet.

Sun. 27. I attended the Service at the English church ;

where about thirty persons were present. At five in the even-

ing I believe I had eighty or ninety hearers ; and I hadmuch

liberty of speech among them. I cannot doubt but some

ofthem found the word of God tobe sharper than a two-edged

sword.

After Service I went once more to Mr. Loten's. Both Mrs.

Loten and he came to town on purpose to see me ; otherwise,

he could find little comfort there, during the present state of

affairs. The Burghers have all agreed to depose their Burgo-

masters, and elect new ones in their stead ; who are to-morrow

to take an oath on a scaffold erected in the open market-place,

not to the Prince of Orange, but to the city of Utrecht. To

this end, theyhad displaced all the Prince's Guards, and placed

Burghers at all the gates. It is thought the example will spread ;

and it will not be strange if all Holland should soon be a field of

blood.

Mon. 28. We took boat at seven, being informed that at

eight all the city gates would be shut. In the evening we

reached Rotterdam, and rejoiced to meet good Mr. Loyal once

more.
Here we rested on Tuesday. Wednesday, 30. We set

out early, and went twelve miles in acoach, forwhich we had to

pay six guilders and no more. We then crossed the river,

which cost four stivers, and hired an openwaggon for twenty-

ン three stivers, which brought us to the other river in half an

hour. At the Brill we hired another coach, which cost us

four guilders. I set down these little things that others may not

be cheated.

We found company enough in our inn at Helvoetsluys,

genteel, good-natured, and sensible ; but finding our conversa-

tionwas not suited to their taste, we only dined with them on

this and the following days. Both on this, Thursday, and

Friday, the wind was quite contrary ; but, otherwise, we could

not have sailed, for it blew a storm ; so I took the opportunity of

writing a sermon for the Magazine.

Sat. SEPTEMBER 2.-The storm abating, we set sail about

nine, though thewindwas contrary ; but in the afternoon it fell

calm. The rolling of the ship made us sick. I myself was sick

a few minutes ; Mr. Broadbent, by times, for some hours ; Mr.

Sept. 1786. ] 349

Brackenbury, (who did not expect to be at all,) almost from the

beginning of the voyage to the end.

Sun. 3-. When we had been twenty-fourhours on board, we

were scarce come a third of our way. I judged we should not

get on unless I preached, which I therefore did, between two

and three in the afternoon, on, " It is appointed unto men once

to die ; " and I believe all were affected for the present. After-

wards,wehad a fair wind for several hours ; but it then fell dead

calm again. This did not last long ; for as soon as prayer was

over, a fresh breeze sprung up, and brought us into the Bay.

It being then dark, we cast anchor ; and it was well ! for at ten

at night we had a violent storm. I expected little rest ; but I

prayed, andGod answered ; so that I slept sound till my usual

hour, four o'clock. The wind being again quite contrary, we

were obliged to tack continually ; but about nine were brought

safe to Harwich. After resting about anhour, we took chaise,

and about one came to Colchester ; where, Mr. Brackenbury

being exceedingweak, we thoughtit best to stay till the morning.

In the evening the House was throughly filled ; andmany

received the truth in the love thereof; so that I did not at all

regret my stopping here. Setting out early in the morning,

Tuesday, 5, I reached London before one o'clock, and trans-

acted most ofmy business in the afternoon. In the evening I

preached on Psalm xxix. 9, 10 ; and the voice of the Lord was

indeed with power. Wednesday, 6. I answered my letters ; and

on Thursday, 7, set out for Bristol.

In the evening I preached at Newbury. It rained and blew

vehemently ; yet the Housewas throughly filled ; and I found

uncommon liberty in pushing the inquiry, "Who of you are

building on the sand, and who upon a rock ? " Friday, 8. In

the evening I preached at Bath, to a more numerous congrega-

tion than I expected ; and more serious, for I do not find there

were any careless or inattentive hearers. Saturday, 9. We had

agood congregation at five ; although the weather continued

stormy. Afterward I searched to the bottom a story I had

heardinpart ; and found it another tale of real woe :-Two of

our society had lived together in uncommon harmony ; when

onewho met in Band with E. F., to whom she had mentioned

that she had found atemptation toward Dr. F., went and told

her husband she was in love with him ; and that she had it

from her own mouth. The spirit of jealousy seized him in a


moment, and utterly took awayhis reason ; and some one telling

him his wife was at Dr. F.'s, (on whom she hadcalledthat after-

noon,) he took a great stick, and ran away ; andmeeting her in

the street, called out, " Strumpet, strumpet !" and struck her

twice or thrice. He is now throughly convinced ofher innocence ;

but the water cannot be gathered up again ! He sticks there,

" I do throughly forgive you ; but I can neverloveyou more."

Sun. 10. Our service began at ten. Mr. Creighton (whose

health is a little recovered by rest, and drinking the mineral

waters) read Prayers and assisted at the sacrament. I preached

on, " The children are brought to the birth, and there is not

strength to bring forth." At half an hour past two we had a

far larger congregation, and I think equally serious ; on whom

I enforced the exhortation, " Come unto me, all ye that are

weary andheavy-laden." In the evening I opened and largely

applied those words in the Gospel for the day, “ Verily I say

unto you, Many Prophets andKings have desired to see the

; things which ye see, and have not seen them ; and to hear those

things that yehear, and have not heard them."

Mon. 11.-Leaving the society here well united together, I

went on, and preached at Bristol in the evening ; and on Tues-

day, 12, retired to a friend's house, where I went on with Mr.

Fletcher's Life without interruption ; but on Wednesday, 13,

Icould not resist the desire ofmy friends, to preach at Temple

church in the evening. I never saw it so full in an evening

before, nor felt so much ofthe power of God there.

Fri. 15. I had much satisfaction in the evening at the

chapel in Guinea-Street. It was throughly filled ; and most of
i the people seemed much affected, while (from Heb. xii. 1) I

described what I take tobe the chiefbesetting sins ofBristol,-

love of money, and love of ease. Indeed God has already

i wrought a great deliverance for many ofthem ; and we hope a

far greater will ensue.

Sun. 17.-I preached morning and evening at the Room;

and in the afternoon at Kingswood, where the work of God

seems to stand nearly at one stay ; not sensibly increasing or

decreasing. On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I met the

classes at Bristol; and on the remaining days of the week
transcribed the society, considerably increased since last year;

and I hope in grace as well as in number.
i

Sat. 23.-I read the general plan of Monsieur Gebalin's vast

Oct. 1786.1 JOURNAL. 351

work, designed to consist of twelve very large quarto volumes ;

eightofwhichare published :-"The Primitive WorldAnalyzed,

andcomparedwith the Modern." He is a man of strong under-

standing, boundless imagination, and amazing industry. I think

his first volume is abeautifulcastle inthe air. I admire it ; but I

do not believe oneword of it, because it is wholly built on the

authority of Sanchoniathon, whom no one could ever yet prove

tohavehad abeing : And I fearhewas aDeist : 1. Becausehe

nowhere lays the least stress upon the Bible : 2. Because he

supposes the original confusion oftongues to havebeen amerely

natural event. Sunday, 24. Godwas eminently present with

us at the morning service, as well as at Temple church in the

afternoon, which I never saw so filled before ; which is not at

all strange, considering the spirit ofthe Vicar, and the indefati-

gable pains which he takes with rich and poor. At five I took

the opportunity of a fair evening to preach once more near

King's Square ; and once more I declared to a huge multitude

the whole counsel ofGod.

Mon. 25. We took coach inthe afternoon; and on Tuesday

morning reached London. I now applied myself in earnest to

the writing of Mr. Fletcher's Life, having procured the best

materials I could. To this I dedicated all the time I could

spare, till November, from five in the morning till eight at night.

These are my studying hours ; I cannot write longer in aday

without hurting my eyes.

Sat. 30.-I went to bed atmy usual time, half anhour past

nine, and, to my own feeling, in perfect health. But just at

twelve I was waked by an impetuous flux, which did not suffer

me to rest many minutes together. Finding it rather increased

than decreased, though (what I never knew before) without its

old companion, the cramp, I sent for Dr. Whitehead. He came

about four ; and, by the blessing of God, in three hours I was

as well as ever. Nor did I find the least weakness or faintness ;

but preached, morning and afternoon, and met the societyin the

evening, without any weariness. Ofsuch a one I would boldly

say, with the son of Sirach, " Honour the Physician, for God

hath appointedhim."

Mon. OCTOBER 2.-I went to Chatham, and had much com-

fort with the loving, serious congregation in the evening, as well

as at five in the morning. Tuesday, 3. We then randown, with

afair, pleasant wind, to Sheerness. The preaching-house here is

[Oct. 1786.

now finished, but by means never heard of. The building was

undertaken a few months since, by a little handful of men, with-

out any probable means of finishing it. But God so moved the

hearts of the people in the Dock, that even those who did not

pretend to any religion, carpenters, shipwrights, labourers, ran

up, at all their vacant hours, and worked with all their might,

without any pay. By this means a large square House was soon

elegantly finished, both within andwithout; and it is the neatest

building, next to the new chapel in London, of any in the south

ofEngland.

I preachedin the evening, on, "Stand in the old paths," to a

lovely congregation ; and then showed the society of how great

importance it was, that their light should shine before men.

And indeed it does shine: They are of one heart and of one

mind, striving for the hope of the Gospel. I preached at

Chatham on Thursday evening ; andthe next day, Friday, 6,

returned to London.

Tues. 10.-Having promised to preach in their new House,

at Lynn, I thought it best to go while the good weather conti-

nued. I had ordered two places to be taken in the coach, which

would have reached Lynn on Tuesday noon ; but my messen-

ger, mending myorders, took them in the diligence, which came

in between nine andten at night. By this means I lost one of

three evenings, which I proposed to spend there.

I spent Wednesday and Thursday with much satisfaction,

with a very loving and lively people, increasing in grace aswell

as innumber, and adorning the doctrine ofGod our Saviour. I

had appointed to preach Mrs. Shewell's funeral sermon, at Bar-

net, on Friday evening ; and as we had only two light persons

in the diligence, and no baggage, I hoped we shouldhave come

intime. But theywere vain hopes : We did not reach Hoddes-

don till after sunset. I thentook a post-chaise ; for the diligence

went the other road. But as we had aroughby-road across the

country, without either moon or stars, we could not reach the

chapel till halfanhour after seven. About half the congrega-

tion were gone away ; an officious manhaving informed them I
would not come. With the other half, which pretty well filled

the House, we had a solemn opportunity.

So I have lived to see the large family at Hadley, two brothers

and three sisters, all removed. So does " the earth drop its inha-

bitants, as the tree its leaves."

Oct. 1786.1 353

Mon. 16. I went to Hinxworth, and preached in the even-

ing to a more numerous congregation than I ever had seen

there before. At length Miss Harvey sees some fruit of all the

pains she has taken. Tuesday, 17. I met her poor children in

the morning, twenty ofwhom she keeps at school in the village,

as she is unwearied in doing good. In the evening I preached

in Mr. Hicks's church, at Wrestlingworth. I have not seen such

a congregation there for manyyears : Neither have I found so

much of the power ofGod. Surely all our labour here will not

beinvain.

Thur. 19. I returned to London. In thisjourney I had a

full sight of Lord Salisbury's seat, at Hatfield. The park is

delightful. Both the fronts of the house are very handsome,

though antique. The hall, the assembly-room, and the gallery,

are grand and beautiful. The chapel is extremely pretty ; but

the furniture in general (excepting the pictures, many of which

are originals) is just such as I should expect in a gentleman's

house of five hundred a year.

Sun. 22-. I preached at West-Street, morning and after-

noon, and at Allhallows church in the evening. Itwas much

crowded ; andGod gaveus so remarkable a blessing, as I scarce

ever found at that church. Tuesday, 24. I met the classes at

Deptford, and was vehemently importuned to order the Sunday

service in our Room at the same time with that of the church.

It is easy to see that this would be aformal separation from the

Church. We fixed both our morning and evening service, all

overEngland, at such hours as not to interferewith the Church ;

with this very design, that those of the Church, if they chose

it, might attend both the one and theother. But to fix it at the

same hour, is obliging them to separate either from the Church

or us ; and this I judge to be not only inexpedient, but totally

unlawful for me to do.

Wed. 25. I went to Brentford, but had little comfort there.

The society is almost dwindled to nothing. What have we

gained byseparating from the Church here ? Is not this a good

lesson for others ?

Thur. 26. Mr. Holbrook carried us to Hampton- Court, far

the finest palace which the King of England has. The build-

ings are a little town; and nothing can be pleasanter than the

park. But above all, the three fronts of the house, the stair-

case, and the furniture and pictures in the apartments, are


worthy of a King, and not equalled by any in the kingdom, in

some respects ; not by Blenheim itself,which exceeds it only in

its front, in tapestry, and in shockingly immodest pictures.

In the evening I preached to a large and serious congregation,

at Wandsworth. I think it was about two in the morning that

adog began howling under our window, in a most uncommon

manner. We could not stop him by any means. Just then

William B-r died.

Fri. 27. I preached once more at Barnet, probably for the

last time. Sunday, 29. After preaching at West-Street, I went

directly to St. Giles's ; where I preached before I went abroad,

two or three and fifty years ago. And are they not passed as a

watch in the night? My subject was the joy in heaven over

one sinner that repenteth : And truly God confirmed his word.

Many seemed to be partakers of that joy; and asolemn awe sat

on the whole congregation.

Monday, 31, and the ensuing days, I visited the classes. I

was careful to take an exact account of the society. I was sur-

prised to find only ahundred and fifty-nine. I thought they

hadbeendouble the number. Ihope, bythe assistance of God,

within four months to see that none ofthese want either food or

raiment.

Fri. NOVEMBER 3.-Taking the advantage of a moonlight

evening, I went down to the chapel atRotherhithe. I never saw

it so well filled before, nor with such serious and attentive

hearers. Is anything too hard for God ? Shall this wilderness

blossom and bud as the rose ?

Sun. 5. I buried the remains of John Cowmeadow, another

martyr to loud and longpreaching. To save hislife, if possible,
when he was half dead, I took him to travel with me. But it

was too late : He revived a little, but soon relapsed; and, after

a few months died in peace. He had the ornament of a meek

and quiet spirit, and was ofan exemplary behaviour.

Tues. 7.-Ivisited the classes, and found themmuch increased

both in grace and number. The House was, as usual, well filled

in the evening, and many were refreshed and comforted.

Thur. 9. Inthe evening I preached at Stratford ; andunder .

standing I had many good sort of people to deal with, I endea-

voured to stir them up, by strongly showing what it is to build

upon a rock ; after showing them the various ways whereby the

generality of good men(so called) usually build upon the sand.
Dec. 1786.1 JOURNAL. 355

Sun. 12.-I preached, morning and afternoon, for the use of

our little charity-school, where forty boys and twenty girls are

trainedup both for this world and the world to come.

Mon. 13.-I retired, for afew days to Highbury-Place, that

Imight go on in mywork without interruption. I returned to

town on Thursday, 16 ; and afterpreaching on 1 Tim. vi. 20,

had acomfortable meeting with the Bands. Their shyness is

vanished away ; andwe have only one inconvenience, we have

not time to hear all those that are willing to speak.

Sun. 26. After officiating at West-Street morning and after-

noon, I took coach at seven in the evening. We had aclear,

pleasant night, and reached Norwich about eleven on Monday,

27. I found all things in peace, through the zeal and prudence

of Jasper Robinson and his fellow-labourers. The congregation

in the evening was nearly as large as it usually is on Sunday ;

and more than twice as large at six in the morning as it is accus-

tomed to be. Tuesday, 25. Aboutnoon I preached at Cayster,

a little town twenty miles east of Norwich, to a little, serious

congregation ; the greater part ofthem seemed to be ripe for a

blessing. The House at Yarmouth was throughly filled in the

evening, and many attended in the morning likewise. Once

more the combatants here have laid down their arms, and

solemnly promise to continue in peace and love.

Wednesday and Thursday I spent comfortably at Lowestoft,

among a quiet, loving people. Friday, DECEMBER 1. I took a

solemn leave ofthem at six. At nine Ipreached at North-Cove,

with much enlargement ofspirit ; and about eleven at Beccles,

to more than their preaching-house could contain ; and all of

them appeared as serious and attentive as the congregation at

Yarmouth. In the evening there seemed to be a considerable

shaking even among the dry bones at Loddon ; and such acom-

pany attended at Mr. Crisp's in the morning, as I never saw

there before.

Sat. 2.-I returned to Harwich, andwas much pleased in the

evening with the largeness and seriousness of the congregation.

Sunday, 3. I administered the Lord's Supper at eight, and

afterwards attended our parish church. Besides the little com-

panythat went with me, and the Clerk and Minister, I think we

had fivemenand six women : And this is a Christian country !

Our House could in nowise contain the congregation, either

in the afternoon or in the evening ; and at both times, greatwas

:

[Dec. 1786.

the power of God in the midst of them. I have not seen, for

many years, such a prospect of doing good in this city.

Mon. 4. I was strongly importuned byour friends at Long-

Stratton, to give them a sermon there. I heard of a young
:

woman in that countrywhohad uncommon fits, and of one that

had lately preached ; but I did not know that itwas oneand the
i

same person. I found her in the very house to which I went,

and went and talked with her at large. I was surprised. Sarah

: Mallett, two or three and twenty years old, is of the same size

that Jane Cooperwas; and is, I think, full as much devoted to

God, and of as strong an understanding. But she is not likely

to live; having aspecies of consumptionwhich I believe is never

cured. Ofthe following relation,which she gave me, there are

numberless witnesses :-
!
Some years since itwas strongly impressed upon her, that

she ought to call sinners to repentance. This impression she

vehemently resisted, believing herselfquite unqualified, both by

her sin, and her ignorance, till it was suggested," Ifyou do it

not willingly, you shall do it whether you will or no." She fell

into a fit ; and while utterly senseless, thought she was in the

preaching-house in Lowestoft, where she prayed and preached

for near an hour, to a numerous congregation. She then opened

her eyes, and recovered her senses. In ayear or two she had

eighteen of these fits ; in every one of which she imagined her-

self to be preaching in one or another congregation. She then

cried out, " Lord, I will obey thee ; I will call sinners torepent-

ance." She has done so occasionally from that time ; and her
fits returned no more.

I preached at one to as many as the House could contain, of

people that seemed ready prepared for the Lord. In the even-

ingthe hearts ofthe whole congregation at Norwich seemed to
be bowed as the heart of one man. I scarce ever saw them so

moved. Surely Godwill revive his work in this place, andwe

shall not always find it so cold and comfortless as it has long

been.

Tues. 5. In the afternoon I took coach again, and returned

to London at eight on Wednesday morning. All the time I

could save to the end of the week I spent in transcribing the

society ; a dull, but necessary, work, which I have taken upon

myself once a year for near these fifty years.

Wed. 13. I retired to Peckham, where, the next evening, I

Jan. 1787. ]

preached to as many as the house would well contain, and found

much liberty of spirit in enforcing upon them, the glorying only

in the cross of Christ. Saturday, 16. I returned to London.

Sun. 17. We had, as usual, a very solemn and comfortable

season at Spitalfields. Wednesday, 20. I retired to Highbury-

Place ; but how changed! Where are the three amiable sisters ?

One is returned to her father ; one deprived ofher reason ; and

one in Abraham's bosom !

Sat. 23. By great importunity I was induced (having little

hope of doing good) to visit two of the felons in Newgate, who

lay under sentence of death. They appeared serious ; but I can

lay little stress on appearances of this kind. However, I wrote

in their behalf to agreat man ; and perhaps it was in conse-

quence of this that they had a reprieve.

Sun. 24. I was desired to preach at the Old Jewry. But

the church was cold, and so was the congregation. We had a

congregation of another kind the next day, Christmas-Day, at

four in the morning, as well as five in the evening at the new

chapel, and at West-Street chapel about noon.

Sun. 31. From those words of Isaiah to Hezekiah, “ Set

thy house in order," I strongly exhorted all who had not

done it already, to settle their temporal affairs without delay.

It is a strange madness which still possesses many, that are in

other respects men of understanding, who put this off from day

to day, till death comes in an hour when they looked not for it.

Mon. JANUARY 1, 1787.-We began the service at four in

the morning, to an unusually large congregation. We had

another comfortable opportunity at the new chapel at the usual

hour, and a third in the evening at West-Street. Tuesday, 2.

Iwent over to Deptford; but it seemed, I was got into a den of

lions. Most of the leading men of the society were mad for

separating from the Church. I endeavoured to reason withthem,

but in vain ; they had neither sense nor even good manners left.

At length, after meeting the whole society, I told them, " If

you are resolved, you may have your service in church-hours ;
”

but, remember, from that time you will see my face no more.

This struck deep; and from that hour I have heard no more of

separating from the Church.

Friday, 5, and in the vacant hours of the following days, I

read Dr. Hunter's Lectures. They are very lively and ingenious.

The language is good, and the thoughts generally just.


But they do not at all suit my taste. I do not admire that florid

way ofwriting. Good sense does not need to be so studiously

adorned. I love St. John's style, as well as matter.

Sun. 7-. At the desire ofmany of our friends, we began that

: solemn work of renewing our covenant with God at three in the

afternoon, two hours earlier than usual.

Monday, 8, and the four following days, I went a begging for
the poor. I hoped to be able to provide food and raiment for

those of the society whowere in pressingwant,yet hadnoweekly

allowance : These were about two hundred: But I was much

disappointed. Six or seven, indeed, of our brethren, gave ten

pounds apiece. If forty or fifty had done this, I could have

carried my design into execution. However, much good was

done with two hundred pounds, and many sorrowful hearts

madeglad.

Sun. 21.-I preached at St. Swithin's church, to a numerous

and serious congregation. Thursday, 25. I went to Dorking,

and found a lively and well-established people. Saturday, 27.

I began theheavy work ofmeeting the classes in London.

Fri. FEBRUARY 2.-I endeavoured to reconcile two of our

brethren that were at variance ; and one of them was very will-

ing ; but the other raged like a bear bereaved of her whelps.

Sun. 4.-While I applied the parable of the Sower at the new

chapel, God was with us of a truth. The stout-hearted trem-

bled; as they did, likewise, in the evening, while I applied,

"Many are called, but few are chosen."
:

Wed. 7.-I preached at Brentford; and in the morning ;

Thursday evening atLambeth. Atboth places I foundmany

who promise not to be forgetful hearers, but doers of the word.

Being earnestly desired by our brethren at Newark, one hundred and twenty-four miles from London,to come and open their

new House, I took the mail-coach, Friday, 9, in the evening,

and reached Newark the next day about four in the afternoon.

But having a great cold, and being so hoarse that I could not

preach, I desired Mr. Mather to supplymy place, till I had

recovered my voice.

Sun. 11. Having partly recovered my voice, I preached in

the new House at nine,-a lightsome, cheerful building, and

gave notice of preaching at five in the afternoon. But itwas

not long before I received a message from the Mayor, to desire
me to begin preaching a little later, that himselfand several of
Feb. 1787.1 359

the Aldermen might the more conveniently attend. They all

came at half an hour past five, and as many people as could

possibly squeeze in ; and God opened mymouth to speak strong

words, and the hearts of many to receive them. Surely God

will have a people in this place, that will adorn the doctrine of

God our Saviour.

Mon. 12. There being no places to be had in the York

coach, Mr. Broadbent and I went across the country to Hinck-

ley. I now inquired concerning the poorwretch, who, when I

was here last, while he was praying to God to damn his eyes,

was in the instant struck blind. So, it seems, he continued for

some time. But as soon as he recovered his sight, he wasjust

as profane as before. Although it rained, and the people had

no notice till we came, yet the preaching-house was quickly

filled; and many, I believe, were filled with peace and joy in

theHoly Ghost.

Tues. 13.-Leaving the society here much alive to God, I

went on to Coventry. Here finding places vacant in the Liver-

pool mail-coach, we set out in the evening, and reached London

the next morning, Wednesday, 14. Thursday, 15. I preached

at Deptford, and was agreeably surprised to find the threatening

storm blown over, and all our brethren in peace and love with

each other. From hence, on Friday, 16, I went to Rotherhithe,

which used to be one of the most uncomfortable places in Eng-

land. Butitwas far otherwise now. Many ofthe peopleseemed

much alive to God; and his presence was manifested in the con-

gregation, in a very uncommon manner.

Sat. 17-. I went on in reading that odd book, entitled, " A

Chinese Fragment." As to the Chinese themselves, I believe

they are almost as religious, but nothing near so honest, as the

Turks ; so that I account the contrasting them with the Christ-

ians, to be a mere pious fraud. Du Halde's word I will not

take for a straw ; but there are many and just remarks in the

treatise, to which few impartial menwould have any objection,

inwhatever form they were proposed.

Sun. 18. The power ofGod was, as usual, eminentlypresent

during the service at Spitalfields. In the evening I met the

single women ofthe society, and advised them to make full use

of the advantages they enjoy: But I doubt, not many had ears

tohear ;

Forwhenhad youth the leisure to be wise ?

[March 1787.
Fri. 23.-I met our family, and was pleased to find that we

are a family of love. There is not at present onejarring string,

but we all hold the unity of the Spirit in the bond ofpeace.
Sun. 25. After taking asolemn leave ofour friends, both at

West-Street and the new chapel, I took the mail-coach, andthe

next evening reached Exeter, a little after ten o'clock. Tues-

day, 27. We went on to Plymouth-Dock. The large, new

House, far the best in the west of England, was well filled,

though on so short a warning ; and they seemed cordially to

receive the exhortation," Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous."

I had the satisfaction to find the society here in a more flourish-

ing state than ever. Notwithstanding all the pains that have

been taken, and all the art that has beenused, to tear them

asunder, they cleave close together ; and consequently increase

in number as well as in strength .

Wed. 28. We went over to Plymouth, and found the society

doubled since I was here before ; and they are bothmore loving

than they were then, and more earnest to save their souls. It

rained most of the afternoon. However, we had a crowded con-

gregation in the evening ; and all of them seemed to feel that

God was in the midst of them ; for his word was sharper

than a two-edged sword. In consequence of this, a large num-

ber attended at five on Thursday morning, MARCH 1. Surely

this is a time of love for poor Plymouth also. O that theymay

know the day of their visitation !

In the evening I preached again at the Dock ; andagain the

power ofGod was present to heal. The people seemed to be all

struck , while I opened and strongly applied the parable of the
!

Sower ; especially while I was warning them to beware of " the

cares of the world, and the desires of other things."

Fri. 2.-I was desired to go over to Torpoint, a village on

the Cornish side of the water. We were attended by a large

company from the Dock, and a great multitude from allquarters.

I suppose a great part of these had never heard this sort of

preaching before : They now heard with inexpressible attention ;

and I believe not in vain. God opened, as it were, the windows

ofheaven, and sent a gracious rain upon his inheritance. I am

in hopes, a plentiful harvest will spring from the seed which was

sown this hour.

In the afternoon I went over to Plymouth, and drank tea at

Mr. Hawker's, the Minister of the new church. He seems to be

March, 1787.1

aman of an excellent spirit, and is a pattern to all the Clergy

round about. It rained all the evening ; but that did not hinder

the House from being throughly filled with people that heard

as for life. This congregation likewise seemed to be, " all but

their attention, dead." The like has hardly been seen here

before. What ! is God about to work in Plymouth also ?

Sat. 3. Many attended at five in the morning, although it

rained sharply. It likewise blew a storm. So it did all the day, as

well as in the evening. The House wasthen crowded indeed ; yet

there was attention still as night. But God uttered his voice; yea,

and that amighty voice, insomuch that the stout-hearted trem-

bled; and it seemed as if he would send none empty away; but

of these too, though many were called, I fear few were chosen.

Sun. 4.-Ibegan the service at half an hour past nine, and

concluded it before one. I suppose such a number of commu-

nicants were never seen before at Plymouth-Dock; but there

was no disorder or hurry at all. There was more difficulty in

the evening : The throng was so great that it was impossible

for me to get through them to the pulpit ; so at length they

made shift to lift me over the seats. AgainGod spoke in his

word, I believe to all that could get in ; but some could not, and

were constrained to go away.

Mon. 5. The House was well filled again, both above and

below; and after a solemn parting, wetook coach at six, leaving

such a flame behind us as was never kindled here before. God

grant it may never be put out !

We reached Exeter between two and three. In the evening

I preached on, " By grace are ye saved through faith," to as

many as could possibly squeeze into the Room. It was a glo-

rious opportunity. God uttered his voice, and that amighty
one. It seemed to break the rocks in pieces, to make the stout-

hearted tremble. I know not that I ever saw such an impres-

sion made on the people of Exeter before .

Wed. 7.-It rained muchwhile we were at Plymouth, and at

the Dock, and most of the way from the Dock to Exeter ; but

wehad lovely weather to-day, and came into Bath early in the

evening. So crowded a House I had not seen here for many

years. I fully delivered my own soul, by strongly enforcing

those awful words, "Many are called, but few are chosen. " I

believe the word sunk deep into manyhearts. The next evening

we had another large congregation equally serious. Thursday,

!

[March, 1787.

8. I went on to Bristol; and the same afternoon Mrs. Fletcher

came thither from Madeley. The congregation inthe evening

was exceeding large. I took knowledgewhat spirit they were of.

Indeed the work of God has much increased in Bristol since I

was here last, especially among theyoung men, many of whom

are a pattern to all the society.

Fri. 9.-I went over to Kingswood, and found the school in

a better state than I expected, considering the want of a second

master, which they hadfor some time laboured under.

Sat. 10. I had the pleasure of an hour's conversation with

Mrs. Fletcher. She appears to be swiftly growing in grace, and

ripening for abetter world. I encouraged her todo all the good

she could during her short stay in Bristol. Accordingly she

met, in the following week, as many of the classes as her time
:

and strength would permit ; and herwords were as fire, convey-

ing both light and heat to the hearts of all that heard her.

Sun. 11. We had asolemn season at the Room, both in the

morning and evening ; and also in the afternoon at Kingswood,

where the work ofGod revives as well as at Bristol. I strongly

warned the people of Bristol oftheir indolence, through which

the Preacher had twelve, ten, or five hearers in amorning; and

advised them to shake it off. Many ofthemdid so ; and I sup-

posewe had three hundred on Monday morning, one hundred

and fifty on Saturday, and between two and three hundred every

morning of the week besides.

Monday, 12, and on the four days following, I met the

society. They were considerably increased both in grace and

number. In the evening we had a Sunday's congregation, and

a very uncommon pouring out ofthe Spirit. Ifthis continues,

the society in Bristol will soon vie with that in Dublin. On

Thursday, 16, we had such another shower of grace. Many

were wounded, andmanyhealed. Yesterdaythat blessed saint,

Sarah Bulgin, went to rest in the full triumph of faith. Sun-

day, 18. I preached her funeral sermon to a listeningmultitude,

andhad such anumber ofcommunicants as was never seen toge-

ther at Bristol Roombefore. Inthe evening wehad alove-feast,

at which Mrs. Fletcher simply declared her present experience.

Iknow no one that is so changed for the better in a few years,

even in her manner of speaking. It is now smooth, easy, and

natural, even when the sense is deep and strong.

Mon. 19. I left Bristol withmuch satisfaction, expecting to

March, 1787.1 JOURNAL. 363

hear of a plentiful harvest there ; and in the evening preached

at Stroud. The House was unusually filled, both with people

and with the power of God. Tuesday, 20. We had a large

congregation at five. Afterwards I met the select society, many

of them enjoying the pure love of God, and constantly walking

in the light of his countenance. We then visited one that was

always sick and in pain, and always rejoicing in God. Another

man we found nearly in the same condition, always afflicted,

and always happy. Mrs. Wathen, a few doors from them, left

by a most affectionate husband with six children, is a pattern to

all about her. Iwalked from hence through one ofthe loveliest

valleys I ever saw, running, with a clear stream in the midst of

it, between two lofty and fruitful mountains, sprinkled all over

with little white houses. Between eleven and twelve I reached

Cirencester; and,nolargerplace being to be procured,I preached

at one in our ownRoom, to as many as could hear, either in or

near it. And the labour was not lost: They all drunk in the

word, as the thirsty earth the showers.

In the evening I preached to a multitude of people, in the

Tolbooth, at Gloucester. Highand low, richand poor, behaved

well. I trust a good blessing is coming to Gloucester also.

Wed. 21. We had a numerous congregation at six, onwhom

I strongly enforced the great salvation. About eleven I had

the satisfaction of spending an hourwith theBishop ; a sensible,

candid, and, I hope, pious man. The palace in which he lives

(once the Priory) is a venerable place, quite retired and elegant,

though not splendid; the chapel, in particular, fitted up by

good Bishop Benson. The hall is noble ; as are also two or

three of the bedchambers. But how soonmust all these change

their possessor !

Finding prejudice was now laid asleep, the tide running the

contraryway, our friends thought it time to prepare for building

their preaching-house ; and a hundred pounds are already sub-

scribed. In the evening I preached to a larger congregation

than ever ; but allwas still as night: And once more in the

morning, on, " Whosoever doeth the will of God, the same is

my brother, and sister, and mother."

Thur. 22.-About noon I preached at Tewkesbury, to the

largest congregation I have seen there for many years ; and in

the evening, to our lovely and loving people, at Worcester ;-

plain, old, genuine Methodists.

[March, 1787.

Fri. 23.-Notice having been given, though without my

knowledge, I went over to Stourport, a small, new-built village,

almost equally distant from Bewdley and from Kidderminster.

I had seen Mr. Heath before, a middle-aged Clergyman, who

is going over to Cokesbury-College, and is, I believe, throughly

qualified to preside there. I methis wife and two daughters

here, who are quite willing to bearhim company ; and I think

their tempers and manners, so " winning soft, so amiably mild,"

willdohim honour wherever they come.

At noon, abundance of people being gathered together from

all parts, I preached on Isaiah liii. 6, 7. We have not had such

an opportunity since we left Bristol. The stout-hearted trem-

: bled ; and every one seemed almost persuaded to be a Christian.

The congregation at Worcester, intheevening, seemed to be of

the same spirit; andGod spoke to every heart.

Sat. 24. I went on to Birmingham: But my hoarseness

increased; so that I was afraid the people would not hearme

in the evening. But they did, though the congregationwas

uncommonly large. Sunday, 25. Having promised to read

Prayers and administer the sacrament, I knew not how I should

do. But as we were going to the House, Mr. Heath, just come

to town, overtook us. So he read Prayers, and assisted me in

delivering the sacrament to seven or eight hundred communi-

cants.

In the evening the House at Birmingham, as it was rainy,

contained half (I suppose) of those that would willingly have

come in. Those that could get in found it an acceptable time ;

and we all praisedGod with joyful lips.

Mon. 26. I spent an agreeable hour with the select society.

Most of them still enjoy the pure love of God, and the rest are

earnestly panting after it. I preached in the evening (at the

request of a friend) on 2 Cor. v. 19, &c. Many seemed to

receive the word with all readiness, and I trust will bring forth

fruit with patience.

Tues. 27. I went on to Wednesbury. As it rained great

part of the afternoon, most of the congregation could get into

the House ; and I took knowledge of the ancient spirit, although

most of our first hearers are gone to rest.

Wed. 28. About ten Mr. Horne (from Madeley)read Prayers

in the church, at Darlaston ; and I preached on those words of

Ruth, in the First Lesson, " Thy people shall be my people,

:

March, 1787.]

and thy God shall be my God." We have had no such time

since I left Bristol. The flame of love seemed to melt many

hearts. What has God done for Darlaston ! How are the last

become first !

In the evening I opened the new House at Wolverhampton,

nearly as large at that at Newcastle-upon-Tyne. It would not

near contain the people, though they were wedged together as

close as possible. I believe such acongregation was never seen

in Wolverhampton before; not only so serious, but so well-

behaved. I hope this is a token for good.

Thur. 29. About twelve I preached at Lane-End. It being

too cold to stand abroad, the greater part of the earnest congre-

gation squeezed into the preaching-house. Here we entered into

the countrywhich seems to be all on fire, that which borders

on Burslem on every side: Preachers andpeople provoking one

another to love and good works, in such a manner as was never

seen before. In the evening I preached at Burslem. Observing

the people flocking together, I began half an hour before the

appointed time. But, notwithstanding this, the House would

not contain one half of the congregation : So, while I was

preaching in the House to all that could get in, John Broad-

bent preached in ayard to the rest. The love-feast followed ;

but such a one as I have not known for many years. While the

two or three first spoke, the power ofGod so fell upon all that

were present, some praying, and others giving thanks, that their

voices could scarce be heard : And two or three were speaking

at a time, till I gently advised them to speak one at a time ; and

they did so, with amazing energy. Some of them had found

peace a year ago, somewithin amonth or a week, some within
"At

aday or two ; and one of them, apotter's boy, told us,

the prayer-meeting I found myself dropping into hell ; and I

cried to the Lord, and he showed me he loved me. But Satan

came immediately, and offered me a bag of money, as long as

my arm ; but I said, 'Get thee behind me, Satan.' " Several

also testified that theblood of Christ had cleansed them from all

sin. Two declared, after bitter cries, that they knew their sins

were just then blotted out by the blood of the Lamb; and I

doubt not but it will be found, upon inquiry, that several more

were either justified or sanctified. Indeed there has been, for

some time, such an outpouring of the Spirit here, as has not

been in any other part of the kingdom ; particularly in the


meetings for prayer. Fifteen or twenty have been justified in a

day. Some of them had been the most notorious, abandoned

sinners, in all the country; and people flock into the society on

every side ; six, eight, or ten, in an evening.

Fri. 30. I had appointed to preach at five in the morning;

but soon after four I was saluted by a concert ofmusic, both

vocal and instrumental, at our gate,making the air ring with a

hymn to the tune of Judas Maccabeus : It was a good prelude.

So I began almost halfan hour before five ; yet the House was

crowded both above and below. I strongly, but very tenderly,
enforced that caution," Let him that standeth takeheed lest he

fall." And is notGod able to make them stand ? Yea, and he

willdo it, if theywalk humbly with God.

In the evening I preached at Congleton to a serious and well-

established people. Here I found my coeval, Mr.,- two

months (I think) younger than me,just as alamp going out for

want of oil, gently sliding into a better world : He sleeps always,

only waking now and then just long enough to say, " I am

happy."

Sat. 31. I went on to Macclesfield, and found a people still

alive to God, in spite of swiftly increasing riches. If they con-

tinue so, it will be the only instance I have known, in above

half a century. I warned them in the strongest terms I could,

and believe some of them had ears to hear.

Sun. APRIL 1.-Fearing nothing so much as lest a people so

much at ease should settle upon their lees, I preached at the

new church, in the most awakening manner I could, on Rev.

xx. 11 : " I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it," &c.

I then hastened to Manchester; and endeavoured to convince a

crowded congregation of the full spiritual meaning of those

important words, " By grace are ye saved, through faith."

Mon. 2.-About noon I preached at Stockport, and in the

evening at Manchester ; where I fully delivered my own soul,

both then, and the next day. Wednesday, 3. I went to Chester,

and preached in the evening, on Heb. iii. 12. Finding there

was no packet at Parkgate, I immediately took places in the

mail-coach for Holyhead. The porter called us at two in the

morning, on Thursday, but came again in half an hour, to

inform us the coach was full ; so they returned my money, and

at four I took a post-chaise. We overtook the coach at Conway ;

and, crossing the ferry with the passengers, went forward with

April, 1787.1 JOURNAL. 367

out delay. So we came to Holyhead an hour before them, and

went on board the Le Despenser between eleven and twelve

o'clock. At one we left the harbour ; and at two the next day

came into Dublin-Bay. On the road and in the ship I read

Mr. Blackwell's " Sacred Classics Illustrated and Defended." I

think he fully proves his point, that there are no expressions in

the New Testament which are not found in the best and purest

Greek authors. In the evening we had a Sunday's congregation,

and a blessing from on high : I then retired to my lodgings

which were at Arthur Keene's, about half a mile out of town ;

apleasant, healthy spot,where were peace and love, and plenty

ofall things.

APRIL 7.-(Being Easter-Day.) I preached in Bethesda,

Mr. Smyth's new chapel. It is very neat, but not gay; and I

believe will hold about as many people as West-Street chapel.

Mr. Smyth read Prayers, and gaveout the hymns, which were

sung by fifteen or twenty fine singers ; the rest of the congre-

gation listening with much attention, and as much devotion, as

they would have done to an opera. But is this Christian wor-

ship ? Or ought it ever to be suffered in a Christian church ?

Itwas thought wehad between seven and eight hundred com-

municants ; and indeed the power of God was in the midst of

them. Our own Room in the evening was well filled with peo-

ple, and with the presence of God. Afterward we had a love-

feast, which I supposemight have continued till midnight, if all

had spoken that were ready to speak.

On Monday and Tuesday I preached again at Bethesda, and

God touched several hearts, even of the rich and great : So that

(for the time at least) theywere "almost persuaded to be Christ-

ians. " It seems as if the good Providence ofGodhad prepared

this place, for those rich and honourable sinners, who will not

deign to receive any message from God but in a genteel way.

Wed. 11. By conversing with many of our friends, I found

theywere still increasing in grace as well as in number. The

society now contains upwards ofa thousand members ; so that it

has outrunall inEngland, but that of London. After this amaz-

ing flow, we must expect an ebb : It will be well if only two

hundred of these fall away. On Thursday and Friday the

congregations were still uncommonly large, and seemed to feel all

that was spoken.

Sat. 14.-Even at the Gravel-Walk, where the congregation


used to be small enough, the House was crowded in the evening ;

although the soldiers (seventy or eighty of whom are in the

society) could not attend; it being the hour of their roll-calling.

Sun. 15. I preached first at the new Room, and afterwards

at Bethesda : Many fair blossoms we see here also ; and surely

some fruit will follow ! In the evening our House could not

contain the congregation,though they squeezed together as close

as possible. I believe few of them heard in vain: Such atten-

tion sat on every face, as I seldom see even in Bristol or

London.

Mon. 16. I set out early, and preached at Prosperous about

ten, to a numerous congregation; and although I had come ten

miles outofmyway, I didnot regretmylabour. In the even-

ing we came to Philipstown, which we had forsaken for near

forty years ; yet at length there is a prospect of good. A little

society is formed; and some troopers, who are part of it, keep all

the town in awe. The congregation was as quiet asthat in Dublin,

both in the evening and at seven in the morning. Here is seed

sown once more ; and God is able to give a plentiful harvest.

Tues. 17.-I crossed over to my old friends at Tyrrel's Pass.

It was supposed the House would hold the congregation inthe

evening, but it would hardly contain a fourth part of them : So

I preached in the yard, not only to Protestants, but (I was

informed) most of the Papists in the town ; and we found God

was no respecter of persons. Wednesday. 18. The House was

well filled in the morning, andwe hadacomfortable season; as

also at Coolylough in the evening, where God spoke to many

: hearts. Thursday, 19. About noon I preached at Kenagh, to a

numerous congregation : Formany years we seemed to be beat-

ing the air here ; but a few months since, God so blessed the

preaching of poor John Bredin,just tottering over the grave,

that we have now a lively society, swiftly increasing both in

grace and number. We went hence to Longford, where a mul-

titude of people soon assembled in the Town-Hall. I found

much liberty of speech, and I have seldom seen a congregation

more affected. I observed one genteel woman, who kept her

eyes fixed, from the beginning to the end; andwas agreeably

surprised, when she called upon me, to find one ofmy old flock

at Castlebar. Once more she has set her hand to the plough:

May she never look back !

Fri. 20.-I went to Athlone, and preached in the evening to

April, 1787.1 JOURNAL . 369

acongregation of deeper experience than any I had seen since

I left Dublin. Yet the nextday I thought it expedient to press

upon them the advice of the Apostle, " Let him that assuredly

standeth" (so it should be rendered) "take heed lest he fall."

Sun. 22. I opened and applied that glorious text, " The

help that is done upon earth, he doeth it himself." Is it not

strange that this text, Psalm lxxiv. 12, is vanished out of the

new translation of the Psalms ? I found the work ofGod much

increased here; and it is a favourable circumstance, that of the

three Ministers in the town two are our fast friends, and the

third no enemy. The wind driving us into the House at six,

we were crowded sufficiently. Afterwards I administered the

sacrament to the society ; and not without a remarkable

blessing.

Mon. 23. Having takenleave of our affectionate friends at

Athlone, I went on to Balinasloe ; but here we were at a loss ;

the usual preaching-place would not contain half the people ;

and the wind was so high, and so extremely cold, that they

could not stand abroad. However, we made the best shift we

could with two rooms, together with the passage and stair-

case. I strongly explained what it is to build upon the sand ;

and all that could hear seemed to receive the word gladly :

Some, I hope, will bring forth fruit with patience.

The church at Aghrim was so filled in the evening as it scarce

ever was before. I believe God enabled me to find the way to

the hearts both of Protestants and Roman Catholics. I never

saw so general an impression made on the people of this town

before. In the morning, Tuesday, 24, the preaching-house was

well filled; and I exhorted them in St. John's words, " Look

to yourselves, that ye lose not the things which ye have gained,

but that ye receive a full reward."

I did not find either so large or so serious a congregation in

the church at Eyre-Court. I preached between ten and eleven

to a number of unconcerned hearers, and then went on to Birr.

There has been lately agreat shaking among the dry bones

here. The congregations are much increased, and hear with

deep attention ; and several members have been added to the

society. I would fain have preached in the Square, as I did

before ; but the wind and rain did not permit ; so as many as

could, crowded into the preaching-house. I preached on, " I

am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ ; " a subject which, it

VOL. IV. Вв


seemed, suited the hearers; many ofwhom are hindered chiefly

1 by evil shame from being altogether Christians.

Wed. 25. I once more visited my old friends at Tullamore.

Have all the balloons in Europe done so much good as can

counterbalance the harm which one of them did here a year or

two ago ? It took fire in its flight, and dropped it down on one

and another of the thatched houses so fast that it was not

possible to quench it till most ofthe town was burned down. I

preached in the assembly-room, to a large congregation, afew of

whom are still alive to God. In the morning, for the sake of

good old Matthew Moore, who is not likely to hear me again, I

preached in his parlour, to as many as that and the other rooms

would contain, on, (Luke xx. 34, &c.,) " They neither marry,

nor are given in marriage : Neither can they die any more : For

they are equal unto the angels ; and are the children of God,

being the children of the resurrection."

Thur. 26.-About noon I preached at Portarlington, not in

the noisy market-place, but in our own House, throughly filled
!

with attentive hearers. In the evening I preached inthe church

at Mount-Mellick, larger than either that at Eyre-Court or

Aghrim; and the whole congregation behaved well : I have

seen few such since I left Dublin. Friday, 27. We went to

Kilkenny, nine-and-twenty Irish miles from Mount-Mellick.

Religion was here at a low ebb, and scarce any society left, when

God sent three troops of horse, several of whom are full of faith

and love. Since they came, the work of God has revived. I

never saw the House so filled since it was built ; and the power

of God seemed to rest uponthe congregation, as if he would still

have a people in this place.

Sat. 28.-1 preached in the morning to about a hundred

people at Kilkenny, on the general judgment. They seemed
to feel what was spoken. I left Mr. Kane behind me for two or

three days, to follow the blow ; and I trust before he leaves the

town, God will lay such a foundation even there, as shall never

be overthrown.

We reached Carlow before noon ; and were much refreshed

i with the hearty affection of our brethren, who had not forgotten

me, though I had not visited them for near sixteenyears. Inthe

evening I preached at the assembly-room, to a large and tolerably
1 serious congregation. They seemed more serious in the morning,

Sunday, 29, when I spoke in a manner more suited to their

--

May, 1787. ] JOURNAL.
capacities, in largely explaining and strongly enforcing our Lord's

words, " One thing is needful." The church is far the neatest

(though not fine) ofany I have seen since we left Dublin. The

Rector came after Service, and spent near an hour with us in

friendly conversation. In the evening I would have preached in

theopen air; but the windwas too cold and too high: So I applied

the thirteenth of the Corinthians in the assembly-room, to the

most affected congregation I have seen at Carlow : And here is

aplentiful harvest ; the rather, because several of the troopers

quartered here are much alive to God, and "adorn in all things

the doctrine of God our Saviour."

Mon. 30.-We went over high and steep mountains, inter-

spersed with lovely valleys, to Bunklody ; now called Newtown-

Barry, one of the pleasantest towns which I have seen in the

kingdom. Here we rejoiced to meet Mrs. Cookman, with sister

(Henry) Moore, and Miss Acton from Dublin, who came on

purpose, and willingly accompanied us to Waterford, and thence

to Clonmell. I preached in the assembly-room here also ; but

to acongregation very little awakened. But how soon can our

Lord say to any of these, " Lazarus, come forth ! "

About noonwe reached Enniscorthy. Here likewise the use

of the assembly-room was promised ; but a Clergyman (whose

father died in black despair, crying out the room was full of

devils) caused that promise to be retracted: So I stood in a

largeyard; and, though it blew a storm, we had an exceeding

large congregation, three or perhaps four times as many as the

assembly-room would have contained. I preached on, " If we

let him thus alone, all men will believe on him." To avoid

the ferry, we went the mountain way, and about five came to
Wexford.

Were ever assembly-rooms put to better use ? That in

Wexford, wherein I preached, was one of the largest I ever saw ;

and high and low, rich and poor, flocked together; and it seemed

as ifmany of them were ripe for the Gospel. I expect there

will be agood harvest in this place.

Tues. MAY 1.-Setting out early in the morning, between

nine and ten I preached in the church at Old-Ross, to a large

company of as plain country-people as ever I saw in Yorkshire.
We reached Waterford between two and three. At six I

preached in the Court-House, to an immense congregation,

while a file of musketeers, ordered by the Mayor, paraded at the

372 [May,1787

door. Two or three hundred attended in the morning, and

gladly received the whole truth. In the evening the congrega-

tion was larger than before, and equally attentive. Thursday,

3. I took my leave of this earnest, loving people, and went on

through a delightful country to Clonmell. At six I preached

in the Court-House. I was much surprised. I know not when

I have seen so well-dressed and ill-behaved a congregation ;

but I was told it was the sameway that they behaved at church.

Pity then they do not turn Papists. The Church of England

needs no such members : They are no honour to it.

Fri. 4.-With great difficulty we got over a most horrid road

to Capperquin ; but that from thence to Tallagh (eight miles)

was exceeding pleasant. The remaining ten miles were very

tolerable ; so that we reached Youghall in good time. The

Court-House was throughly filled at six, and above half filled at

five in the morning. Saturday, 5. We wenton to Cork. The

latter was pleasant beyond description. Ata very small distance

on the left hand, the river " rolled its sinuous train ; " beyond

which were shady trees, covering a steep hill, and rising row
above row. On the right we had another sloping mountain,

tufted over with trees, sometimes forming one green, even wall,

sometimes scattered up and down. Between these appeared

several beautiful seats, some of them fit for Noblemen.

At six in the evening the preaching-house would ill contain

the congregation ; and many of the rich and honourable were

among them ! Who hath warned these to flee from the wrathto

come?

Sun. 6-. We had an evening congregation at seven, whom I

warned to order their conversation aright. At three in the

afternoon I preached on the road to a numerous congregation ;

but many of them, especially the genteeler sort, were rude as

colts untamed. We stowed the people together in the evening

as close as it was possible ; but still many were constrained to

go away, finding no place, even at the door. Monday, 7. The

congregation at five in the morning was little inferior to that we

used to see on Sunday evening. This time also we had manyof

the gay and honourable,who seem, at present, almost persuaded
to be Christians. O what shoals of half-awakened sinners will

be broad awake when it is too late! On Tuesday likewise the
congregations were exceeding large, and deep attention sat on

every face.

!

May, 1787.1 373

Wed. 9.-We went to Bandon. Here also there has been a

remarkable work of God ; and yet not withoutmany backsliders.

It was therefore my chief business here to strengthen the weak,

and recall the wanderers: So in the evening I preached in the

assembly-room, (which was offered me by the Provost,) on,

"How shall I give thee up, Ephraim ? " and God applied his

word. I believe there was a general melting among the people,

and many purposed to return to God. But the Room was

exceeding hot, and extremely crowded; and yet would not near

contain the congregation. Thursday, 10. The preaching-house

was filled at five in the morning ; and again I applied directly to

backsliders, and found a strong hope that " the times of refresh-

ing " will soon " come from the presence of the Lord."

At noon we took awalk to Castle-Barnard. Mr. Barnard

has given it a beautiful front,nearly resembling that of Lord

Mansfield's house at Caen-Wood, and opened part of his lovely

park to the house, which, I think, has now as beautiful a

situation as Rockingham-House, in Yorkshire. Mr. Barnard

much resembles, in person and air, the late Sir George Saville.

Though he is far the richest person in these parts, he keeps no

race-horses, or hounds ; butloves his wife and home, and spends

his time and fortune in improving his estate, and employing the

poor. Gentlemen of this spirit are a blessing to their neighbour-

hood. MayGod increase theirnumber !

In the evening, finding no building would contain the con-

gregation, I stood in the main street, and testified, to a listening

multitude, " This is not your rest. " I then administered the

Lord's Supper to the society ; and God gave us a remarkable

blessing.

Fri. 11. I took an affectionate leave of our friends at five.

I left them full ofgood desires and resolutions. Calling on one

that was ill at Innishannon, word was quickly brought me, that

the people were flocking together to the preaching-house. It

was soon filled from end to end ; and I preached to them " Jesus

Christ, made of God to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,

and redemption. " About noon I preached in the Court-House

at Kinsale, to a very large congregation. But how different

from that which I had in the bowling-green, two years ago !

That was one of the most indecent, ill-mannered congregations

that ever I saw in Ireland. This was as eminently well-behaved ;

the sovereign and many genteel persons being among them. It

[May,1787.

was no wonder to see the congregation at Cork in the evening
equally well-behaved. So theyalways are; the chief ofthe city

being no longer bitter enemies, but cordial friends.

Sat. 12.-A gentleman invited me to breakfast, with my old

antagonist, Father O'Leary. I was not at all displeased atbeing

disappointed. He is not the stiff, queermanthat I expected; but

of an easy, genteel carriage, and seems not to be wanting either

in sense or learning. In the afternoon, by appointment, I waited
on the Mayor, an upright, sensible man, who is diligently

employed, from morning to night, in doing all the goodhe can.

He has already prevailedupon the Corporation to make it a fixed
។

rule, that the two hundred ayear, which was spent in two enter-

tainments,should for the future be employed in relieving indigent

freemen, with their wives and children. He has carefully regu-

latedthe HouseofIndustry,and has instituted a Humane Society

for the relief of persons seeminglydrowned; and he is unwearied

in removing abuses of every kind. Whenwill our English

Mayors copy after the Mayor of Cork ? He led me through

the Mayoralty-House,-a very noble, and beautiful structure.

The dining-room and the ball-room are magnificent, and shame

the Mansion-House in London by their situation ; commanding

the whole river, the fruitful hills on every side, and themeadows

running between them. He was then sogood as to walk with

me quite through the city to the House of Industry, and to go

with me through all the apartments ; which are quite sweet and

commodious. An hundredand inety-two poor are now lodged

therein ; and the Master (a pious man, and a member of our

society) watches over them, reads with them, and prays with

them, as if they were his own children.

Sun. 13. We had a very comfortable opportunity at eight

in Cork. At three Mr. Broadbent preached on the parade.

At five (as we removed the benches, and stowedthe people close

together) the Room contained most of the people; and I tooka

solemn leave of them, after closely applying our Lord's question,

" Do ye now believe ? "

Mon. 14. We went to Kilfinan, about twenty Irish miles

(so I compute) from Mallow. I preached in the Court-House,

about seven, to a large and serious audience ; and again at five

in the morning, Tuesday, 15. We then went on, through a

delightful country, to Limerick. Herewere always an affectionIt

ate people ; but I never found them so much so as now.

May, 1787. ] JOURNAL. 375

was too cold in the evening to stand abroad ; so we squeezed as

many as possible into the preaching-house. I preached on,

" Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart." Many

here once experienced this ; but few, ifany, retain it now !

Wed. 16. The congregation at five filled the House almost

as well as it was filled in the evening. Finding a remarkable

deadness, I inquired what were the reasons of it ; and found, 1 .

There had been, for several months, a deep misunderstanding

between the Preachers and the chief of the society. Hence, on

the one hand, the Preachers had little life or spirit to preach ;

and, on the other, the congregation dwindled away. 2. Many

had left off meeting their Bands, and many others seldom met

their classes. 3. Prayer-meetings were entirely given up. What

wonder if all the people were grown dead as stones ?

In the evening I endeavoured to re-awaken those that were

settling upon their lees, by strongly applying those solemn

words, " The first shall be last, and the last first; for many

are called, but few are chosen." Inthe morning, Thursday, 17,

I endeavoured to stir them up once more to hunger and thirst

after righteousness, after the whole image ofGod, without which

they will still remain

Cold, languid,weary,heartless, dead.

After morning service I met the Stewards and Leaders, and

inquired into the rise of the late misunderstanding. I found

the matter itself was nothing; but want of patience on both

sides had swelled the mole-hill into amountain. O how patient,

how meek, how gentle toward all men ought a Preacher, espe-

cially a Methodist, to be !

In the afternoon I walked through all the parts of the Work-

house, called, in Ireland, the House of Industry. It is plea-

santly situated on a rising ground near the river; and, I believe,

would contain about three hundred persons. (That at Dublin

contains six hundred.) At present there are about eighty per-

sons there, the contributions falling short. The apartments are

large, airy, and sweet; and the poor (most of whom are employed)
seem contented.

Every time I preached I found more and more hope that

God will revive his work in this city. I know he will, if the

prayer-meetings are restored ; these are never without fruit.

Fri. 18.--I set out early in the morning, and reached Castle-

[May,1787.

bay about four in the afternoon. I hadmuch conversation with

Mrs. Persse, awoman ofmany sorrows. But when she has been

"

tried, she shall come forth as gold.

In the evening I preached at Killchrist, about four miles from

Castlebay. The number of the people constrained me to stand

in the open air, though the wind was high and cold. They

were all attentive and serious, except one young gentleman, who

would fain have laughed, if he could. But his sport was quickly

spoiled ; and before the sermon was half over, he was as serious

as his neighbours.

Sat. 19. In two hours and a half we came to Athenry, the

rival of Killmallock, once a flourishing city, now a heap of ruins :

But even these are now covered with earth. It was built byKing

John, as well as the other ; andseems,by its walls, tohavebeen
one of the largest cities in the kingdom. Being wrong directed

whenwe left this, we got almost to Galway, going about six

miles out of our way to Cahir-Morress. However, I reached

Ballinrobein time to preach toalarge and well-behaved (although

genteel) congregation. Ipreachedagain ateight in the morning,

Sunday, 20, and then hastened on to Castlebar. We went

straight to church. I preached at five in our new House; I

think, larger than that at Limerick, and throughly filledwith as

attentive a congregation as any I have seen in the kingdom.

Mon. 21. Little misunderstandings between themselves have

continually hindered the work of God in this society. This

morning I heard the contending parties face to face, and once

more made them friends. A numerous congregation listened

with all attention, in the evening, to that important word ofour

Lord, " Whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my

brother, andmy sister, and mother." Tuesday, 22. One of the

men confined for murder, earnestly importuned me to visit him.
I did so ; but he seemed as dead as a stone. And I did not

wonder ; for such an action, performed in cool blood, I never
:

heard of before. Mr. M'Donnel, who had his leg wounded by

one shot, and both his arms broke by another, was sitting on the

ground, when this wretch came and presented a blunderbuss.

He begged only five minutes to say his prayers. Andrew swore,

"No, not one ; " and instantly shot him through the heart !

This whole transaction, from the beginning to the end, contain-

ing such a series of calm, deliberate murder, perpetratedwith so

shocking circumstances, is hardly to be paralleled in history.
May, 1787.1 JOURNAL. 377

Some time since a shrewd man said, " This country will never

be in quiet, till one of these men has murdered the other, and

then is hanged for it."

Wed. 23. Leaving our little society in peace and love, we

went by Swineford to Sligo. At six I preached in the new

Court House, a very spacious and commodious building, to a

more numerous and more attentive congregation than I have

seen here for many years. A large congregation was present

again at five in the morning, Thursday, 24 ; so that I am not

without hope, the work of God may at length revive here also.

I had purposed going straight from hence to Annadale ; but

notice had been given of my preaching at Manorhamilton.

It is true, this was five or six miles out of my way, and abun

dantly worse road. However, I would not disappoint the poor

people ; although by this means Mr. Slack's dinner was delayed

till near six o'clock. I preached at seven to a very serious con-

gregation, and passed acomfortable evening.

Fri. 25. I had a day of rest in this lively family, only

preaching morning and evening. Saturday, 26. I preached at

Ballyconnel about eleven: In the afternoon I took awalk in

the Bishop of Kilmore's garden. The house is finely situated ;

has two fronts, and is fit for a nobleman. We then went into

the church-yard, and saw the venerable tomb, a plain flat stone,

inscribed, Depositum Gulielmi Bedel, quondam Episcopi Kil-

morensis : * Over whom even the rebel army sung, Requiescat

in pace ultimus Anglorum. " Let the last of the English-

men rest in peace. " At seven I preached to a large congrega

tion. It blew a storm, but most of the congregation were

covered by akind of shed raised for the purpose ; and not a few

were greatly comforted.

Sun. 27. I preached in Cavan at seven, and then hastened

forward to Clones, leaving Mr. Broadbent to preach at Bally-

hays ; which he did with good effect. But I needed not to have

been in such haste ; for the Church Service did not begin till

twelve. Such a number of communicants, I suppose, was never

seen at this church before. The Service ended about half past

three. The question then was, where I should preach. The

furious wind and violent rain made it impracticable to preach

(where I intended) at the head of the market-place ; but I made

* Here are deposited the remains of WILLIAM BEDEL, formerly Bishop of

Kilmore. EDIT .


:

shift to stand on one side of it in a door-way,where I was pretty

well sheltered : Although the poor people were exposed to heavy

rain during the whole sermon, none of them seemed to regard it ;

and God did indeed send a gracious rain upon their souls, so

that many rejoiced withjoy unspeakable.

Mon. 28. Having all the parties together, I inquired into an

odd affair which occurred here a few months ago. F. B. , Leader

of the class of single women, and always hitherto of an unblem-

ished character, was accused of immodesty by Mr.A-,in

whose house she had lived for several years. I found this accu-

sation to be totally groundless. 2. John Carr, one of our oldest

members, with a few others, spent an hour in reading and

prayer, while a Local Preacher was reading a sermon at the

Room ; this was represented to the Assistant as done in a spirit

ofopposition, and as an intention of leaving the society ; (a thing

which never entered into their thoughts;) and he was urged to
read them out of the society. Accordingly, he read out four-

teen at once : I could not find, upon the strictest inquiry, that
:

they had been guilty of any fault but meeting together that

evening ; so I willingly received them all again, requiring

only one condition of the contenders on both sides, to say not

one word of anything that was past. The spirit of peace and

love gloriously descended on them all, at the evening preaching,

while I was explaining the "fruit of the Spirit." They were

again filled with consolation at the Lord's Supper ; and again

in the morning, while Mr. Broadbent applied, " Comfort ye,

comfort ye my people, saith the Lord. "

Tues. 29. The old murderer is restrained from hurting me ;

but, it seems, he has power over my horses. One of them I was

obliged to leave in Dublin, and afterwards another, having

bought two to supply their places ; the third soon got an ugly

1 swelling in his shoulder, so that we doubted whether we could

go on ; and aboy at Clones, riding (I suppose galloping) the

fourth over stones, the horse fell and nearly lamed himself.

However, we went on softly toAughalun, andfound such a con-

gregation as I had not seen before in the kingdom. The tent,

that is, a covered pulpit, was placed at the foot of a green, slop-

ing mountain, on the side of which the huge multitude sat (as

their manner is) row above row. While I was explaining,

" God has given unto us his Holy Spirit," he was indeed poured

out in awonderful manner. Tears ofjoy, and cries were heard

May, 1787.] 379

on every side, only so far suppressed as not to drownmy voice.

I cannot but hope, that many will have cause to bless God for

that hour to all eternity.

I preached at Lisbelaw, another little village, about six in the

evening. The small rain continued all the time ; but that did

not hinder the people from mightily rejoicing in Him who

causes " the earth to bring forth at once," and " a nation" to be

"born in a day."

Wed. 30.-A large room, designed for an assembly-room,

was filled in the morning ; and the poor people appeared to be.

quite ripe for the highest doctrine of the Gospel ; so I exhorted

them, leaving the first principles, to "go on unto perfection."

About eleven I preached in the market-house at Enniskillen,

formerly a den of lions ; but the lions are become lambs. They

flocked together from every part, and were all attention. Before

I had half done, Godmade bare his arm, and the mountains

flowed down at his presence. Manywere cut to the heart, and

many rejoiced with joy unspeakable: Surely the last shall be

first ; and poor Enniskillen shall lift up its head above many of

the places where the Gospel has been long preached.

In the evening I preached to another numerous congregation,

at Sidare, a large house at the foot of the mountains. One

wouldwonderwhence all the people came: They seemed to spring

out of the earth. Here also there were once many bitter perse-

cutors ; but they are vanished away like smoke. Several of them,

indeed, came to a fearful end, and their neighbours took warning

by them.

Thur. 31. We travelled through a pleasant, well-cultivated

country to Omagh, the shire town of Tyrone. It being market-

day amultitude of people presently flocked together to a tent,

as they call it, on the side of the Green. At first they were

innocently noisy ; (this being a new thing at Omagh ;) but they

were soon still as night : I suited my subject to their experience,

preaching on, " It is appointed unto men once to die." God

applied it to their hearts. Not a smile was to be seen; but all

seemed to feel the solemn truth .

Thence we went over mountains and dales to Kerlish Lodge,

where we met with a hearty welcome, both from Alexander

Boyle, and his amiable wife, who are patterns to all the country.

Although we were at a lone house ten miles from any town,

and although the weather was both rainy and stormy, we had a


large congregation in the evening, and afterwards a comfortable

love-feast. I do not wonder the work of God spreads in these

parts ; the spirit and behaviour of Mr. Boyle and his wife, con-

tinually employed in doing good, have an amazing influence on

all their neighbourhood. Some time ago she went to his uncle's at

Killrail, who has four daughters grown up. They began convers-

ing in the evening ; they prayed, and sung, and talked and

prayed again, till about seven in the morning. By that time all

four of them found aclear sense of pardon; and two believed

they were saved from all sin.

Mr. Boyle had spoke to Dr. Wilson, the Rector of a neigh-

bouring town, concerning my preaching in the church ; who

wrote to the Bishop, and received a letter in answer, giving a

full and free consent. The Doctor desired me to breakfast with

him. Meantime one of his parishioners, awarm Seceder, took

away the key of the church. So I preached in a neighbouring

orchard : I believe, not in vain. The Rector and his wife were

in the front of the congregation.

Afterward we took a view of Lord Abercorn's place. The

house has a lovely situation ; and the front of it is as elegant

as any I haveseeneitherin Great Britain or Ireland. Thegrounds

are delightful indeed, perhaps equal to any in the kingdom.

About five in the evening I preached at Killrail. No house

would contain the congregation ; so I preached in the open air.

The wind was piercing cold; but the people regarded it not.

Afterward I administered the Lord's Supper to about a hundred

of them, and then slept in peace.

Sat. JUNE 2.-It was with difficulty we reached Strabane ;

my new horse quite failing. I had no thought of preaching

there, till word was sent, that the Town-Hallwas atmy service :

Ithen went to it without delay ; and had a genteel, yet serious,

congregation. In the afternoon my horse failed again ; but one

of the Preachers tried his ; and he drew, as if he had been bred

to it. Our House at Londonderry not being ready, I preached at

six in the Town-Hall, a beautiful and spacious room, to a deeply

serious congregation. Sunday, 3. It was more numerous in

the morning, and equally serious; so was the great congrega-

tion in the evening. Surely we shall see more fruit in this city ;

but first we shall have need of patience.

Mon. 4-Mr. Broadbent preached at five, and I at eleven,

and he in the evening. He did the same on Tuesday, 5. At

June, 1787.1 JOURNAL . 381

noon we took awalk in the Bishop's garden, and saw his delight-

ful summer-house; aroom fifty feet long, finished with the utmost

elegance; and situated on the point ofa hill that commands the

river and all the country : But his Lordship has utterly forsaken

it; for it is no longer new.

Wed. 6.-I took leave of my dear friends at Londonderry,

and drove to Newtown Limavaddy. I had no design to

preach there ; but while we were at breakfast, the people were

gathered so fast, that I could not deny them : The House was

soon filled from end to end. I explained to them the fellow-

ship believers have with God. Thence I went on to Coleraine,

and preached at six (as I did two years ago) in the barrack-yard.

The wind was high and sharp enough ; but the people here

are good old soldiers. Many attended at five in the morning,

and a huge congregation about six in the evening ; most of

whom, I believe, tasted the good word ; for God was with us of

a truth. Friday, 8. I could willingly have stayed a little longer

with this steady, affectionate people ; but I broke from them

between six and seven ; and went forward, as well as the heavy

rain and a tired horse would permit. About two we reached

Ballymena, where we have a small and poor, but well-established,

society. The Presbyterian Minister offering his meeting-house,

I willingly accepted his offer ; and explained to a large congre-

gation, " God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself. "

And I believe his word fell on many " as the rain, and as the

dew upon the tender herb."

Sat. 9. We went through a lovely country to Antrim.

Here likewise the Presbyterian Minister offered me the use of a

large and commodious House. The Bible in the pulpit lying

open, I chose, for the subject of my discourse, the words which

first met my eye ; namely, " Whenthey had nothing to pay, he

frankly forgave them both." The greatest part of the country

from hence to Belfast is likewise exceeding pleasant. At six I

preached in the Linen-Hall, to a numerous and seriously atten-

tive congregation. A gentleman invited me to lodge at his

house, and showed me the new Presbyterian meeting-house. It

is nearly seventy-two feet by fifty, and is far the most beautiful

of any I have seen in Ireland ; but I doubt whether it equals

Dr. Taylor's, in Norwich. That is the most elegant I ever saw

I preached at ten in the Linen-Hall, to double the congrega-

tion that attended in the evening ; and the power of God came


wonderfully upon them, melting their hearts, and breaking the

rocks in pieces. In the afternoon I preached in the Linen-Hall

at Lisburn, to a still more numerous congregation ; I think the

largest that I have seen since we left England: And all, except-

ing a few giddy children, behaved as men that heard for life.

Mon. 11. It being the Quarterly Meeting, I preached at

eleven in the Presbyterian meeting-house ; a large and handsome

building, freely offered both by the Minister and his Elders ;

and it then contained the congregation. But in the evening

the multitude of people constrained me to return to my old

stand in the Linen-Hall : And I have hardly had so solemn an

opportunity since we came into the kingdom.

Tues. 12.-We came through a most beautiful country to

Downpatrick ; a much larger town than I imagined ; I think not
much inferior to Sligo. The eveningwas uncommonly mild and

bright, there not being a cloud in the sky. The tall firs shaded

us on every side, and the fruitful fields were spread all around.

The people were, I think, half as many more as were at Lisburn

even on Sunday evening ; on whom I enforced those important

words, " Acquaint now thyself with Him, and be at peace."

Wed. 13.-Being informed we had only six-and-twenty miles
to go, we did not set out till between six and seven. The

countrywas uncommonly pleasant, running between two high

ridges of mountains. But it was up hill anddown, all theway;

so that wedid not reach Rathfriland till near noon. Mr. Barber,

the Presbyterian Minister, (a princely personage, I believe six :

feet and a half high,) offering me his new spacious preaching-

house, the congregation quickly gathered together. I began

without delay to open and enforce, " Now God commandeth all

men everywhere to repent." I took chaise the instant I had

done ; but the road being still up hill and down, we were two
:

hours going what they called six miles. I then quitted the

chaise, and rode forward. But even then four miles, so called,

took an hour and a half riding; so that I did not reach Dr.

Lesley's, at Tanderagee, till half an hour past four. About

six I stood upon the steps, at Mr. Godly's door, and preached

on, " This is not your rest," to a larger congregation, by athird,

than even that at Downpatrick. I scarce remember to have seen

a larger, unless in London, Yorkshire, or Cornwall.

Thur. 14. Mr. Broadbent and I walked round Dr. Lesley's

domain. I have not seen anything of the size in England that

June, 1787.1

is equal to it. The house stands in the midst of a fruitful hill,

which is part beneath, and part above it. In approaching it,

you see no walls, nothing but green trees and shrubs of various

kinds. Enter the court-yard and gate, and you still see no stone

walls; but on either hand,

The verdurous wall of Paradise upsprings ;

and that summer and winter ; consisting wholly of ever-greens,

that bloom all the year round. On the upper side of the house,

the gently rising hill yields the loveliest scene that can be con-

ceived ; such a mixture of shady walks, and lawns sprinkled

with trees ; at the top of which is a natural rock, under which

you may sit and command amost beautiful and extensive pros-

pect: And all this variety has arisen from a rough, furzy heath,

by the industry of Dr. Lesley, in thirty years.

I expected the congregation would not be so large this even-

ing as it was the last ; but it was far larger, and, if possible,

more attentive. I have scarce ever seen a more pleasing sight.

Wewere covered round with tall, shady trees ; only an opening

on one side afforded a view of the wide-extended country. The

people were as motionless as the trees ; for the power of God was

uponthem ; and I believe few of them will forget that hour,

till their spirits return to God.

Fri. 15.-About eight I preached at Rich-Hill, to a deeply

serious congregation. At eleven I preached in the Castle-yard,

at Charlemount, to alarge congregation, gathered from all parts ;

it being the Quarterly Meeting. Immediately followed the

love-feast. But the preaching-house would not contain one half

of the people : So we borrowed the Green in the fort, and let the

people through the wicket, one by one. They then sat down on

the grass, being full as private as in the House ; and many spoke

their experience quite freely. But the rain obliged us to break

off our meeting sooner thanwe intended. It began in the even-

ing, before I had finished the hymn, but stopped in two or three

minutes, and left us a fair and tolerably pleasant evening.

Sat. 16. I went on to Dungannon; but the town seemed to

be in an uproar. One would have thought Bedlam had broke

loose. The cause was this :-A cock-fight was at hand. A

gentleman asked the Presbyterian Minister for the use of his

meeting-house ; but he gave a reason for his denial, viz. , that

Mr. Hall, one of the society, had said he had played at cards all

[June, 1787.

night ; (which, it seems, was true;) and therefore he could not

allow him to come into his meeting-house. So we removed all

the benches out of our own ; and it contained most of the con-

gregation. I preached there again in the evening, and then

held a love-feast ; at which many were greatly comforted.

Sun. 17. We knew not what to do at Armagh : The rain
:

would not suffer us to preach in the avenue; and our House

would not contain half of the congregation, many of whom

came from far. The best shift we could make was to squeeze

into the House as many as possible, and keep both the windows !

and doors open; by which means many more could hear.

In the evening the Seceders (who would think it ?) freely

gave me the use of their large meeting-house. It was filled

from end to end: But awise young gentleman observed, that I
had quite mistook my subject ; my sermon being calculated for

the vulgar, not for gentlefolks .

I permitted as many as our House would contain to stay at

the meeting of the society ; and gave them aplain account of

the Methodists, both as to their rise, principles, and practice.

Mon. 18. Many seemed not a little moved, while I enforced

the words of Eliphaz, (it seems, the eldest and most honourable

of Job's three friends,) "Acquaint now thyselfwith him, and be

at peace." Afterwards we took a view of the Primate's lodge

and chapel, elegant in the highest degree ; and of the domain

surrounding them, which is laid out and planted in the most

beautiful manner. And what hath the owner thereof? Not so

much as the beholding thereof with his eyes. Probably he will

behold it nomore. He is fully taken up in building a large seat

near Dublin, at above eighty years of age !

Tu secanda marmora

Locas sub ipsum funus, et sepulchri

Immemor struis domos ! *

In the evening I preached once more in Mr. M'Gough's

avenue, and a listening multitude seriously attended. Surely

there will be a harvest here also by and by, although hitherto
we see but little fruit.

Tues. 19. We went on through horrible roads to Newry. I

wonder any should be so stupid as to prefer the Irish roads to

the English . The huge unbroken stones, of which they are

• For a translation of these lines see p. 311, of this volume.-EDIT.
June J

generally made, are enough to break any carriage in pieces.

No, there is nothing equal to good English gravel, both for

horses, carriages, and travellers.

In the evening I preached to a numerous congregation in the

large meeting-house. I believe many felt the edge of the word

sharper than a two-edged sword : One consequence of which

was, that our new Room would not contain the congregation

even at five in the morning, but many were constrained to stand

without. Between nine and ten I preached in the market-house

at Dundalk. We expected a tumult; but there was none at

all : Avery large congregation ofrich and poor behaved with the

utmostdecency, while I enforced, "Now is theaccepted time ; now

is theday of salvation." At six in the evening I preached in the

Court-House at Drogheda to a crowded congregation, on, “ I saw

thedead, smallandgreat, stand before God. " Even in this tur-

bulent town, all were quiet, and seemed to feel thatGodwas there.
Thur. 21. Several of our friends from Dublin met us at the

Man-of-war, with whom we went on to Swords ; a town famous

from time immemorial for all manner of wickedness. However,

finding a congregation waiting, I began without delay ; and all

were still as night: So salvation is come to the sinners of Swords

also. In the afternoon it pleased God to bring us safe to Dub-

lin, whenwe had been absent a little above two months.

Fri. 22. I began visiting the classes, which employed me to

the Thursday following. We found it necessary to exclude one

hundred and twelve members ; there remained eleven hundred

and thirty-six.

Sun. 24. At seven I preached in the Room ; at eleven the

Service began at Bethesda. I found uncommon liberty there,

even among the rich and great. I think some of them felt our

Lord present, both to wound and to heal. In the evening I

preached at the new Room, and it was just as much as I could

do without weariness.

Tues. 26. We were agreeably surprised with the arrival of

Dr. Coke, who came from Philadelphia in nine-and-twenty days,

and gave us a pleasing account of the work of God in America.

Thursday, 28. I had the pleasure of a conversation with Mr.

Howard, I think one of the greatest men in Europe. Nothing

but the mighty power of God can enable him to go through his

difficult and dangerous employments. But what can hurt us, if
God is on our side ?

VOL IV. Cc


Sat. 30.-I desired all our Preachers to meet me, and con-

sider the state of our brethren in America, who have been terri-

bly frightened at their own shadow, as if the English Preachers

were just going to enslave them. I believe that fear is now

over, and they are more aware of Satan's devices.

Sun. JULY 1.-At seven I strongly exhorted a large congre-

gation, not to be conformed either to the wisdom, spirit, or

fashions of this world, if ever they desired to be transformed in

the spirit of their mind, according to the perfect and acceptable

will of God. In the evening I opened and applied those awful

words, " Lord, are there few that be saved ?"

Tues. 3.-Afew friends took me to Merino, a seat of Lord

Charlemount's, four miles from Dublin. It contains a lovely

mixture of wood, water, and lawns, on which are several kinds

of foreign sheep, with great plenty ofpeacocks; but I could not

hear any singing birds of any kind. I a little wondered at this,

till I afterwards recollected, that I had not heard any singing

bird, not even a lark, a thrush, or a blackbird, within some miles

of Dublin. In the evening I strongly enforced those awful

words, " Strive to enter in at the strait gate," upon a numerous

congregation ; who had ears to hear, and hearts to receive the

wholeGospel.

Wed. 4.-I spent an hour at the New-Dargle, a gentleman's

seat four or five miles from Dublin. I have not seen so beau-

tiful a place in thekingdom. It equals the Leasowes in Warwick-

shire ; and it greatly exceeds them in situation ; all the walks

lying on the side of a mountain, which commands all Dublin

bay, as well as an extensive and finely variegated land-prospect.

A little river runs through it, which occasions two cascades, at

a small distance from each other. Although many places may

exceed this in grandeur, I believe none can exceed it in beauty.

Afterwards I saw the Parliament-House. The House of Lords

far exceeds that at Westminster ; and the Lord-Lieutenant's

throne as far exceeds that miserable throne (so called) of the

King in the English House of Lords, The House of Commons

is a noble room indeed. It is an octagon,wainscoted round with

Irish oak, which shames all mahogany, and galleried all round

for the convenience of the ladies. The Speaker's chair is far

more grand than the throne of the Lord- Lieutenant. But what

surprised me above all, were the kitchens of the House, and the

large apparatus for good eating. Tables were placed from one

July, 1787.] 387

end of alarge hall to the other ; which, it seems, while the Par-

liament sits, are daily covered with meat at four or five o'clock,

for the accommodation of the members. Alas, poor Ireland !

Who shall teach thy very senators wisdom ? War is ceased;

Sed sævior armis,

Luxuria incubuit ! "

Thur. 5.-Most of our Preachers came to town. Friday, 6.

Our Conference began, and ended as usual on Tuesday, 10.

Wehadnojarring string, but all, from the beginning to the end,

was love and harmony.

Sun. 8.-I preached at our Room at seven. At eleven the

Service began at Bethesda. The congregation was exceeding

large. I preached on part of the Second Lesson, Luke xx. 34 ;

and many had alarge taste of the powers of the world to come.

At the love-feast in the evening,many spoke freely, who were

deeply experienced in the ways of God. Indeed they have

fairly profited in the divine life. I have rarely heard such a

conversation even in England. On Tuesday evening likewise,

many spoke with equal fire, tempered with meekness of wisdom.

Wed. 11. At five I took an affectionate leave of this loving

people ; and, having finished all my business here, in the after-

noon I went down with myfriends,having taken the whole ship,

and went on board the Prince of Wales, one of the Parkgate

packets. At seven we sailed with afair, moderate wind. Between

nine and ten I lay down, as usual, and slept till near four, when

Iwaswaked by an uncommon noise, and found the ship lay

beating upon a large rock, about a league from Holyhead. The

Captain, who had not long lain down, leaped up ; and, running

upon the deck, whenhe saw how the ship lay, cried out, " Your

lives may be saved, but I am undone ! " Yet no sailor swore,

and nowoman cried out. We immediately went to prayer ; and

presently the ship, I know not how, shot off the rock, and pur-

sued her way, without any more damage, than the wounding a

few of her outside planks. About three in the afternoon we

came safe to Parkgate ; and in the evening went on to

Chester.

Fri. 13. I spent aquiet day; and in the evening enforced

•This quotation from Juvenal is thus translated by Gifford :-

Now all the evils of long peace are ours ;

Luxury, moreterrible than hostile powers.-EDIT .


to a crowded audience the parable of the Sower. I know not

1 that ever I had so large a congregation .

Sun. 15. I preached at the new church in the morning, on

Matt. v. 20 ; inthe afternoon, on 1 Cor. xv. 55; Mr. Broadbent

in the Room at eight in the morning, and between five and six

in the evening.
:

Mon. 16. The House was well filled at five in the morning.

i At noon I took a view of Mr. Ryle's silk-mill, which keeps two

hundred and fifty children in perpetual employment. In the

evening I preached on Mark iii. 35; and we had a comfortable

opportunity. Tuesday, 17. About noon I preached inthe new

chapel at Bullocksmithy ; and in the evening at Stockport.

Being informed that the people in general were dead and cold,

I strongly applied, " Now it is high time to awake out of sleep."

God was pleased to speak in his word, and that with amighty

voice; but still more powerfully at five in the morning, Wed-

nesday, 18, while I was enforcing that promise, “ The Lord

whom ye seek will suddenly come to his temple." I then

retired to a little house of Mr. Brocklehurst's, two miles beyond

Manchester. Here Adam Oldham lived ! O what did riches

!
profit him ! How strange the Providence which put me in his

place!

The rest of this week I spent in writing. On Saturday, 21,

I returned to Manchester. Sunday, 22. Our service began at

ten. Notwithstanding the severe cold which has continued

many days, the House was well filled; but my workwas easy,
as Dr. Coke assisted me. As many as could, crowded in in the

evening ; but many were obliged to go away. Afterwards I |

spent a comfortable hour with the society.

Mon. 23. I preached morning and afternoon. Intheeven-

ing I met the Bands, and admired their liveliness and simplicity.

After preaching on Tuesday morning I retired again to Bruton.

Thursday, 26. About noon I preached in the new preaching- 1

house, to as many as it would well contain, on Isaiah lv. 5, 6.

To-day I read upon the road avery agreeable book, Mr. Dobb's

"Universal History." It gave me a clearer view of ancient

times than ever I had before ; but I still doubt ofmany famous

incidents, which have passed current for many ages. Toinstance
in one :-I cannot believe there was ever such anation as the

Amazons in the world. The whole affair of the Argonauts I

judge to be equally fabulous ; as Mr. Bryant has shown many

Aug. 1787.] JOURNAL. 389

parts of ancient history to be : And no wonder, considering

how allegories and poetic fables have been mistaken for real

histories.

After preaching at Rochdale, I was agreeably surprised by a

young womanthat called upon me. Several years, a girl thirteen

or fourteen years old was remarkable for piety ; but a year or

two after, when I called upon her with great expectation, she

had not the least savour of it left. She came on purpose to

inform me that God had restored her ; and she was now deter-

mined to live and die to Him. God grant she may ! She will

either be an abandoned apostate, or a shining Christian.

Fri. 27. The House was well filled at five. I have not

seen so large a morning congregation, in proportion to the size

of the town, since I returned to England. I was invited to

breakfast at Bury, by Mr. Peel, acalico-printer ; who, a few

years ago, began with five hundred pounds, and is now supposed

to have gained fifty thousand pounds. O what a miracle if he

lose not his soul !

Thence we went on to Bolton. Here are eight hundred poor

children taught in our Sunday-schools, by about eighty masters,

who receive no paybut what they are to receive from their Great

Master. About ahundred of them (part boys and part girls)

are taught to sing ; and they sang so true, that, all singing

together, there seemed to be but one voice. The House was

throughly filled, while I explained and applied the first com-

mandment. What is all morality or religion without this ?

A mere castle in the air. In the evening, many of the children

still hovering round the House, I desired forty or fifty to come

inand sing,
Vital spark of heavenly flame.

Although some of them were silent,not being able to sing for

tears, yet theharmonywas such as I believe could not be equalled

in the King's chapel.

Sun. AUGUST 5.-In the morning I met the select society ;

alovelycompany ofhumble, simple Christians. Several of them

appeared to have sound and deep experience of the things of

God, and to stand steadfast in the liberty wherewith Christ had

made them free. The House was at ten full and warm enough.

Mr. Horne read Prayers, and read them well. I preached on

those words in the First Lesson, " How long halt ye between

two opinions ? " and was enabled to press the question home on

[Aug.1787.

the consciences of the hearers. We had five Clergymen,

(although three only could officiate,) and twelve or thirteen

hundred communicants ; and the Master ofthe feast was in the

midst of us, as many found to their unspeakable comfort. After

preaching inthe evening, I took asolemn leave ofthe affectionate

society. Here, at least, it undeniably appears that we have not

run in vain, neither laboured in vain.

Mon. 6.-Having taken the whole coach for Birmingham,

we set out at twelve o'clock, expecting to be there, as usual,

about five in the evening; but having six persons within, and

eight without, the coach could not bear the burden, but broke

down before three in the morning : But having patched it

together, as well as we could, we went on to Congleton, and got

another. But in an hour or two this broke also ; and one ofthe

horses was so throughly tired, that he could hardly set one foot

before the other. After all these hinderances, we got to Birming-

ham just at seven. Finding a large congregation waiting, I

stepped out of the coach into the House, and began preaching

without delay ; and such was the goodness ofGod, that I found

no more weariness when I had done than if I had rested all

1 theday.

Here I took a tender leave of Mrs. Heath and her lovely

daughters, about to embark with Mr. Heath forAmerica; whom I

hardly expect to see any more till we meet in Abraham's bosom.

Tues. 7.-Setting out a little before five, we reached Worces-

ter between ten and eleven : Resting till half-past twelve, and

taking fresh horses at Tewkesbury, we reached Gloucester before

five o'clock . About seven I preached to a numerous congrega-

tion in the new House, on, " I am not ashamed of the Gospel

of Christ ; " and strongly applied the words to those whom they

concerned. This night was one of the hottest I ever felt in

Europe.

Wed. 8.-We set out at two ; and, from the time it was light,

rode through one of the pleasantest countries I ever saw. Before

five we came to Rodbury-Place ; but we were far too early for so

genteel a family. Before we reached Malmsbury, one of my

horses fell lame ; so I sent my own chaise and horses directly to

Bristol, and took post-chaises the rest of the day.

About half-hour after four we came to Salisbury, designing

to go straight forward to Southampton ; but, to our great sur-

prise, there was not a post-chaise to be hired in the town. After

Aug. 1787.] JOURNAL . 391

waiting some time, we were informed that noticehad been given

of my preaching in the evening. I then saw the providential

reason why we could not leave Sarum. The House was full

enough in the evening, and great was the power of God in the

midst of them .

Thur. 9.-Desiring to be at Southampton as soon as possible,

we took chaise at four in the morning, and (making but a short

stay atRomsey) came thither between eight and nine. We found

two sloops nearly ready to sail. The Captain of one promised to

sail the next morning ; so we sat down content. At seven in the

evening I preached in Mr. Fay's school-room, to a small, but

deeply serious, congregation, on, " It is appointed unto men once

to die." I believe some of these will not be forgetful hearers,

but will bring forth fruit with patience.

Fri. 10. At six I preached to nearly the same number, on

Heb. iv. 14. In the afternoon I went with agentleman (Mr.

Taylor) to hear thefamous musician that plays upon the glasses.

By my appearing there, (as I had foreseen,) anheap of Gentry

attended in the evening ; and I believe several of them, as well

as Mr. T. himself, did not come in vain.

Sat. 11.-We went on board the Queen, a small sloop, and

sailed eight or nine leagues with atolerable wind. But it then

grew foul, and blew a storm ; so that we were all glad to put in

at Yarmouth harbour. About six Dr. Coke preached in the

market-house, to a quiet and tolerably attentive congregation.

The storm continuing, at eight in the morning, Sunday, 12,

I preached to a much larger congregation. I had uncommon

liberty of speech, and I believe some of them felt that Godwas

there. At eleven we went to church. There was a tolerable

congregation, and all remarkably well-behaved. The Minister

read Prayers very seriously, and preached on, "Blessed are the

poor in spirit. " At four I preached again, on Luke xix. 42,

(part of the Second Lesson in the morning,) " If thou hadst

known, even thou," &c. The market-house was now more than

filled; and not a few seemed to hear as for life. In the even-

ing Dr. Coke preached again. We have now delivered our own

souls at Yarmouth, and trust God will suffer us to go on to

Guernsey.

Mon. 13.-We set out from Yarmouth with afair wind ; but

it soon turned against us, and blew so hard that in the afternoon

we were glad to put in at Swanage. I found we had still a little
| -

[Aug.1787:

society here. I had not seen them for thirteen years, and had

no thought of seeing them now ; but God does all things well.

In the evening I preached in the Presbyterian meeting-house,

not often, I believe, so well filled; and afterwards passed half an

hour very agreeably with the Minister, in the parsonage-house,

which he rents ; a neat, retired house, with adelightful garden.

Thence we adjourned to the house of our old brother Collins,

and between eight and nine went onboard.

Tues. 14.-Sailing on, with afair wind, we fully expected to

reach Guernsey in the afternoon ; but the wind turning contrary,

and blowing hard,we found it would be impossible. We then

judged it best to put in at the Isle of Alderney ; but we were

very near being shipwrecked in the bay. When we were in the

middle of the rocks, with the sea rippling all round us, the wind

totally failed. Had this continued, we must have struck upon

one or other of the rocks : So we went to prayer, and the wind

sprung up instantly. About sunset we landed; and, though we

had five beds in the same room, slept in peace.

About eight I went down to a convenient spot on the beach,

and began giving out a hymn. Awomanand two little children

joined us immediately. Before thehymnwas ended, wehada

tolerable congregation ; all of whom behaved well: Part, indeed,

continued at forty or fifty yards' distance ; but they were all

quiet and attentive.

It happened (to speak in the vulgar phrase) that three or four

who sailed with us from England, a gentleman, with his wife and

sister, were near relations of the Governor. He came to us this

morning, and, when I went into the room, behaved with the

utmost courtesy. This little circumstance may remove preju-

dice, and make a more open way for the Gospel.

Soon after we set sail, and, after a very pleasant passage,

through little islands on either hand, we came to the venerable

Castle, standing on a rock, about a quarter of a milefrom Guern-

sey. The isle itself makes a beautiful appearance, spreading as

a crescent to the right and left ; about seven miles long, and

five broad ; part high land, and part low. The town itself is

boldly situated, rising higher and higher from the water. The

first thing I observed in it was, very narrow streets, and exceed-

ing high houses. But we quickly went on to Mr. De Jersey's,

hardly a mile from the town. Here I found a most cordia

welcome, both from the master of the house, and all his family.

Aug. 1787.] JOURNAL. 393

I preached at seven in alarge room, to as deeply serious a con-

gregation as I ever saw, on, "Jesus Christ, of God made unto

us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption."

Thur. 16. I had a very serious congregation at five, in a

large room of Mr. De Jersey's house. His gardens and orchards

are of a vast extent, and wonderfully pleasant ; and I know no

Nobleman in Great Britain that has such variety of the most

excellent fruit ; which he is every year increasing, either from

France, or other parts of the Continent. What quantity of fruit

hehas, you may conjecture from one sort only :-This summer

he gathered fifty pounds of strawberries daily, for six weeks

together.

In the evening I preached at the other end of the town, in

our own preaching-house. So many people squeezed in, (though

not near all who came,) that it was as hot as a stove. But this

none seemed to regard ; for the word of God was sharper than a

two-edged sword.

Fri. 17-. I waited upon the Governor, and spent half an

hour very agreeably. In the afternoon we took a walk upon

the pier, the largest and finest I ever saw. The town is swiftly

increasing; new houses starting up on every side.

In the evening I did not attempt to go into the House, but

stood near it, in the yard surrounded with tall, shady trees, and

proclaimed to a large congregation,"God is a Spirit ; and they

that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth." I

believe many were cut to the heart this hour, and some not a

little comforted.

Sat. 18. Dr. Coke and I dined at the Governor's. I was

well pleased to find other company. We conversed seriously,

for upwards of an hour, with a sensible, well-bred, agreeable

man. In the evening I preached to the largest congregation I

have seen here, on Jer. viii. 22; and they were all attention

Surely God will have apeople in this place.

Sun. 19. Joseph Bradford preached at six in the morning,

at Mont-Plaisir les Terres, to a numerous congregation. I

preached at half an hour past eight, and the House contained

the congregation. At ten I went to the French church, where

therewas a large and well-behaved congregation. At five we

had the largest congregation of all; ofwhom I took a solemn

and affectionate leave, as it is probable Imay not see them any

more till we meet in Abraham's bosom.

[Aug.1787,

Mon. 20. We embarked between three and four in the morn-

ing, in a very small, inconvenient sloop, and not a swift sailer ;

so that we were seven hours in sailing what is called seven

leagues. About eleven we landed at St. Helier, and went

straight to Mr. Brackenbury's house. It stands very pleasantly,

near the end of the town; and has a large, convenient garden,

with a lovely range of fruitful hills, which rise at a small

distance from it. I preached in the evening to an exceeding

serious congregation, on Matt. iii. ult. And almost as many

were present at five in the morning ; whom I exhorted to go on

to perfection ; which many of them, Mr. Clarke informs me, are

earnestly endeavouring to do. Tuesday, 21. We took a walk

to one of our friends in the country. Near his house stood what

they call the College. It is a free-school, designed to train up

children for the University ; exceeding finely situated, in a quiet

recess, surrounded by tall woods. Not far from it stands, onthe

top of a high hill, (I suppose aRomanmount,) an old chapel,

believed to be the first Christian church which was built in the

island. From hence we had a view of the whole island, the

! pleasantest I ever saw ; as far superior to the Isle of Wight as

that is to the Isle of Man. The little hills, almost covered with

large trees, are inexpressibly beautiful : It seems they are to be

equalled in the Isle of Guernsey. In the evening I was obliged

to preach abroad, on, "Now is the day ofsalvation." I think a

blessing seldom fails to attend that subject.

Wed. 22. In the evening, the Room not containing the peo-

ple, I was obliged to stand in the yard. I preached on Rom,

iii. 22, 23 ; and spoke exceeding plain: Even the Gentry heard

with deep attention. How little things does God turn to his own

glory ! Probably many of these flock together, because I have

lived so many years. And perhaps even this may be the means

of their living for ever !

Thur. 23.-I rode to St. Mary's, five or six miles from St.

Helier, through shady, pleasant lanes. None at the house

could speak English, but I had interpreters enough. In the

evening our large Roomwas throughly filled: I preached on,

"By grace are ye saved, through faith." Mr. Brackenbury

interpreted sentence by sentence ; and God owned his word,

though delivered in so awkward a manner; but especially in

prayer: I prayed in English, and Mr. B. in French.

The houses here are exactly like those in the interior parts of

Aug. 1787. 395

Wales, equal to the best farmers' houses in Lincolnshire; and

the people in general are far better behaved than our country

farmers in England.

Fri. 24. I returned to St. Helier. The high wind in the

evening prevented my preaching abroad. However, on more

than the House would contain, I enforced those awful words,

" It is appointed unto men once to die." I believe the word

fell heavy on all that heard; and many wished to die the death

ofthe righteous.

Sat. 25. Having now leisure, I finished a sermon on dis-

cerning the " Signs ofthe Times. " This morning I had a par-

ticular conversation (as I had once or twice before) with Jean-

nie Bisson of this town; such ayoung woman as I have hardly

seen elsewhere. She seems to be wholly devoted to God, and

to have constant communion with him. She has a clear and

strong understanding ; and I cannot perceive the least tincture

of enthusiasm. I am afraid she will not live long. I am

amazed at the grace of God which is in her: I think she is far

beyond MadameGuion, indeep communion with God; and I

doubt whether I have found her fellow in England. Precious

asmy time is, it would have been worth my while to come to

Jersey, had it been only to see this prodigy of grace.

In the evening God was with us in avery uncommon man-

ner, while I opened and enforced those comprehensive words,

"We preach Christ crucified." I know not whenwe have had

such an opportunity ; it seemed as if every soul present would

have found the salvation of God !

Sun. 26.-Dr. Coke preached at five, and I at nine o'clock.

Afterwards I heard the English Service at church ; but the

congregation was nothing near so large as ours at five in the

morning. We had a French sermon in our Room at three.

Afterwards I met the society ; many of whom came from the

country, and had no English ; so Mr. Brackenbury interpreted

for me again : Afterwards we both prayed. Many of the peo-

ple seemed greatly affected. Between five and six I began

preaching in the yard; but before I had finished my sermon, it

poured downwith rain; so I was obliged to conclude abruptly.

Mon. 27. Captain Cabot, the master of a Guernsey sloop,

called upon us early in the morning, and told us, if we chose

to go that way, he would set out between five and six. But

the wind being quite contrary,wejudged it best to wait a little

[Aug.1787.

longer. In the evening, being appointed to preach at seven, I

was obliged to preach within. We were extremely crowded ;

but the power of God was so manifested while I declared, " We

: preach Jesus Christ, and him crucified," that we soon forgot the

heat, and were glad of being detained alittle longer than we
intended.

I thought when I left Southampton, to have been there

again as this day ; but God's thoughts were not as my thoughts.

Here we are, shut up in Jersey ; for how long we cannot tell.

But it is all well ; for thou, Lord, hast done it. It is my part

to improve the time, as it is not likely I shall ever have another

opportunity of visiting these islands.

Tues. 28-. Being still detained by contrarywinds, I preached

at six in the evening to a larger congregation than ever, in the

assembly-room. It conveniently contains five or six hundred

people. Most of the Gentry were present ; and I believe felt that

Godwas there in an uncommon degree. Being still detained,

I preached there again the next evening, to a larger congregation

than ever. I now judged, I had fully delivered my ownsoul:

1 And in the morning, the wind serving for Guernsey, and not for

Southampton, I returned thither not unwillingly ; since it was

not by my choice, but by the clear providence of God ; for in

the afternoon I was offered the use of the assembly-room; a

spacious chamber in the market-place,which would contain at

least thrice as many as our former Room. I willingly accepted

the offer, and preached at six to such a congregation as I had

not seen here before ; and the word seemed to sink deep into

their hearts. I trust it willnot return empty.

Wed. 29. I designed to have followed the blow in the morn-

ing; but I had quite lostmy voice. However, it was restored

in the evening ; and I believe all in the assembly-room (more

than the last evening) heard distinctly, while I explainedand

applied, " I saw the dead, small and great,stand before God."

In the morning, Thursday, 30, I took a solemn leave of the

society. We set out about nine, and reached St. Peter's in the

afternoon. Good is the will of the Lord. I trust he has something more for us to do here also. After preaching to a larger

congregation than was expected on so short a notice, on, "God

was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself," I returned

to Mont-Plaisir, to stay just as long as it should please God.

I preached there in the morning, Friday, 31, to a congregation
Sept. 1787. ] JOURNAL. 397

serious as death . Afterwards I looked over Archbishop Usher's

Letters ; and was surprised to find that great man was fully

convinced, 1. That the Septuagint translation continually adds

to, takes from, and changes, the Hebrew text at pleasure : 2.

That this could not possibly be owing to mistake, but must

have been done by design : 3. That the original translation of

itwas lost long ago; and what has ever since gone under that

name is a spurious copy, abounding with omissions, additions ,

and alterations of the Hebrew text ; yet not such as any way

destroy the foundation.

I designed to preach abroad in the evening, but the furious

wind drove us into the House. However, our labour was not

lost ; for many felt the sharpness of the two-edged sword, while

I was expounding Gal. vi. 14.

Sat. SEPTEMBER 1.-This day twelvemonth I was detained

in Holland by contrary winds. All is well, so we are doing and

suffering the will of our Lord. In the evening the storm driv-

ing us into the House again, I strongly exhorted a very genteel

audience (such as I have rarely seen in England) to "ask for

the old paths, and walk therein."

Sun. 2-. Being still pent up by the north-east wind, Dr.

Coke preached at six in the morning to adeeply affected con-

gregation. I preached at eight, on Rom. viii. 33. At one,

Mr. Vivian, a Local Preacher, preached in French, the language

ofthe island. At five, as the House would not contain half the

congregation, I preached in a tolerably sheltered place, on

the "joy there is in heaven over one sinner that repenteth ;"

I then
and both high and low seemed to hear it gladly.

designed to meet the society, but could not. The people pressed

so eagerly on every side, that the House was filled presently ;

so that I could only give a general exhortation, to walk worthy

of their profession.

I was in hopes of sailing in the morning, Monday, 3 ; but the

storm so increased, that it was judged impracticable. The con-

gregation in the evening increased every day ; so I trust we

were detained for good purpose. They appeared to be more

and more affected; so that I believe we were not detained for

nothing.

Tues. 4. The storm continued, so that we could not stir. I

took awalk to-day, through what is called the New-Ground,

where the Gentry are accustomed to walk in the evening. Both

[Sept. 1787.

the upper ground, which is as level as a bowling-green, and the

lower, which is planted with rows of trees, are wonderfully beau-

tiful. In the evening I fully delivered my own soul, by showing

what it is to build upon a rock. But still we could not sail ;

the wind being quite contrary, as well as exceeding high. It

was the same on Wednesday. In the afternoon we drank tea

at a friend's, who was mentioning a Captain just come from

France, that proposed to sail in the morning for Penzance ; for

which the wind would serve, though not for Southampton. In
this we plainly saw the hand of God ; so we agreed with him

immediately ; and in the morning, Thursday, 6, went on board

with a fair, moderate wind ; but we had but just entered the

ship when the wind died away. We cried to God for help, and

it presently sprung up, exactly fair, and did not cease till it

brought us into Penzance bay.

We appeared to our friends here, as men risenfrom the dead.

Great was their rejoicing over us ; and great was the power of

God in the midst of the congregation, while I explained and

applied those words, " Whosoever doeth the will of God, the

same is my brother, and sister, and mother."

Sat. 8.-Dr. Coke preached at six to asmany as the preaching-

house would contain. At ten I was obliged to take the field,

by the multitude of people that flocked together. I founda

very uncommon liberty of speech among them; and cannot

doubt but the work of God will flourish in this place. In the

evening I preached at St. Ives, (but it being the market-day,

I could not stand, as usual, in the market-place,) in a very

convenient field at the end of the town, to a very numerous

congregation : I need scarce add, and very serious ; for such are

all the congregations in the county of Cornwall.

Sun. 9.-About nine I preached at the Copper-works, three

or four miles from St. Ives, to a large congregation gathered

from all parts ; I believe, " with the demonstration of the Spirit."

I then met the society in the preaching-house ; which is unlike

any other in England, both as to its form and materials. It

is exactly round, and composed wholly of brazen slags; which,

I suppose, will last as long as the earth. Between one and two

I began in the market-place at Redruth, to the largest congre-

gation I ever saw there ; they not only filled all the windows,

but sat on the tops of the houses. About five I began in the

pit at Gwennap. I suppose we had athousand more than ever

Sept. 1787.] JOURNAL. 399

were there before : But it was all one; my voice was strengthened

accordingly, so that every one could hear distinctly.

Mon. 10. I had alarge congregation at five, and a peculiar

blessing. Thence I went to Mr. Mill's, the Rector of Kenwyn,

half a mile from Truro ; a house fit for a Nobleman; and the

most beautifully situated of any I have seen in the county. At

noon I preached in the preaching-house at Truro. It was well

filled with deeply attentive hearers. Thence we went on through

a swiftly improving country to St. Austle; and preached in the

new House, though not quite finished, to a crowded audience,

who seemed all sensible that God was there. The old House

was well filled at five in the morning, Tuesday, 11. I did not

design to preach at Liskeard, but finding a few people gathered

together, I gave them a short discourse ; and then went on to

Torpoint, where several of our brethren from the Dock were

waiting for us : So we crossed over without loss of time, to an

earnest, affectionate people. The House would ill contain the

congregation in the evening, and ajoyful meeting it was.

Wed. 12. We went over to Mount Edgecomb, and walked

through all the improvements. The situation is fine indeed.

The lofty hill, nearly surrounded by the sea, and sufficiently

adorned with trees, but not crowded, is uncommonly pleasant ;

but it did not strike me like Lord Harcourt's seat at Newnham.

And are all these things to be burned up ?

At noon I preached at Plymouth. The House was crowded

enough, and a solemn awe sat on all the people; as likewise in the

evening at Plymouth-Dock. There is an excellent spirit in this

people; and such general peace and unanimity as neverwasbefore.

Thur. 13. We set out early, and dined at Exeter. In the

evening we had a crowded congregation, that drank in every

word. This society likewise increases both in number and

strength. Friday, 13. We took the mail-coach, and in the

afternoon came to Bath. Considering the uncertain notice

which had been given, we had a larger congregation than was

expected ; and many found it a comfortable season, particularly

those that were in heaviness.

Sat. 15. With the assistance of two of my friends, I

answered abundance of letters. In the evening we had an

uncommon congregation, onwhom I strongly enforced the first

principles, (which indeed never can be too much enforced,) "By

grace are ye saved, through faith."

[Oct. 1787.

Sun. 16.-I read Prayers at ten, and preached with a peculiar

blessing; and administered the Lord's Supper to an unusual

number of deeply serious communicants. At half-past two I

began again. The chapel was more than filled. Many could

not get in ; and it was the same case at six in the evening. At

both times I preached considerably longer than I usually do.

Surely the time is come,whenGodwill cause his power to be

known here also.

Mon. 17.-Leaving this society in a better state than it has

been in formany years, I went to Bristol, where my brother has

been for some weeks. By the way I preached at Wintanburn,

on the foundation of a new preaching-house. There was much

rain before I began, and a violent wind all the time I was

preaching ; yet some of these I trust did come to the marriage.

I had now two or three days to answer my letters. Every

evening our Room was well filled with deeply attentive hearers.

Fri. 21. I spent the evening at the School, and was much

pleased with the management of it.

Sun. 23. In the morning my brother read Prayers, and I

preached. In the afternoon I preached in Temple church, to

a very large and serious congregation. My brother desired to

preach in the evening: So by the mouth of two or three wit

nesses shall every word be established.

On Monday and the following days I visited the country

societies ; and had the satisfaction to find most of them growing

in grace, and not decreasing in number.

Thur. 27.-About noon I preached at Castle-Carey. How

are the times changed ! The first of our Preachers that came

hither, the zealous mob threw into the horse-pond : Now high

and low earnestly listen to the word that is able to save their

souls . In the evening I preached at Ditcheat. Friday, 28. I

preached at Ditcheat again, at Shepton-Mallet ; and at Pensford

to such a congregation as I have not seen there formanyyears ;

and on Saturday returned to Bristol.

Sun. 30-I read Prayers, and my brother preached. I

preached in the avenue at Kingswood about two; and at five

near King's Square ; probably the last time this year that I shall

preach in the open air.

Monday, OCTOBER 1, and the three following days, I spoke

to the society one by one, and was much refreshed; as the love of

manywas not growncold, and theirnumberconsiderably increased.

Oct. 1787.1

Fri. 5.-I preached at noon in Keynsham ; and the power of

Godwas present in an uncommon degree : So it was when I

met the children at Miss Bishop's, and afterwards those at Mr.

Simpson's. I verily think, the spirit and behaviour ofthese two

sets of children gradually affect the whole place ; which now

retains scarce anything of the brutality and savageness for which

itwas eminentsome years ago. In the eveningwe had awatch-

night at Kingswood. The weather was exceeding rough : Yet

the House was filled ; and few went away till after the noon of

night.

Sun. 7.-I preached morning and evening, and took a solemn

leave of the affectionate people. Monday, 8. Having taken the

whole mail-coach on Saturday, Iwent to it on Monday between

three and four ; andfound, to mygreat surprise,it was filled with

other passengers ; and the clerk faced me down, I had taken the

coach for Sunday : But some of our friends speaking strong

words, they thought good to provide us another coach ; only

itdid not reach town quite so soon. Iwas, however, soon enough

to meet a large congregation on Tuesday evening, and praise

the Lord together .

Wed. 10.-1 retired, and spent the rest of the week in answer-

ing letters, and preparing matter for the Magazine.

Sun. 14. I preached in West-Street chapel morning and

afternoon ; and at St. Swithin's church in the evening. Mon-

day, 15. I began a little tour through Oxfordshire. I preached

at Wallingford in the evening, with much enlargement of heart.

Mr. Pentycross called upon me in the morning. Tuesday, 16.

Calvinism and bitterness are fled away together, and we will-

ingly gave each other the right hand of fellowship. About one

I preached at Oxford, to a very quiet, deeply serious congrega-

tion. The House at Witney would nothing near contain the

people in the evening : It was well filled at five on Wednesday

morning. I dearly love this people ; they are so simple of heart,

and so much alive to God. After dinner we returned to Oxford.

Half an hour before thehour ofpreaching, aheavy rain began ;

by this means the House was filled, and not overfilled. I found

great liberty of speech in enforcing the first and great command-

ment; and could not but hope there will be a great work ofGod

here, notwithstanding all the wisdom ofthe world.

Thur. 18.-We went on to High-Wycomb. The work of

God is so considerably increased here, that although three


galleries are added to the preaching-house, it would scarce con-

tain the people. Even at five in the morning, Friday, 19, it

was throughly filled. Neverbefore was there so fair a prospect

ofdoing good at this place. I dined in London.

Sun. 21. I preached in the morning at Spitalfields, with

the usual success ; in the afternoon at the new chapel, on the

remarkable answer of Balaam to Balak's question. (Micah vi.

8.) How clear light had Balaam at that time ! But he soon

turned back, and " loved darkness rather than light."

Mon. 22.-I went to Canterbury, and preached in the even-

ing on the first and great commandment ; in the morning, Tues-

day, 23, on the second. We then went on to Dover. In the

evening I strongly applied the parable of the Sower toa crowded

audience. Wednesday, 24. I spoke equally plain in the morn-

ing. About noon (after an intermission of fifteen years) I

preached at Sandwich, to more than the House contained, on

Luke ix. 62. God applied his word to manyhearts, so that I

have at length a hope for Sandwich also. In the evening I

preached at Margate. The word was quick and powerful. So

it was likewise, in the morning, Thursday, 25. Agood work

has been wrought here since I was here before. Here is now a

lively, loving society, who adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour.

In returning to Canterbury, I called upon Mr. Kingsford, a
man of substance as well as piety. He informed me, "Seven

years ago, I so entirely lost the use of myankles andknees, that

I could no more stand than a new-born child. Indeed, I could

not lie in bed without apillow laid between mylegs, one ofthem

being unable to bear the weight of the other. I could notmove

from place to place, but on two crutches. All the advice I had

profited me nothing. In this state I continued above six years.

Last year I went on business to London, then to Bristol and

Bath. At Bath I sent for a Physician ; but beforehe came, as

I sat reading the Bible, I thought, 'Asa sought to the Physi-

cians, and not to God ; but God cando more for me than any

Physician.' Soon after I heard a noise in the street ; and, rising

up, found I could stand. Beingmuch surprised, I walked several

times about the room ; then I walked into the Square, andafter-

wards on the Bristol road : And from that time I have been per-

fectly well, having as full a use of all my limbs as I had seven

years ago."
We had a comfortable opportunity in the evening, and early

Nov. 1787.] JOURNAL. 403

in the morning ; and I left Canterbury, Friday, 26, with a

stronghope that thework of God will flourish here, as it has

notdone formany years. In the evening I preached to a lovely

congregation at Chatham; andon Saturday returned to London.

Mon. 29. I looked over all the manuscripts which I had

collected for the Magazine, destroyedwhat I did not think worth

publishing, and corrected the rest. Tuesday, 30. I wentdown

to Miss Harvey's, at Hinxworth, in Hertfordshire. Mr. Simeon,

from Cambridge, met me there ; who breathes the very spirit of

Mr. Fletcher. The chapel was quite crowded in the evening.

I preached on that inexhaustible text, and with much liberty of

spirit, " By grace are ye saved through faith." In the morning,

Wednesday, 31, I preached on the Woman ofCanaan ; and in

the afternoon went over to Mr. Hick's, at Wrestlingworth,

through such roads as no chaise could pass : So we had the

pleasure of riding in a farmer's cart. Itwas such amotion as I

never felt before : But to make amends, the church was so filled

as I never had seen it; and Iwas enabled to speak with unusual

plainness. Surely some received the truth in the love thereof !

Thur. NOVEMBER 1.-I gave a fair reading to Dr. Gerard's

"Essay on Taste." I should have wondered, but that I had

read his " Plan of Education ; " wherein he advises to read Logic

last. Such an advice could never have been given but by one

thatknew nothing about it. Indeed, he has hardly aclear idea

of anything. Hence it was natural for him to produce this

strange performance, wherein he talks prettily, but quite wide of

the mark, stumbling at first setting out ; for genius is no more

invention, than it is sense or memory.

Fri. 2.-I set out early, and about noonpreached at Barnet,

to a small, serious congregation. I then went on to London.

Sat. 3-. I had a long conversation with Mr. Clulow, on that

execrable Act, called the Conventicle Act. After consulting

theAct of Toleration, withthat ofthe fourteenth of QueenAnne,

we were both clearly convinced, that it was the safest way to

license all our chapels, and all our Travelling Preachers, not as

Dissenters, but simply " Preachers of the Gospel ; " and that no

Justice, or Bench of Justices, has any authority to refuse licens-

ing either the House or the Preachers.

Sun. 4. The congregation at the new chapel was far larger

thanusual ; and the number of communicants was so great, that

I was obliged to consecrate thrice. Monday, 5. In my way to

Dorking, I read Mr. Duff's " Essay onGenius. " It is beyond

all comparison, deeper and more judicious than Dr. G.'s Essay

on that subject. If the Doctor had seen it, (which one can

hardly doubt,) it is awonderhe would publish his Essay. Yet

I cannot approve ofhis method. Why does he not first define

his term, that we may know what he is talking about ? I doubt,

because his own idea of itwas not clear ; for genius is not imagi-

nation, any more than it is invention. If we mean by it a

quality ofthe soul, it is, in its widest acceptation, an extraordi-

nary capacity, either for some particular art or science, or for

all ; for whatever may be undertaken. So Euclid had a genius

for mathematics ; Tully, for oratory : Aristotle and LordBacon

had an universal genius, applicable to every thing.

The congregation was, as usual, large and serious. But there

is no increase in the society. So that we have profited nothing

1 by having our service in the church hours, which some imagined

would have done wonders. I do not know that it has donemore

good anywhere in England ; in Scotland I believe it has.

Tues. 6. I preached about noon at Mitcham. We preached

here many years ago for some time ; but despairing of doing

any good there, totally left the place. A year or two ago a

spark fell upon it, which is now kindled into a flame. So that

the work of God is more lively here, than in any society near

London. I found more life than I expected, in the evening,

among the poor people at Wandsworth, who have been long

swallowed up in the cares of this world. But as theyhave a

little more business, so they have more ease for their souls ; and

seem determined to recover the ground they had lost.

Fri. 9-. A friend offering to bear my expenses, I set out in

the evening, and on Saturday, 10, dined at Nottingham. The

preaching-house (one of the mostelegant inEngland)was pretty
well filled in the evening. Sunday, 11. At ten we had a lovely

congregation ; and a very numerous one in the afternoon. But,

I believe, the House would hardly contain one half ofthose that

came to it. I preached a charity sermon for the Infirmary, which

was the design ofmy coming. This is not a County Infirmary,

but is open to all England ; yea, to all the world ; and everything

about it is so neat, so convenient, and so well ordered, that I

have seen none like it in the threekingdoms. Monday, 12. In

the afternoon we took coach again, and on Tuesday returnedto

London.

:

Dec. 1787.]

-Thur. 15. Even at Poplar I found a remarkable revivalof

the work ofGod. I never saw the preaching-house so filled

before; and the power of the Lord seemed to rest on many of

thehearers.

Sun. 18. We had, as usual, a large congregation and a

comfortable opportunity at Spitalfields. Monday, 19. I began

the unpleasing work of visiting the classes. I still continue to

do this in London and Bristol, as well as in Cork and Dublin.

With the other societies, their respective Assistants supply my

lack of service.

Sun. 25.-I preached two charity sermons at West-Street,

in behalf of our poor children. Herein I endeavoured to warn

them, and all that bring them up, against that English sin,

ungodliness ; that reproach of our nation, wherein we excel all

the inhabitants of the earth .

Thur. 29.-I preached at Mr. Edwards's, in Lambeth. How

wonderfully does God fit people for their work ! Here Mrs. 1

Edwards, a person of no extraordinary natural abilities, teaches

near ahundred children, and keeps them in as good, ifnot better,

order, thanmost school-mistresses in the kingdom !

Fri. 30.-I met the Committee, to consider the state of our

temporal circumstances. We are still running backward. Some

way must be found to make ourincome answer our expenses.

Sat. DECEMBER 1.-I saw an uncommon instance of distress ;

agentlewoman, who used to keep her coach, shut up with her

four children inadarkdirty room, (herhusband beingimprisoned

for debt, ) without almost any of the necessaries of life. No

wonder ifshehad chose strangling rather than life.

Sun. 2.-I was pressed in spirit to warn our people, in strong

terms, of the Laodicean spirit which had crept in among them.

They received the reproof; andmanybeganto stir up the gift

ofGod that is in them, which immediately appeared from the

very great increase of the morning congregations.

Tues. 4.-I retired to Rainham, to prepare another edition

of the New Testament for the press. Wednesday, 5. I preached

at Purfleet, to a deeply serious congregation, many of whom

walk in the light of God's countenance. Thursday, 6. I

preached to a large congregation at Rainham. I trust some

good will be done here also.

Fri. 7.-I returned to London, and again considered what
was to be done in our present temporal circumstances. After

[Dec.1787.

much consultation, they desired me, 1. To appoint a few of our

brethren to divide the town between them,anddesire our brethren

thatwere able to assist in this exigence : 2. That a collection

should be made in all our preaching-houses for the same pur-

pose. Above three hundred pounds were raised by these means,

whereby the whole difficulty was removed.

Sun. 9.-1 went down at half-hour past five, but found no

Preacher in the chapel, though we had three or four in the

house: So I preached myself. Afterwards, inquiring why none

ofmy family attended the morning preaching, they said, it was

because they sat up too late. I resolved to put a stop to this ;

and therefore ordered, that, 1. Every one under my roof should

go to bed at nine ; that, 2. Every one might attend the morning-

preaching : And so they have done ever since.

Mon. 10. I was desired to see the celebrated wax-work at

theMuseum in Spring-Gardens: It exhibits most of the crowned

heads inEurope, and shows their characters in their countenance.

Sense and majesty appear in the King of Spain ; dulness and

sottishness in the King of France ; infernal subtlety in the late

King of Prussia; (as wellas in the skeleton Voltaire;) calmness

and humanity in the Emperor, and King of Portugal; exquisite

stupidity in the Prince of Orange ; and amazing coarseness,

with everything that is unamiable, in the Czarina.

In the evening I preached at Peckham to a more awakened

congregation than ever I observed there before.

Thur. 13. I preached in the evening at Miss Teulon's, in

Highgate. I never saw such a congregation there before. Will

there then be good done here at last ? Well ; nothing is too

hard for God!

Sun. 16. After preaching at Spitalfields, I hastened to St.

John's, Clerkenwell, and preached acharity sermon for the Fins-

bury Dispensary ; as I would gladly countenance every institu-

tion of the kind.

Tues. 18.-I retired to Newington, and hid myself for almost

three days. Friday, 21. The Committee proposed to me, 1.

That families of men and women should sit together in both

chapels : 2. That every one who took apew should have it as

his own : Thus overthrowing, at one blow, the discipline which

I have been establishing for fifty years !

Sat. 22.-I yielded to the importunity of apainter, and sat

an hour and a half, in all, for my picture. I think it was the

March, 1788. ] JOURNAL.
best that ever was taken; but what is the picture of a man

above fourscore ?

Mon. 24. We had another meeting of the Committee ; who

after a calm and loving consultation,judged it best, 1. That the

menand women should sit separate still ; and, 2. That none

should claim any pew as his own, either in the new chapel, or

in West-Street .

[N. B. A part of Mr. Wesley's Journal which should come

in here, is lost or mislaid, and cannot be found. ]

FEBRUARY 25, 1788.-I took a solemn leave of the congre-

gation at West-Street, by applying once more what I had

enforced fifty years before, "By grace are ye saved, through

faith. " At the following meeting, the presence of God, in a

marvellous manner, filled the place. The next evening we had

avery numerous congregation at the new chapel, to which I

declared the whole cuonsel of God. I seemed now to have fin-

ished my work in London. If I see it again, well; if not, I

prayGod to raise up others, thatwill be more faithful and more

successful in his work !

Thur. 28. I set out in the mail-coach, and the next morn-

ingcametoBath. HereI found apleasing prospect : The con-

gregations are larger than ever. The society is, at length, at

unity in itself; and, consequently, increases both in grace and

number.

Sat. MARCH 1.-(Being Leap-year.) I considered, What dif-

ference do I find by an increase ofyears ? I find, 1. Less activ-

ity ; I walk slower, particularly up-hill : 2. My memory is not

so quick : 3. I cannot read so well by candle-light. But I bless

God, that all my other powers of body and mind remainjust as

theywere.

Sun. 2.-I preached at eleven, at half an hour past two, and

at half-hour past five. The first congregation was large, and

so was the second ; but the third was far the largest, filling

every corner of the House. And the power of God seemed to

increase with the number of the people ; insomuch that in the

evening, while I was applying, " To me to live is Christ, and to

die is gain," the glory of the Lord seemed to overshadow the

congregation in an uncommonmanner : And I trust the impres-

sion thenmade upon rich and poor will not soonwear off.

Mon. 3.-I went on to Bristol, and having two or three quiet

days, finished my sermon upon Conscience. On Tuesday I


gave notice ofmy design to preach on Thursday evening, upon

(what is now the general topic) Slavery. In consequence of

this, on Thursday, the House from end to end was filled with

high and low, rich and poor. I preached on that ancient pro-

phecy, " God shall enlarge Japhet. And he shall dwell in the

tents of Shem ; and Canaan shall be his servant." About the

middle of the discourse, while there was on every side attention

still as night, a vehement noise arose, none could tell why, and

shot like lightning through the whole congregation. The terror

and confusion were inexpressible. You might have imagined it

was acity taken by storm. The people rushed upon each other

with the utmost violence ; the benches were broke in pieces ;

and nine-tenths of the congregation appeared to be struck with

the same panic. In about six minutes the storm ceased, almost

as suddenly as it rose ; and, all being calm, I went on without

the least interruption.

It was the strangest incident of the kind I ever remember ;

and I believe none can account for it, without supposing some

preternatural influence. Satan fought, lest his kingdom should

be delivered up. We set Friday apart as aday of fasting and

prayer, that God would remember those poor outcasts of men;

and (what seems impossible with men, considering the wealth

and power of their oppressors) make away for them to escape,

and break their chains in sunder.

Fri. 7-. I went over to Kingswood School, and found every-

thing there in excellent order. Sunday, 9. I preached at the

Room, morning and afternoon, (Mr. Collins reading Prayers,)

and about two at the School ; though the House would very ill

containthe congregation. Monday, 10, and the three following

days, I visited the classes; which contained (after many added,

and many lost or removed) a little more than nine hundred

members. I wonder that, with such Preachers, there is so little

increase. Dublin has outrun Bristol already : So will Manches.

ter, Sheffield, and even Birmingham soon, unless they stir them-

selves up before the Lord.

Wed. 12. I preached in the eveningat anewplace, in Little

George-Street, the poorest part of the city, and great was our

rejoicing in the Lord among this willing people.

Sat. 15. In the evening, having no other time, I preached

once more in Temple church. I had no thought of meddling

with the controversy which has lately pestered this city, till I

March, 1788.1 409

read those words in the Second Lesson which threw me full

upon it, " Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction

from the presence of the Lord, andfrom the glory of his power."

I then thought it my duty to speak clearly and strongly upon
thathead.

Sun. 16.-I was invited by the Mayor, Mr. Edger, to preach

inhis chapel, and afterwards to dine with him at the Mansion-

House. Most of the Aldermen were at church, and a multitude

of high and low ; to whom I explained and applied that awful

passage of Scripture,-the history of Dives and Lazarus.

Mon. 17. I began my northern journey, in a mild, lovely

morning. In the evening I preached to so crowded an audi-

ence, at Stroud, as I have not seen there for some years. Tues-

day, 18. I preached in Painswick at ten. Here also we wanted

room for the audience ; and allwere still as night. At six in the

evening I began at Gloucester. Here it seems the scandal of

the cross (such is the will of God) is ceased. High and low,

rich and poor, flock together, and seem to devour the word. I

preached on building upon a rock, and spoke with all plainness.

Many, I believe, were cut to the heart ; for it was aday ofthe

Lord's power.

Wed. 19. About noon I preached at Tewkesbury, where

also, notwithstanding the market, the House was over-filled ;

and the people were deeply attentive.

The work of God goes on steadily here. More and more are

continually convinced, and convertedto God : Butthe preaching-

house is far too small ; so thatmanywho came could not getin.

We went to Worcester in the afternoon, where also the House is

far too small for the congregation. The Methodistshere haveby

well-doing utterly put to silence the ignorance of foolish men ;

so that they are now abundantlymore indangerby honourthan

by dishonour. Thursday, 21. I went to Stourport. Twenty

years ago there was but one house here; now there are two or

three streets ; and, as the trade swiftly increases, it will probably

grow into aconsiderable town. A few years since Mr. Cowell

largely contributed to the building ofa preaching-house here, in

which both Calvinists and Arminians might preach : But when

it was finished, the Arminian Preachers were totally excluded.

Rather than go to law, Mr. Cowell built another House, both

larger and more convenient. I preached there at noon to a

large congregation, but to amuch largerin the evening. Several

[March,1788.

Clergymen were present, and were as attentive as any of the

people. Probably there will be a deep work of God at this

place.

Sat. 22.-I breakfasted at Mr. Lister's, in Kidderminster,

with a few very serious and pious friends. In the evening we

had a Sunday congregation at Birmingham .

Here there is a glorious increase of the work of God. The

society is risen to above eight hundred; so that it is at pre-

sent inferior to none inEngland, except those in London and
Bristol .

Sun. 23.-We were greatly straitened for room, manybeing

obliged to go away. But I believe all that could squeeze in

found it good to be there ; for, both in the morning and after-

noon, the power ofGod was present to heal. And so indeed it

was on the two following days; particularly on Tuesday even-

ing, while I explained, " Seest thou how faith wrought with

his works, and by works was faith made perfect ? "

Wed. 26. I went on to Wednesbury, the mother-society of

Staffordshire. But few of the old standers are left : I think but

three, out of three hundred and fifteen. However, anew gene-

ration is sprung up, though hardly equal to the former.

Thur. 27.-About noon I preached at Dudley, and with

much liberty of spirit ; but with far more at Wolverhampton in

the evening ; the new House being sufficiently crowded. What

aden of lions was this town for manyyears ! Butnow, itseems,

the last will be first. Friday, 28. We came to our dearfriends

at Madeley. Mrs. Fletcher's health is surprisingly mended ;

and one might take her nephew for a believer of seven years'

standing ; he seems so well established in the faith ofthe

Gospel. The congregation was surprisingly large in the even-

ing ; and great was their solemnjoy, while I applied, “ When

Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear

with him in glory."

Sat. 29.-Having no other time, I went over to Salop, and

spent an afternoon very agreeably. The Roomwas so crowded

in the evening as I never saw it before ; perhaps the more, by

reason of two poor wretches who were executed in the afternoon.

It was given me to speak strong words, such as made the stout-

hearted tremble. Surely there is now, if there never was before,

aday of salvation to this town also.

Sun. 30-. I returned to Madeley ; but we were distressed
April, 1788.1 JOURNAL.

by the large concourse of people. It was too cold to stand

abroad ; and the church could in nowise contain the congrega-

tion. But we could not help it: So as many as could, got in ;

the rest stood without, or went away. The Epistle led me to

preach on the " Three that bear record in heaven," which proved

seasonable for Mrs. Fletcher. In the afternoon, I preached on,

" This is the record, that God hath given unto us eternal life,

and this life is in his Son."

Mon. 31.-About noon I preached at Stafford,to alarge and

serious congregation ; and about six in the evening, at Lane-

End. Our chapel not being able to contain one-third of the

congregation, they stood at the front of Mr. Myat's house,

where they could all hear perfectly; and though the wind was

high, and extremely cold, none seemed to regard it.

Mr. Myat was mentioning a little circumstance which I think

worth relating, for its oddness :-Hehad two catswith kitten at

once ; one ofwhich was the mother of the other, and kittened

three weeks before her. But she would not suffer one of her

kittens to suck at all, till it was almost starved. The younger

cat, seeing this, took the kitten and suckled it till she kittened

herself ; and afterwards suckled it with her own kittens. Who

can account for this ?

Tues. APRIL 1.--We went on to Burslem, where the work of

God still prospers exceedingly. Sinners,-men, women, and

children,-are still convinced and converted to God every day ;

and there are exceeding few that draw back, as they are much

united in affection, and watch over each other in love.

In the evening, before the time of preaching came, the

preaching-house was more than filled. Finding it could not

contain one half ofthe people, I ordered atable to be placed

in the yard ; where they stood very patiently, though the wind

was very high and very cold. Afterwards I spent acomfortable

hour with the society, who completely filled the House.

Wed. 2. This morning I finished Mr. Weston's ingenious

" Dissertations on the Wonders of Antiquity ; " particularly

the Darkness at our Lord's death, and the Pool of Bethesda.

And I quite agree with him, that the chief reason why these

and many other miracles were not even mentioned by the

heathen Historians is, their utter contempt of the Chris-

tians, and their being so accustomed to the "lying wonders "

which were so common in the heathen world ; whence they

[April, 1788.

naturally supposed all the Christian miracles to be of the same

sort.

In the evening I preached to a crowdedcongregation atNew-

castle ; and Godwas in the midst of them. Thursday, 3. I

crossed over to Leek, where for manyyears we seemed to be

ploughing upon the sand ; but at length, the fruit appears.

Their new House would very hardly contain the congregation,

although it blew a storm, so that many of the women could

hardly bear up against the wind. In the evening I preached

at Congleton. Part of the congregation were the Minister and

the Mayor, with several Aldermen : But they seemed astonished

while I opened and strongly applied, " Thou shalt have no other

gods before me."

Fri. 4.-We had another violent storm in going to Maccles-

field. But there all is calm ; their little feuds are removed, and

the work ofGod steadily goes on. Sunday, 6. The new church

was half filled in the morning, but throughly in the afternoon ;

and great was our rejoicing in the Lord, both then and at six in

the evening.

I took a solemn leave ofthem at five in the morning, Monday,

7, and with adeal of difficulty got to New-Mills ; the roads over

the mountains being scarce passable ; but the earnestness of the

congregation made amends for the difficulty of the journey.

They all are athirst for God. Wednesday, 9. At noon I

preached in the chapel at Bullocksmithy ; one of the most famous

villages in the county for allmanner of wickedness. But there

is a change for the better already, and a fair prospect of amuch

greater. In the evening, as well as on the next, the House at

Stockport was throughly filled with people ready prepared for

the Lord, and adorning the doctrine of God our Saviour.

Thur. 10.-About noon I preached at Ashton, to a loving

and lively people, and thence went on to Oldham. But what

could be done here ? I suppose the children alone would have

filled the preaching-house from end to end. We kept the door

locked till a little before the appointed time. Then I went in,
"

and to as many as the House would hold, explained "the rest

that " remaineth for the people of God; " and indeed they had
ears to hear. Afterward, leaving one to preach again, after an

hour's respite I went on to Manchester.

Fri. 12.-The House was well filled in the evening. I

explained and enforced the words of St. James, " Seest thou
April, 1788. ] JOURNAL.

how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith

made perfect ? " Idid not hear that any were offended ; for the

bulk of these are an understanding people.

Sat. 12-. I took aview of the public library, preferable to

most in England. It is annexed to the Blue-Coat School,

wherein fourscore children are provided with all things ; and all

by the munificence of one man, who expressly forbade any one

to add thereto.

Sun. 13.-Mr. Simpson assisting,we dealt very well with a

crowded congregation. I suppose we had about a thousand

communicants ; and surely God was among them : And so He

was in the evening,while I applied,"Thou shalt haveno other

gods before me."

Mon. 14. At noon I preached at Northwich, to such a con-

gregation as ever scarce was seen there before ; and had a good

hope that, after all the storms, good will be done here also. In

the evening I preached to the affectionate congregation at

Chester,who want nothing but more life and fire. Tuesday, 15.

I was desired to preach upon the Trinity. The chapel was

sufficiently crowded ; and surelyGod answered for himself to all
candid hearers.

Wed. 16.-I preached about eleven at Warrington, (acold,

uncomfortable place,) and in the evening at Liverpool. The

House was extremely crowded, and I found great liberty of

spirit ; but still more the next evening, while Iwas openingand

applying the parable of the Sower. How much seed has been

sown in this town ! And, blessed be God, all is not lost. Some

has brought forth thirty, some sixty, and some a hundred fold.

Fri. 18.-Notice having been given at Wigan ofmy preach-

ing a sermon for the Sunday-schools, the people flocked from all

quarters in such amanner as never was seen before. I spoke

with all possible plainness on, "Repent ye, and believe the

Gospel; " and it seemed to sink deep into the hearts of the

hearers. Surely " the kingdom ofheaven is at hand."

Sat. 19. Wewent on to Bolton, where I preached in the

evening in one of the most elegant Houses in the kingdom, and

to one of the liveliest congregations. And this I must avow,

there is not such a set of singers in anyof the Methodist congre-

gations in the three kingdoms. There cannot be ; for we have

near ahundred such trebles, boys and girls, selected out of our

Sunday-schools, and accuratelytaught, as arenot found together

[April, 1788.

in any chapel, cathedral, or music-room within the four seas.

Besides, the spirit with which they all sing, and the beauty of

many of them, so suits the melody, that I defy any to exceed it ;

except the singing of angels in our Father's house.

Sun. 20. At eight, and at one, the House was throughly

filled. About three I met between nine hundred anda thousand

of the children belonging to our Sunday-schools. I never saw

such a sight before. They were all exactly clean, as well as

plain, in their apparel. All were serious and well-behaved.

Many, both boys and girls, had as beautiful faces as, I believe,

England or Europe can afford. When they all sung together,

and none of them out of tune, the melody was beyond that of

any theatre ; and, what is best of all, many of them truly fear

God, and some rejoice in his salvation. These are a pattern to

all the town. Their usual diversion is to visit the poorthatare

sick, (sometimes six, or eight, or ten together,) to exhort, com-

fort, and praywith them. Frequently ten or more of them get

together to sing and pray by themselves; sometimes thirty or

forty ; and are so earnestly engaged, alternately singing, praying,

and crying, that they know not how to part. You children

that hear this, why should not you go and do likewise ? Is not

God here as well as at Bolton ? Let God arise and maintain

his own cause, even "out of the mouths of babes and

sucklings ! "

Mon. 21. I went on, through miserable roads, to Blackburn ;

where, notwithstanding the continued rain,the new preaching-

house was throughly filled with serious, well-behaved people.

Tuesday, 22. Through equally good roads we got on to

Padiham. I preached at eleven to as quiet a congregation,

though not so lively, as that at Bolton. From hence we went

in the afternoon, through still morewonderful roads, toHasling-

den. They were sufficient to lame any horses, and shake any

carriage in pieces. N.B. I will never attempt to travel these

roads again, till they are effectually mended !

Agentleman, no way connected with us, has built us a neat

preaching-house here, desiring only three per cent. for what he

has laid out, (about eight hundred pounds,) provided the seats
let for so much, of which there is little doubt. Itwaswell filled

in the evening with serious people, lying in the midst of many

societies. Wednesday, 23. We hobbled on to Bury, through

roads equally deplorable ; but we met a lively congregation,

May, 1788.1

whichmade us forget our labour. In the evening I preached

to another lively congregation at Rochdale. Formerly we had

much trouble here : But it is past ; and theynow hold the unity

of the Spirit in the bond ofpeace.

Thur. 24.-About tenwe began the Service in the church at

Todmorden, crowded sufficiently. I found uncommon liberty

among these poor mountaineers. We had a pleasant road from

hence to Burnley, where a multitude of people were waiting;

but wehad no house that could contain them. Just then the

rain ceased : So we went into the inn-yard, which contained them

well ; and itwas an acceptable season, as indeed it was both the

times before when I preached at Bury.

Fri. 25. In the evening I preached at Colne. This is the

fifth rainy daywe have had. However, the House was pretty

well filled ; and I strongly exhorted them that had left their first

love, to remember from whence they had fallen, to repent, and

to do their first works.

Sun. 27. I preached at Haworth church in the morning,

crowded sufficiently ; as was Bingley church in the afternoon :

But, as verymanycould not get in, Mr. Wrigley preached to

them in the street ; so that they did not come in vain. In the

evening we went on to Halifax.

Mon. 28. The House in the evening was throughly filled

with hearers that devoured the word. Tuesday, 29. I was

desired to preach in the church at Sowerby, four miles from

Halifax. It stands on the brow of ahigh and steep mountain.

Rich and poor flocked together to it ; whom I exhorted to

acquaint themselves with God, and be at peace. I found much

liberty of spirit among them ; and still more at Halifax in the

evening, when it seemed as if the windows of heaven were

opened ; as also at five in the morning, when I took a solemn

leave of this affectionate people.

Wed. 30.-About eleven the Service began at Honley. After

the Curate had read Prayers to a large and serious congrega-

tion, I preached, on, " It is appointed unto men once to die."

I believe many felt as well as heard the word. About six I

preached at Huddersfield ; where our brethren are now all at

peace and unity with each other. In the evening I went to our

quiet and delightful retreat at Longwood-House.

Thur. MAY 1.-The congregation at five was exceeding

large, coming from many miles round; but that at Shelly, a

[May, 1788,

lone place, six or seven miles from Huddersfield, where I was

constrained to preach in the open air at nine, was six or seven

times larger ; indeed, the largest I have seen since I left Man-

chester; and the power of Godwas eminently present, both to

wound and to heal. I believe the congregation at Wakefield in

the evening was larger even than this ; and the verdure of the

trees, the smoothness of the meadow, the calmness ofthe evening,

and the stillness ofthe whole congregation,made it a delightful

sight.

Fri. 2.-I went on to Bradford. I feared the jars which had

been here would have lessened the congregation; but it was

as large as ever I remember it on a week-day ; and as deeply
attentive as ever. Alarge number attended again at five in the

morning. In the afternoon I spent some hours with the Trus-

tees of Eccleshill House ; but I might aswell have talked to so

many posts. In the evening we had a lovely congregation

again, to whom I explained the former part ofRev. xiv. These

had ears to hear ; and many of them rejoiced with joy full of

glory.

Sun. 4. It was not without extreme difficulty that we could

get intothe church ; but it was worth all the labour. I strongly

applied those words in the Epistle for the day, " The end of all

things is at hand ; be ye therefore sober, andwatchunto prayer."

It seemed as if the whole congregationwas moved. I believe

that hour will not soon be forgotten.

The concourse of people at Birstal, about four, was greater

than ever was seen there before ; and the wind being very high,

it was feared not half of them would be able to hear : But God

was better to them than their fears. Afterwards we found that

all could hear distinctly ; so, if they hear no more, I am clear

of their blood. I have declared to them the whole counsel

ofGod.

Mon. 5.-About nine I preached to the loving people at

Morley, on 1 Pet. i. 3, and then went forward to Leeds ; where

(Mr. Hey having sent meword that it was not convenient for

him to receive me) Mr. Floyd, and every one in his house,

received me with all gladness. We had a full House in the

evening. I explained and applied James ii. 22, which I

suppose was never more needful to be insisted upon than it is

this day.

Tues. 6.-About eleven I accepted the invitation of Mr.

May, 1788. ] 417

Stone, a truly pious and active man,and preached in his church

atRawdon, ten miles from Leeds, to a very serious congregation,

on Mark i. 15 : " Repent ye, and believe the Gospel."

In the evening I preached at Otley to a lovely congregation,

and at five in the morning. At four in the afternoon I preached

at Pateley-Bridge; and setting out at four on Friday morning,

reached Kendal that evening, (sixty-one miles,) and Whitehaven

at five on Saturday, 10.

The congregation in the evening rejoiced much, as they had

not seen me for four years. But scarce any of the old standers

are left : Two-and-forty years have swept them away. Let us

who are left live to-day. "Now is the day of salvation."

MAY 11 .-(Being Whitsunday.) In the morning, while those

words were applied, "And they were all filled with the Holy

Ghost," his power was eminently present in the congregation ;

but much more in the evening. At noon Joseph Bradford

preached in the market-place to a numerous congregation ; and

I am not without hope, that poor Whitehaven will lift up its

head again.

Mon. 12.-About eight I began preaching in the market-

house at Cockermouth. I was surprised to find several of those

that are called the best of the town there ; and they were one

and all serious and attentive : So we had a solemn parting.

Hence we went on to Carlisle. I never found this society so

well united before. The preaching-house, begun three or four

years ago, is now completely finished. It is neat, lightsome, and

cheerful ; but it was very ill able to contain the congregation.

Several Ministers were there ; and so was the power of God, in

an uncommon degree. All that were under the roof seemed to

be moved more or less ; and so they were in the morning, Tues-

day, 13, when I besought them to present themselves a living

sacrifice to God.

To-day we went on through lovely roads to Dumfries.

Indeed all the roads are wonderfully mended since I last travel-

led thisway. Dumfries is beautifully situated ; but as to wood

and water, and gently-rising hills, &c. , is, I think, the neatest,

as well as the most civilized, town that I have seen in the king-

dom. Robert Dall soon found me out. He has behaved exceed-

ing well, and done much goodhere ; but he is a bold man : He

has begun building a preaching-house, larger than any in Scot-

land, except those in Glasgow and Edinburgh ! In the evening


I preached abroad in a convenient street, on one side of the

town. Rich and poor attended from every quarter, of whatever

denomination ; and every one seemed to hear for life. Surely

the Scots are the best hearers in Europe !

Wed. 14.-At five I wasimportuned to preachinthepreaching-

house; but such a one I never saw before. It had no windows

at all : So that although the sun shone bright, we could see

nothing without candles. But I believe our Lord shone onmany

hearts, while I was applying those words, " I will, be thou

clean." I breakfasted with poor Mr. Ashton, manyyears ago

amember of our society inLondon ; but far happier now in his

little cottage, than ever he was in his prosperity.

When I was in Scotland first, even at a Nobleman's table, we

had only flesh meat ofonekind,but no vegetables of any kind ;

butnow they areas plentiful here as inEngland. NearDum-

fries there are five very large public gardens, which furnish the

town with greens and fruit in abundance.

The congregation in the evening was nearly double to that

we had the last ; and, if it was possible, more attentive. Indeed

one or two gentlemen, so called, laughed at first ; but they

quickly disappeared ; and all were still while I explained the

worship of God in spirit and in truth. Two of the Clergy fol-

lowed me tomy lodging,and gavemeapressing invitation to

their houses. Several others intended,it seems, to do the same;

but having a long journey before me, I left Dumfries earlier in

themorning than they expected. We set out on Thursday, 15,

at four ; and reached Glasgow, Friday, 16, before noon. Much

of the country, as we came, is now well improved ; and the wild-

erness become a fruitful field.

Our new preaching-house will, I believe, contain about as

many as the chapel at Bath. But O the difference ! It has the

pulpit on one side; and has exactly the look of a Presbyterian

meeting-house. It is the very sister of our House at Brentford.

Perhaps an omen ofwhat willbe when I am gone. I preached

at seven to a tolerably large congregation, and to many ofthem

at five in the morning. At six in the evening they were

increased fourfold; but still I could not find theway to their

hearts.

Sun. 18-. I preached at eleven on the parable ofthe Sower;

at half-past two on Psalm 1.23 ; and in the evening on, " Now

abideth faith, hope, love; these three." I subjoined a short

May, 1788. ]

account of Methodism, particularly insisting on the circum-

stances, There is no other religious society under heaven

which requires nothing of men in order to their admission into it,

but adesire to save their souls. Look all round you, you can-

not be admitted into the Church, or society of the Presbyterians,

Anabaptists, Quakers, or any others, unless you hold the same

opinions with them, and adhere to the same mode of worship.

The Methodists alone do not insist onyour holding this or

that opinion ; but they think and let think. Neitherdo they

impose any particular mode of worship ; but you may continue

to worship in your former manner, be itwhat it may. Now, I do

not know any other religious society, either ancient or modern,

wherein such liberty of conscience is now allowed, or has been

allowed, since the age of the Apostles. Here is our glorying ;

and a glorying peculiar tous. What society shares it with us ?

Mon. 19. I went to Edinburgh, and preached to a much

larger congregation thanI used to see here on a week-day. I

still find a frankness and openness in the people of Edinburgh,

which I find in few other parts of the kingdom. I spent two days

among them with much satisfaction ; and I was not at all disap-

pointed, in finding no such increase, either in the congregation

or the society, as many expected from their leaving the Kirk.

Thur. 22. The House at Dalkeith being far too small,

even at eight in the morning, to contain the congregation, I

preached in a garden, on, " Seek ye the Lord while he may be

found : " And from the eager attention of the people, I could not

but hope, that some of them would receive the truth in love.

In the evening I preached in the House at Dunbar, tolerably

well filled, on Job xxii. 2,3 ; I believe with

The spirit of convincing speech :

But much more, at five in the morning, Friday, 23. Andwill

God manifest his power among these dry bones also ? Immedi-

ately after preaching we set out. How is the face of this coun-

try changed in a few years ! Itwas, twenty years ago, dreary

enough ; but is now as a pleasant garden. But what is most

remarkable, is the bridge which connects the two mountains,

the Peas, together; one of the noblest works in Great Britain ;

unless you would except the bridge at Edinburgh, which lies

directly across the Cowgate: So that one street (a thing not

heard of before) runs under another.


About noon we came to Berwick-upon-Tweed ; but the town

being all in a hurry, on occasion of the fair, so that I could not

conveniently preach in the market-house, I was glad that Mr.

Atcheson, the Presbyterian Minister, offered me the use of his

chapel. It was a large commodious place. Several ofhis hear-

ers attended; to whom I spoke exceeding plain, inthe evening,

on 1 Cor. xii. 3 ; and in the morning, on Isaiah lix. 1-3.

Sat. 24.-About one we reached Alnwick. I was a little sur-

prised at the new preaching-house, (in which I preached in the

evening,) exactly resembling the meeting-house we hire at Brent-

ford. Had they no eyes ? Or had they never seen any English

House ? But the scarecrow must now stand without remedy.

Sun. 25. This was theday on which all the Nonjuring con-

gregations in Scotland began, bycommon agreement, to pray in

all their public worship for King George and his family. I

preached at nine, at two, and at half-past five; the last time on

the Gospel for the day, (the history of Dives and Lazarus,) with

much enlargement of spirit. After preaching at five in the

morning, on Matt. xxvi., and taking a solemn leave of the con-

gregation, I went on to Morpeth ; but was informed the Town-

Hall was totally engaged ; the lower part, by a company of

players ; the upper, by a dancing-master. However, the latter

did scruple the having his right: So I preached to the largest

congregation I ever saw there. And our Lord seemed to

Dart into all the melting power

Oflove, and make the mountains flow.

Itwas indeed awonderful season, such as we had scarce had

before since we left Bristol. In the evening I preached at

Newcastle, to such a congregation as was never there before,

unless on a Sunday ; and indeed all the congregations, morn-

ing and evening, were such as had not been before since the

House was built. Surely this is the accepted time for Newcastle.

Perhaps I may see it no more !

At noon I preached in the lower House, to a very crowded
congregation ; and I believe most of them felt that God was

there; for it was as a season ofgreat refreshment. So it was at

the upper House in the evening. Idoubt not but God will be

glorified in both, provided thepeople in each agree to provoke

one another only to love, and to good works.

Sat. 31.-At five I preached in the lower House to a numer-

ous congregation : I believe the greater part of whom had no
June, 1788.1 JOURNAL.

thought of salvation, till they heard the preaching at this place.

Were it only for the sake of these, I do not regret all the trouble

I have had on occasion of this building.

At nine I preached in South-Shields to a large and serious

congregation, ready prepared for the Gospel; in the evening

at Sunderland, to an experienced people, many of whom are

rooted and grounded in love.

Sun. JUNE 1.-I willingly accepted of Mr. Hampson's invi-

tation, and preached in his church morning and afternoon. I

suppose it was hardly ever so filled before. And the power of

Godwas present to heal. It was doubted whether all could

hear. In order to try, Joseph Bradford stood in the farthest

corner ; and he could hear every word. I preached in our chapel

at six ; but abundance of people could not get in. I was sorry

Idid not preach abroad, while so many were athirst for the word.

Mon. 2-. About noon I preached at Cockermouth. I had

never such a season there before: The glory ofthe Lord seemed

to fill the House, and the people trembled before him. We had

such another opportunity at Sunderland in the evening : Surely

God will be glorified in this place !

Tues. 3.-I returned to Newcastle,andpreached in the even-

ing on the " rest" that " remaineth for the people of God :" And

a few have believed our report, and are eager to enter into it.

Thur. 5-. Desiring to pay one more visit to the loving society

in Weardale, I set out early, and drove through wonderful roads

to Wolsingham ; a town near the entrance of the vale. I could

not preach abroad, because of the storm ; and the House would

not near contain the people. However, as many crowded in as

could: The rest got near the door or windows ; and surely the

willing mind was accepted.

In the evening, the wind being still very high, I was obliged

to preach within, in Weardale also ; and it was a time of uncom-

mon blessing. Friday, 6. Going out of my room I missed a

step, and fell forward, so that the edge of one of the stairs came

a quarter of an inch above my right eye, exactly upon my

eyelid. I put a little white paper upon it, which immediately

stopped the bleeding, and preached without any inconvenience.

The work of God has much increased here lately. Many have

been convinced of sin,many justified; some perfected in love,

andmany added to the society.

Fri. 6. We returned to Stanhope, formerly the seat of sev-

422 [June, 1788,

eral great families,now an inconsiderable village. It is eminent

for nothing in this age,but averyuncommondegree of wicked-

ness. I preached at five, in what I understoodwas once the

market-place, to an exceedingly numerous congregation. I

preached on Isaiah lv. 6, 7 ; and, if ever, with the demonstration

ofthe Spirit. The people were all bowed down together, as the

heart of one man. Surely Godwill have a people in this place!

Sat. 7. Our brethren thought the preaching-house would

containthe congregation at five in the morning. It was a large

upper room : But before I began to speak, it was exceedingly

crowded; and the mainbeamthat supported it giving way, the

floor began to sink. Some crying out,"The room is falling! "

oneman leaped out of the window; the rest slowly and quietly

went out, without the least hurry or confusion ; so that nothing

was hurt except a poor dog that was under the window. I then

preached in the open air, to twice or thrice as many as the

room would have contained, who were all attention. O how

white are these fields to the harvest !

About twelve, I preached to alovely congregation at Burn-

upfield, on, " Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous." I have

found nothing like it since I left London; such was

The' o'erwhelming power ofgrace divine ;

I know not that ever I felt such self-abasement before ; and

thewhole congregation seemed almost equallymoved. And so

they were at Newcastle in the evening, while I explained and

strongly applied, " I am the all-sufficient God: Walk before

me, and be thou perfect."

Sun. 8.-I preached at the Ballast-Hills, about half an hour

after eight. I think thecongregationwasnearlydouble to that

Ihad here two years ago ; and they increased in earnestness as

much as in number. About two I preached at Gateshead-Fell,

to I suppose twice as many as were at the Ballast-Hills, on the

joy that is in heaven "over one sinner that repenteth." Though

the sunwas very hot, and the windverycold, the people regarded

neither one nor the other. They seemed only to attend to the

voice of God, and the breathing of his Spirit.

In the evening I preached near the Keelmen's Hospital,

within sight of the place where I preached the first Sunday I

was at Newcastle ; and I think to the largest congregation which

Ihave seen at Newcastle since that time. The Second Lesson

June, 1788.1 JOURNAL. 423

for the Evening Service supplied me with a text, 2 Cor. vi. 1 :

"We then, as workers," &c. The people appeared to devour

the word, and I did not spare them. I was then ready to say,

"Now I am clear from the blood of these men." No, I dare

not ! Ijudge not my own self! He thatjudgeth me is the Lord.

Mon. 9. I preached at Durham about eleven, to more than

theHouse could contain. Even in this polite and elegant city,

we now want a larger chapel. In the evening I preached near

our preaching-house, to a large multitude ; I think, as numerous

as that at Gateshead-Fell. Many of the Durham Militia, with

several of their officers, were there: And all of them seemed

to receive the word, "not as the word of man; but, as it is

indeed, the word of God."

Tues. 10. We went through one of the pleasantest countries

I ever saw, to Darlington. Before I left Newcastle, I was

desired to read a strange account of a young woman, late of

Darlington. But I told the personwho brought it, " I can form

no judgment till I talk with Margaret Barlow herself." This

morning she came to me, and again in the afternoon ; and I

asked her abundance of questions. I was soon convinced, that

she wasnot only sincere,but deep in grace ; and therefore incap-

able of deceit. I was convinced likewise, that she had frequent

intercourse with a spirit that appeared in the form of an angel .

I know not how tojudge of the rest. Her account was :-" For

above a year, I have seen this angel, whose face is exceeding

beautiful; her raiment," so she speaks, "white as snow, and glis-

tering like silver; her voice unspeakably soft and musical. She

tells me many things before they come to pass. She foretold,

I should be ill at such atime, in such a manner, and well at

such an hour ; and it was so exactly. She has said, such a per-

son shall die at such a time; and he did so. Above two months

ago, she told me, your brother was dead; (I did not know you

hadabrother;) and that he was in heaven. And some time

since she told me,you will die in less than ayear. But what

she has most earnestly and frequently toldme, is, that God will

in a short time be avenged of obstinate sinners,and will destroy

them with fire from heaven." Whether this will be so or no, I

cannot tell ; but when we were alone, there was a wonderful

power in her words; and as the Indian said to David Brainerd,

"They did good to my heart."

It is above a year since this girl was first visited in this man-

June, 1788.

ner, being then between fourteen and fifteen years old. But she

was then quite awomanish girl,andofunblamable behaviour.

Suppose that which appeared to her was really an angel ; yet

from the face, the voice, and the apparel, she might easily mis-

take him for a female; and this mistake is of little consequence.

Much good has already resulted from this odd event ; and is

likely to ensue ; provided those who believe, and those who dis-

believe, her report,havebut patience with each other.

We had a love-feast in the evening, at which several spoke

deep experience in a plain, artless manner ; and many were

greatly comforted, and stirred up more intensely to hunger and

thirst after righteousness .

Wed. 11. About noon I preached at Stockton ; but the

House would not contain the congregation ; nor indeed at

Yarm, in the evening. Here I heard what was quite new to me,

namely, that it is now the custom, in allgood company to give

obscene healths, even though Clergymen be present ; one of

whom, lately refusing to drink such ahealth, was put out ofthe

room; and one of the forwardest, in this worthy company, was

a Bishop's steward.

Thur. 12.-Between one and two we had a larger congrega

tion at Potto than I ever saw there before. At Hutton-Rudby,

in the evening, I spoke strongly to the backsliders ; and I think

not invain.

At eight I preached to a lovely congregation, at Stokesley,

with much liberty of spirit ; and at eleven, in Guisborough, to

one far larger, and equally attentive. In the evening I preached

at Whitby, in the new House, throughly filled above and below ;

though it contains twice asmany as the old one ; and although

the unfinished galleries, having as yet no fronts, were frightful

to look upon. It is the most curious House we have in England.
:

You go up to it by about forty steps ; and have then before you

a lofty front, I judge, near fifty feet high, and fifty-four feet

broad. So much gainers havewe been by the loss of the former

House. Beside that it stood at one end of the town, and in the

very sink of it, where people of any fashion were ashamed to be

seen.

Sat. 14.-At five in the morning we had a large congregation;

but it wasmore than doubled in the evening ; and at both times

I could not but observe the uncommon earnestness ofthe people.

Sunday, 15. The House was well filled at seven. For the sake

. 425
June, 1788.1 JOURNAL

of the country people, who flocked from all sides, I preached

again at halfan hour past one, on, " The end of all things is at

hand: Be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer." After

preaching at five, on the education of children, I made a collec-

tion for Kingswood School ; the rather, that I might have an

opportunity of refuting that poor, threadbare slander, of my

"getting so much money." We concluded our service with a

comfortable love-feast.

Mon. 16. From the plain people at Whitby I went on to

the elegant congregation at Scarborough. I was surprised at

their flocking together in such numbers,-many more than the

House could contain ; and I strongly enforced, " Now is the

accepted time, now is the day ofsalvation."

Tues. 17.-Desiring Joseph Bradford to preach at five, I did

not preach till three. I then urged, on a very genteel congre-

gation, " One thing is needful ; " and surely the power of the

Lord was present to heal them, in amanner I have not often

found; and again in the evening, while I enforced, " He is able

to save to the uttermost all them that come unto God by him."

Wed. 18.-I designed to preach in the street, at Bridlington ;

butthe wind and dust would not suffer it. So as many as could

pressed into the House ; but near as many were constrained to go

away. I preached on Rev. xx. 12 ; and, I believe, not invain.

Thur. 19. I went about forty miles out of my way, to see

my old friends at Malton ; and particularly old Mr. Wilson, at

whose house I first lodged there. Between eleven and twelve I

beganpreachingon," It is appointed unto menonce to die: " And

God applied his word, one would almost have thought, to every

one under the roof. Itwas a glorious opportunity. The people

were gathered frommany miles round, and I think few repented

oftheirlabour. As soon as the service was over, I hasted away,

and reached Beverley (twenty-eight miles) in good time. The

House here, though greatly enlarged, was well filled with high

and low, rich and poor ; and (it being the day of the Archdea-

con's visitation) many of the Clergy were there. I rejoiced in

this, as it might be a means of removing prejudice from many

sincere minds.

Fri. 20. I went on to Hull; and in the evening explained

and applied those remarkable words of our Lord, " Whosoever

doeth the will of God, the same is mybrother, and sister, and

mother." The new preaching-house here is nearly as large as

[June, 1788,

the new chapel in London. It is well built, and elegantly

finished ; handsome, but not gaudy. Saturday, 21. We had a

large congregationat five, larger thaneventhatat Birmingham;

which exceeded all the morning congregations I had then seen.

Sunday, 22. Mr. Clark, the Vicar, inviting me to preach in the

High Church, I explained (what occurred in the Service of the

day)what it is to build our house upon the rock ; andapplied it

as strongly as I could. I dined at the Vicarage with Mr. Clark;

afriendly, sensible man; and, I believe, truly fearing God. And

such, by the peculiar providence of God, are all the three stated

Ministers in Hull. He said he never saw the church so full

before. However, it was still fuller in the afternoon; when, at

the desire of Mr. Clark, I preached on St. James's beautiful

account of the wisdom which is from above. Atsix in the even-

ing I preached in our own House, to as many as could get in,

(but abundance ofpeople went away,) on Gal. vi. 14.

Mon. 23. About eight we reached Mr. Stillingfleet's, at

Hotham; one of the pleasantest places I have seen. Atnine

he read Prayers, and I preached to alarge and serious congre-

gation. At eleven I preached, with much enlargement of heart,

in the new chapel at Market-Weighton; and at half an hourafter
one, in Pocklington: But the House was like an oven. Between

six and seven I began at York, on Rom. xiii. 12. The word

was as fire ; and all that heard it seemed to feel the power

thereof.

Tues. 24.-Having no other opportunity, I went over to

Thirsk, and preached in the evening on 1 Pet. i. 24. All the

congregation were serious, but two young gentlewomen, who

laughed and talked incessantly, till I turnedand spoke expressly

to them. They then seemed to be ashamed.

Wed. 25. Believing the little flock there wanted encourage-

ment, I took Ripon in myway to York, and gave them a strong

discourse on the story of Dives and Lazarus. Many strangers

seemed greatly astonished; and I believe they will not soon

forget what they heard ; for God applied it to their hearts : As

he did also the parable of the Sower at York, I will hope, to

most of the congregation.

Thur. 26. The Vicar of Selby having sentme word that I

was welcome to preach in his church, I went that way. But

before I came he had changed his mind : So I preached in

our own chapel ; and notwithout ablessing. In the evening I

June, 1788.1 427

preached at Thorne, to a larger congregation than ever I saw

in the House before. Friday, 27. At nine I preached in the

church, at Swinfleet, filled from end to end. About eleven I

preached at Crowle, to a large congregation ; and I am now in

hope that there will be a good harvest here also, seeing the

almost perpetual jars are now at an end. Thence I came once

more (perhaps for the last time) to Epworth ; where, by the

prudence and diligence of T. Tattershall, the people have now

forgot their feuds, and are at unity with each other.

Sat. 28. I this day enter onmy eighty-fifth year : And what

cause have I to praise God, as for a thousand spiritual blessings,

so for bodily blessings also ! How little have I suffered yet by

" the rush of numerous years ! " It is true, I am not so agile as

I was in times past. I donot run or walk so fast as I did ; my

sight is a little decayed ; my left eye is grown dim, and hardly

serves me to read; I have daily some pain inthe ball of my

right eye, as also in my right temple, (occasioned by a blow

received some months since,) and inmy right shoulder and arm,

which I impute partlyto a sprain, and partly to the rheumatism.

I find likewise somedecay inmy memory, with regard to names

and things lately past ; but not at all with regard to what I

have read or heard, twenty, forty, or sixty years ago ; neither

do I find any decay in my hearing, smell, taste, or appetite ;

(though Iwant but a third part of the food I did once ; ) nor do

I feel any such thing as weariness, either in travelling or preach-

ing: And I am not conscious of any decay in writing sermons ;

which I do as readily, and I believe as correctly, as ever.

To what cause can I impute this, that I am as I am ? First,

doubtless, to the power of God, fitting me for the work to which

I amcalled, as long as He pleases to continue me therein ; and,

next, subordinately to this, to the prayers of his children.

May we not impute it, as inferior means,

1. To my constant exercise and change of air ?

2. To my never having lost a night's sleep, sick or well, at

land or at sea, since I was born ?

3. To my having sleep at command ; so that whenever I feel

myself almost worn out, I call it, and it comes, day or night ?

4. To my having constantly, for above sixty years, risen at

four in the morning ?

5. To my constant preaching at five inthe morning, for above

fifty years ?

[June, 1788.

6. To my having had so little pain in my life; and so little

sorrow, or anxious care ?

Even now, though I find pain daily in my eye, or temple,

or arm; yet it is never violent, and seldom lasts many minutes at

atime.

Whether or not this is sent to give mewarning that I am

shortly to quit this tabernacle, I do not know ; but be it one

way or the other, I have only to say,

My remnant of days

I spend to his praise

Who died the whole world to redeem :

Be they many or few,

My days are his due,

Andthey all are devoted to Him !

I preached in the morning on Psalm xc. 12 ; in the evening

on Acts xiii. 40, 41 ; and endeavoured to improve the hours

between to the best advantage.

Sun. 29. At eight I preached at Misterton, as usual ; about

one to a numerous congregation at Newby, near Haxey ; and

about four at my old stand in Epworth market-place, to the
great congregation. Here there used to be a few mockers ; but
there were none now : All appeared serious as death, while I

applied those solemn words. " When the breath of man goeth

forth, " &c. We concluded with a love-feast, at which many

declared, with an excellent spirit, the wonderful works of God.

Mon. 30.-About eight I preached in Scotter ; and found it

good to be there. About eleven I preached in Scowby, two

miles from Brigg, to a very numerous and serious congregation.

In the afternoon, going just by that curious building, Mr.

Pelham's Mausoleum, I alighted, and took aview of it within

and without. The like, I suppose, is not to be found in England.
: It is exactly round, fifty-two feet in diameter, and will be sixty-

five feet high. The lower part contains, I believe, near a

hundred places for the bodies of the Pelham family. (Owhat a

comfort to the departed spirits, that their carcases shall not above

ground! ) Over this is to be a chapel. It is computed the whole

building will cost sixty thousand pounds.

About five we came to Grimsby ; and, the Vicar reading

Prayers, I preached on the Psalm for the day, "He healeth

them that are broken in heart, and giveth medicine to heal their

sickness. " I think the church is near as large as that at Hull;

July, 1788.]

and it has not been so well filled in the memory of manbefore.

Allwere seriously attentive ; many received the word with joy ;

and some doubtless will bring forth fruit to perfection.

Tues. JULY 1.-The Vicar again read Prayers at eleven ; and

Ipreached on those words in the Second Lesson, " Lord, are

there few that be saved ? " I spoke as plain as possibly I could ;

butGod only can speak to the heart.

The gentleman at whose house I was to lodge coming from

Louth to meet me, his headstrong horse crushed his leg against

agate, with such force, that both the bones were broke and came

through his boot. The horse stood byhim till some countrymen

came, put him into a cart, and brought him home. It is

doubtful whether he will recover ; but death is no terror tohim.

I preached in Louth at six, in the preaching-house ; but per-

haps I had better have been in the market-place. At five in the

morning the Roomwas filled ; and I spoke, as doubting whether I

should see them any more. At eleven I preached at that lovely

spot, Langham-Row. Although Mr. Robinson has made the

chapel twice as large as itwas, yet it would hardly contain the

congregation ; and most of these are in earnest to save their

souls ; as well as himself, and his wife, and his sixteen children.

Thur. 3.-I was going to preach at Alford, near the end of

the town ; but the Gentry sent and desired me to preach in the

market-place ; which I accordinglydid, to a large and attentive

congregation, on, " It is appointed unto men once to die."

Thence we went to Raithby ; an earthly paradise ! How

gladly would I rest here a few days : But it is not my place ! I

am to be a wanderer upon earth. Only let me find rest in a
better world !

At six I. preached in the church to such a congregation as I

never saw here before ; but I do not wonder if all the country

should flock in hither, to a palace in the midst of a paradise.

Fri. 4-. I set out early from Raithby, and at eight preached

in Horncastle. My design was, to have preached seriously ; for

which purpose I chose that text, " The harvest is past, the

summer is ended, and we are not saved ; " but I was turned, I

knew not how, quite the other way, and could preach scarce

anything but consolation. I believe this was the very thing

which the people wanted ; although I knew it not.

We reached Lincoln about twelve. A verynumerous congre-

gation of rich and poor were quickly assembled. I preached

below hill, in Mrs. Fisher's yard ; a large andcommodious place.

From the quietness of the people one might have imagined that
we were in London or Bristol. Indeed the dread of the Lord

was on every side ; and surely his power was present to heal.

In the evening I preached in our new House at Gainsborough,

which was crowded sufficiently. I spoke strong words, on,

" Now is the accepted time; " which seemed to sink deep into

the hearts of the hearers. Saturday, 5. In the evening I

preached at Owstone, to such a congregation, both for number

and seriousness, as I hardly ever saw here before. Afterwards

I took a view of what was lately the glory of the town,-the

great mansion-house built by the late Mr. Pinder's father,

when I was a little child. His grandsonhas left it desolate and

without inhabitant, has taken away all the pictures and furni-

ture, blocked up the windows, and cut down the fine rows of

trees which formed the avenue !

So fleets the comedy of life away.

Sun. 6. At eight we had such another congregation as that

in the evening ; to which I expounded that comfortable scripture,

the former part of Rev. xiv. I came to Epworth before the

church Service began ; and was glad to observe the seriousness

with which Mr. Gibson read Prayers, andpreachedaplain useful
:

sermon ; but was sorry to see scarce twenty communicants, half

ofwhom came on my account. I was informed likewise, that

scarce fifty persons used to attend the Sunday service. What

can be done to remedy this sore evil ?
}

Ifain would prevent the members here from leaving the

church ; but I cannot do it. As Mr. G. is not a pious man,

but rather an enemy to piety, who frequently preaches against

the truth, and those that hold and love it, I cannot with allmy

influence persuade them either to hear him, or to attend the

sacrament administered by him. If I cannot carry this point

even while I live, who then can do it when I die? And the i

case ofEpworth is the case of every church, where the Minister

neither loves nor preaches the Gospel. The Methodists will

not attend his ministrations. What then is to be done ?

At four I preached in the market-place, on Rom. vi. 23 ; and

vehemently exhorted
i the listening multitude to choose the bet-

terpart.

Mon. 7.-Having taken leave of this affectionate people, proJuly, 1788. ]

bably for the last time, I went over to Finningley ; and preached

at eleven, on that verse in the Second Lesson, Luke xix. 42.

After dinnerwewalked over Mr. H.'s domain, the like to which

I never saw in so small a compass. It contains a rabbit-warren,

deer, swans, pheasants in abundance, besides a fish-pond and an

elegant garden. Variety indeed ! But is there no danger that

such amultitude of things should divert the mind from the " one

thing needful ?”

In the evening I preached at Doncaster. I never before saw

this House so filled, much less crowded ; and it was, in aman-

ner I never knew before, filled with the presence of God, while

I earnestly enforced that advice, "Acquaint now thyself with

Him, and be at peace." One fruit of this was, that the congre-

gation at five in the morning was larger than it ever was before

in the evening ; and God again made bare his arm, and uttered

his voice, yea, and that a mighty voice. Surely those who now

heard will be without excuse, if they do not know the day of

their visitation !

Weweremuch distressed at Rotherham for wantofroom, the

raindriving us into the House. However, we stowed in it as

many as we possibly could; andGod bore witness to his word.

Wednesday, 9. After dining with that lovely old man, Mr.

Sparrow, I went on to Sheffield. The House was much

crowded, though one ofthe largest in England; but all could

hear distinctly. In the morning, Thursday, 10, at five we had

an evening congregation ; and the people seemed to devour the

word. Here and at Hull are the two largest morning congre-

gations which I have seen in the kingdom.

Fri. 11. We set out early for Derby. About nine, within

about a mile of the Peacock, suddenly the axletree ofmychaise

snapped asunder, and the carriage overturned. The horses

stood still till Jenny Smith and I crept out at the fore-windows .

The broken glass cut one of my gloves a little, but did us no

other damage. I soon procured another chaise, and went on to

Derby, where I preached in the evening ; and at five in the

morning on Saturday, 12; and then went on to Nottingham.

Sun. 13. I beganthe service at ten; but Iknew not how I

should get to the end, being almost exhausted when I had

finished my sermon ; when Mr. Dodwell came,who, though very

weak through the ague, assisted me in administering the Lord's

After
supper to a very large number of communicants .

[Aug. 1788.

preaching in the evening, I made a collection for Kingswood

School . To-day Ihadjust as much work as I could do.

Mon. 14. The mail-coach being full, I crossed over to

Newark, and had the satisfaction of seeing in the evening, not

only a numerous, but likewise a serious and deeply attentive

congregation.

Wed. 16. I consulted with a few friends concerningthe state

of things ; which was better than I expected. The society is

increased, and the ordinary hearers in all parts of the town not

diminished. Meantime there is reason to hope the work ofGod

goes on, though by slow degrees. On the following days I

looked over my books and papers, and set them in order as far

as I could. Saturday, 19. I spent an hour in Chesterfield-

Street, with my widowed sister and her children. They all

seemed inclined to make the right use of the late providential

dispensation.

Sun. 20. Both in the morning and evening I preached at

the new chapel, crowded sufficiently, on Heb. v. 12 : " Ye

have need that one teach you again which be the first prin-

ciples of the oracles of God." Monday, 21. I retired to

Highbury-Place, and spent the residue of the week in answering

letters, revising papers, and preparing for the Conference.

Sun. 27. In the morning I preached at West-Street ; and

in the afternoon in Bethnal-Green church, on part oftheGospel

for the day ; our Lord's lamentation over Jerusalem. I believe

the word did not fall to the ground. I preached at the new

chapel every evening during the Conference, which continued

nine days, beginning on Tuesday, JULY 29, and ending on

Wednesday, AUGUST 6 : And we found the time little enough;

being obliged to pass over many things very briefly, which
deserved a fuller consideration.

Sun. 3.-I preached at the new chapel, so filled as it scarce

ever was before, both morning and evening. Monday, 4. At

five we had a good evening congregation ; and I believe many

felt the power of the word; or, rather, ofGod, speaking therein.

One of the most important points considered at this Confer-

ence, was that of leaving the Church. The sum of along conver-

sation was, 1. That, in a course of fifty years, we hadneither pre-

meditately nor willingly varied from it in one article either of

doctrine or discipline. 2. That we were not yet conscious of

varying from it in any point ofdoctrine. 3. Thatwe have in a

Aug. 1788.]

course of years, out of necessity, not choice, slowly and warily

varied insome points of discipline, by preaching in the fields,

by extemporary prayer, by employing Lay Preachers, by form-

ing and regulating societies, and by holding yearly Conferences.

But we did none of these things till wewere convinced we could

no longer omit them, but at the peril of our souls.

Wed. 6. Our Conference ended, as it began, ingreat peace.

Wekept this day as a fast, meeting at five, nine, and one, for

prayer; and concluding the day with a solemn watch-night.

The three following days I retired, revised my papers, and

finished all the work I had to do in London. Sunday, 10. I

was engaged in avery unpleasing work, the discharge of an old

servant. She had been my housekeeper at West-Street for

many years, and was one of the best housekeepers I had had

there; but her husband was so notorious a drunkard, that I

could not keep them in the house any longer. She received her

dismission in an excellent spirit, praying God to bless us all.

I preached in the morning at West-Street to a large congre-

gation ; but to afar larger at the new chapel inthe evening. It

seems the people in general do not expect that I shall remain

among them a great while after my brother; and that, therefore,

they are willing to hear while they can. In the evening we set

out in the mail-coach, and early in the morning got to Ports-

mouth.

They have lately built a neat preaching-house in the town,

something larger than that at Deptford. It is well situated near

the midst of the town, and has three well-constructed galleries.

I preached at noon to alarge and well-behaved audience, and

to a much larger in the evening. I believe the word took place

inmany souls. All went away still as night.

Tues. 12.-Joseph Bradford preached at five in the morning.

I preached in the new House about six in the evening, and

guarded them against that deadly Antinomianism which has so

often choked the good seed here. In the evening I preached

at our House on the common. Afterwards, meeting the society,

I took a solemn leave of them, which I hope they will remember

if they see me no more.

Wed. 13. We crossed over to Sarum, where I preached in

the evening, with much enlargement of heart. Thursday, 14.

Setting out about three, we came to Gloucester early in the

afternoon. I spoke very plain, both in the evening and the

ĮAug. 1788.

morning. Friday, 15. We went on to Monmouth; but Mr.

G- has done with us ; so I lodged with my old friend, Mr.

Johnson ; and instead of that lovely young woman, S-B-,

who is removed to Cowbridge, met with her younger sister,

who more than supplies her place. She is a jewel indeed; full

of faith and love, and zealous ofgood works.

I preached both in the evening and the next morning with

the demonstration of the Spirit ; and all the congregation, rich

and poor, appeared to be sensible of it. Saturday, 16. We had

an easy journey to Brecon, where I preached in the evening.

Sunday, 17. I preached in the Room at eight, on the fruit of

the Spirit. In the evening I preached in the spacious Town-

Hall, so filled as it had never been before. I think there is a

little company here that are truly alive to God. Monday, 18.

Iwent on to Carmarthen, and preached at six, on 2 Cor. v. 19;

and again at five in the morning, Tuesday, 19, when the Room

was well filled. A servant of Mr. Bowen's came early in the

morning, to show us the way to Llyngwair : And itwas well he

did; for I do not know that we could otherwise have found our

way thither. We met (as I expected) with ahearty welcome.

At five I preached in Newport church, to a large congregation,

and with a greater prospect of doing good than ever I had before

We passed an agreeable evening at Llyngwair. Wednesday, 20.

I went to Tracoon, one of the most venerable seats in Great

Britain. The good old house is buried in woods and mountains,

having no resemblance to any place I have seen. It is just

suited to the good old Admiral, with his four maiden sisters ; the

youngest ofwhom, I suppose, has lived more thanseventy years.

I preached at twelve, and in the afternoon went on to Haverford-

west. The Room was filled sufficiently, and I could not but

believe God will build up the waste places.

Thur. 21. The Roomwaswell filled at five. Finding there

had been no discipline here for some time, I determined to begin

at the foundation, and settle every thing. So I first visited and

regulated the classes, then restored the bands,which had been

totally neglected, and then gave directions for meeting the

Leaders both of bands and classes. After preaching in the

evening, I met the society, and gave them awarm exhortation,

-to set out anew . I trust they will ; and all the present

Preachers, I am persuaded,will neglect nothing.

Fri. 22.-I went to Pembroke. Here, likewise, not one

Aug. 1788.] 435

thing, but everything, had been neglected. No Stewards, no

bands, half of the preaching-places dropped ; all the people

cold, heartless, dead! I spoke earnestlyin the evening ; and

thewordwas as fire. Surely, some fruit will follow !

Sun. 24. We had alovely congregationat St. Daniel's, and

aremarkable blessing. In the afternoon I returned to Haver-

fordwest, and preached in a large open space near the great

church, to such acongregation as I have not seen in Wales for

manyyears. I explained and applied the parable of the Sower,

andGod clothed his word with power. I know not whether I

havehad such an opportunity before, since I left London.

Mon. 25.-I spent another night at Carmarthen very agree-

ably. Tuesday, 26. I preached in Kidwelly at nine ; between

twelve and one at Llanelly, to all the Gentry in the town; and

in the evening to a multitude of people at Swansea. Wednes-

day 27. Far more than the Room would contain attended at

five in the morning. About eight I preached in our new

preaching-house at Neath ; and in the afternoon reached Fonte-

gary, and found Mrs. Jones, with several of her children about

her, onthe margin of the grave; worn out with that dreadful

disease, a cancer. She uttered no complaint, butwas all pati-

ence and resignation, showing the dignity of a Christian, in

weakness, and pain, and death. I preached on, " It is appointed

untomenonce to die;" and I believe all present felt the awful

truth.

I had intended to go on to Cowbridge the next day; but, being

much importuned to give one day more to a dying friend, I

yielded, and desired another Preacher to go and supply my

place. In the evening I preached on Psalm cxlvi. 3, 4. The

scene before us greatly confirmed the word. Friday, 29. That

they might not be offended, I went to Cowbridge. In half an

hour's notice, we had alarge congregation inthe Town-Hall, to

whom I showed the nature and pleasantness of religion, from

Prov. iii. 17. I returned to Fontegary, took my last leave of

thedying saint, and thenwent on to Cardiff. In the evening I

preached (probably for the lasttime) to a very genteel congre-

gation in the Town-Hall. Saturday, 30. I returned to Bristol.

Sun. 31. Mr. Collins came very opportunely, to assist me at

the morning service. Otherwise, I should have been distressed ;

for such a number of communicants I never saw here before.

Iwould fain have preached abroad; but the ground was too

[Sept. 1788.

wet. So I preached within, on, " Ye cannot serve God and
mammon."

Wed. SEPTEMBER 3.-I made a little beginning of some

account of my brother's life. Perhaps I may not live to finish

it. Then let it fall into some better hands !

Thur. 4.-I had the satisfaction of spending an hour with

that excellent woman, Lady : Not quite so honourable,

but full as much devoted to God, and as useful, as even Lady
Betty Hastings. What is too hard for God? We see even

this is possible with God, to raise a Lady and a saint in one

person !

Fri. 5.-We had a solemn watch-night at Kingswood. The

school is now injust such a state as I wish. Mr. M'Geary has

three pious and able Assistants, out of those that were brought

up in it ; and I doubt not it will supply a sufficiency ofMasters

for the time to come.

Sat. 6.-I walked over to Mr. Henderson's, at Hannam, and

thence to Bristol. But my friends, more kind than wise, would

scarce suffer it. It seemed so sad a thing to walk five or six

miles ! I am ashamed, that a Methodist Preacher, in tolerable

health, should make any difficulty of this.

Sun. 7.-Having none to assist me, I found it hard work to

read Prayers, preach, and administer the sacrament to such a
number of people. The moment I had done, I hastened to

Kingswood ; having but just time to take a little dinner before I

began preaching to a large congregation, before the preaching-

house. Returning to Bristol, I preached at five in Carolina-

Court, to an immense number of people, on Rom. viii. 33, 34.

Tues. 9.-I saw the large church at Midsummer-Norton

throughly filled with serious hearers. The Room at Shepton-

Mallet, though greatly enlarged, could in nowise contain the

congregation. At five in the morning, Wednesday, 10, it was

throughly filled. At Coleford, in the evening, Iwas obliged to

preach. Thursday, 11. We had a lovely congregation at

Frome, both in the evening and at five in the morning. At

length this wilderness, too, as it has long appeared to be, begins
to blossom and bud as the rose.

About two o'clock, Friday, 12, I preached in the preaching.

house yard, at Trowbridge, where, notwithstanding the harvest,

we had an unusually large congregation, who listened with deep

attention ; in the evening, at Bradford, to as many as the

Sept. 1788. ] 437

House would contain. But I did not find good Mrs. Ballard

there. After long struggling with a deep nervous disorder,

which for a time depressed the mind as well as the body, the

cloud removed ; herload fell off, and her spirit joyfully returned

toGod.

Sat. 13.-I found the society at Bath in a more flourishing

state than it had been for many years ; and the congregation in

the evening was unusually large, and, as usual, seriously attentive.

Sun. 14. We had twice as many communicants as I ever

remember here. Just before service Mr. Shepherd came, and

offered me his service. It could not have been more seasonable.

I had much liberty of spirit the first time I preached to-day ;

but greater at half-hour past two, and the greatest of all in the

evening ; when I vehemently enforced those awful words, " Why

will ye die, O house of Israel ? "

Mon. 15. I returned to Bristol, and on the four following

days was sufficiently employed in meeting the classes. At each

end of the town, the society increases greatly. It does not

decrease in any part. Glory be to God !

Fri. 19. Being pressed to preach to the poor people in

George-Street, and knowing the House would not contain half

the congregation in the evening, I began atfive ; by which means

wehad room for all that could attend at so early an hour. O

what an advantage have the poor over the rich ! These are not

wise in their own eyes, but all receive with meekness the ingrafted

word which is able to save their souls.

Sat. 20.-I met the Trustees for the new Room ; who were

all willing to add a codicil to the Deed of Trust, in order to

ascertain to the Conference (after me) the sole right of appoint-

ing the Preachers in it.

Sun. 21. I preached morning and afternoon at the Room ;

and at three in Temple church ; so filled as I never saw it before .

In the evening I spent an hour in fixing the places of the seve-

ral classes, at the society ; a thing necessary to be done, although

it is certain some will be not a little displeased.

Tues. 23. An end was put to the long contest between Dr

Coke and Mr. Durbin, by the Doctor's acknowledging that the

words he had wrote were too keen ; and that hewas sorry hehad

given Mr. D. so much uneasiness.

Wed. 24. I took awalk in Miss Goldney's garden at Clifton.


Nothing can bemorepleasant. But whatis most remarkable is,

the long terrace-walk, commanding amost beautiful prospect,

and the grotto, the largest andmost beautiful in its kind that I

ever saw. It is admirably well laid out, and decorated with a

surprising variety ofshells and glittering fossils ; the procuring

and placing of which (we were informed) took the late Mr.

Goldney above twenty years. Andhehas left it all !

Fri. 26. We had a fast-day, which was concluded with a

solemn watch-night. At the close of this we sung,

Yevirgin souls, arise !

accompanied by the Gloucestershire band of music. Such a

concert was never heard in that House before, and perhaps

never will be again.

Sat. 27.-Two or three friends took me to Blaise-Castle,

about five miles from Bristol. Mr. F-, a person of exqui-

site taste, built it some years ago, on the top of a hill, which

commands such a prospect all fourways as nothing in England

excels . Thence we went to Lord Clifford's seat, at King's

Weston. His house, one of the most beautiful I ever saw,

stands on a little eminence in his park, and fronts all fourways.

The prospect is fine every way,commanding both the land and

the water ; and the rooms are very elegantly furnished, particu-

larly with excellent pictures. And must the owner leave all

these beautiful things ? Will Death have no more respect for

a Lord than for a beggar ?

Sun. 28.-I set out in the mail-coach. Tuesday, 30. Having

for the present settled my business at London, in the evening I

took coach for Lynn ; and came thither about noon on Wednes-

day, OCTOBER 1. I spent all the time with much satisfaction,

as I never found them so much alive before. On Friday, 3, I

set out for Norwich, in the coach oddly called the Expedition.

Going through Dereham about noon, I was desired to preach,

which I willingly did, on Isaiah xxxvii. 3 ; and in the evening,

to a huge congregation at Norwich, on the parable of the Sower.

Sunday, 5, was a comfortable day, especially at seven in the

morning, when I administered the Lord's Supper ; and at two

in the afternoon and six in the evening, when I preached to

very serious congregations. Monday, 6. I preached at Loddon,

North-Cove, and Lowestoft. When Fcame into the town, it

blew a storm ; and many cried out, " So it always does when

Oct. 1788. ] 439

he comes." But it fell as suddenly as it rose ; for God heard

theprayer.

Wed. 8.-I preached at Caston about noon, and at Yarmouth

in the evening. Thursday, 9. I returned to Norwich ; and,

after preaching in the afternoon, took coach for London.

Fri. 10.-1 appointed aCommitteefor auditing my accounts,

and superintending the business of the Book-room ; which, I

doubt not, will be managed in a very different manner from

what it has been hitherto.

Sun. 12.-I preached in the morning at the new chapel ; in

the afternoon, at West-Street. Monday, 13. I went to Walling-

ford, and preached to a serious and, it seemed, much-affected

audience. Tuesday, 14. I preached at Witney, which I gene-

rally find a very comfortable place. I think much of the impres-

sion which was made on the people here, at the time of the great

storm, remains still. Wednesday, 15. I preached at Oxford, on

Gen. i. 27. Wewanted only a larger Room. Many young

gentlemen were there, and behaved well. I hope some of them

did not come in vain. Thursday, 16. We went on to High-

Wycomb. Mr. Murlin's settling here has been of great use.

Here is now a steady and understanding people ; to whom I

preached, as usual, evening and morning, with a good deal of

satisfaction . Friday, 17. We returned to London.

Sun. 19. We had, as usual, a comfortable time at Spital-

fields. Monday, 20. I set out for Northamptonshire. In the

evening I preached to the lovely congregation at Whittlebury,

standing fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made them

free. Wednesday, 22. I made one more trial of poor Towcester,

if haply God might yet breathe on the dry bones, by opening

and strongly applying these words, " I will heal their backsliding ;

Iwill love them freely." In the evening, and on Thursday

morning, I preached at Northampton, in the new Presbyterian

meeting-house, a large and elegant building, I think not without

effect; and then returned to London.

Tues. 28. I took the stage-coach for Rye ; which promised

to be there by six in the evening : But the coachman lingered

so, that in the afternoon I found they did not intend to be there

tillnear eight : So at Hawkhurst I took a post-chaise, which, with

much ado, reached it soon after six. Being informed the service

was begun, I did not stay to eat or drink, but went directly to

the preaching-house, which was sufficiently crowded ; and, as

[Nov. 1788.

soon as I could get through the people, I began with solemn

prayer ; and then explained and applied that glorious truth,

"God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself." We

had another happy opportunity at five in the morning. Know-

ing there was no depending on the coach, I took chaise ; and by

that means came early to Sevenoaks ; where, in the evening, I

found uncommon liberty of spirit in exhorting the audience to

worship God in spirit and in truth .

Sat. NOVEMBER 1.-(Being All- Saints' Day. ) I preached at

Snowsfields, on Rev. xiv. 1 ; a comfortable subject ; and I always

find this a comfortable day. Monday, 3. I began visiting the

classes ; a work which usually takes up about a fortnight. Sun-

day, 9. I preached at West-Street, and found uncommon liberty

in enforcing that caution, " Quench not the Spirit." On Wed-

nesday, 12, and the following days, I visited the country soci-

eties ; some of which, that of Mitcham inparticular, are swiftly

increasing in the grace ofGod.

Mon. 17.-I set out for Hertfordshire. In the evening I

preached at Hinxworth, to a deeply serious congregation ; the

next evening, in the church at Wrestlingworth, to the largest

congregation I have seen there these twenty years. Wednesday,

19. I crossed over to Bedford ; but where to lodge I did not
know : But one met me in the street, and said Mr.- desired

I would go straight to his house. I did so, and found myself

in a palace ; the best house by far in the town ; where Iwas

entertained not only with the utmost courtesy, but, I believe,

with sincere affection. Our Room was much crowded in the

evening, and pretty well filled in the morning ; and as all dis-

putes are at an end, there is great reason to hope that the work

ofGod will increase here also.

Thur. 20. We had a lovely congregation at St. Neot's, who

seemed ripe for the promises ; so I preached on our Lord's

words to the leper : " I will; be thou clean." Friday, 21. About

noon I preached at Huntingdon, and in the evening atGodman-

chester. Still it is the day of small things here ; but a few are

still fighting the good fight of faith.

Mon. 24. I went to Canterbury. As all the Preachers are

in earnest, God has blessed them through the whole Circuit.

This evening we had a large and deeply serious congregation,

and not a few ofthem in the morning. Tuesday, 25. Though

it blew a storm, and was piercing cold, we were sufficiently

Dec. 1788. ] JOURNAL. 441

crowded at Dover ; where the work of God is very lively, and

continually increasing. Wednesday, 26. Our Room at Sandwich

being small, both the Dissenting Ministers sent to offer me

theuse oftheir chapels. I willingly accepted one of them, which

was far larger than ours, and very commodious. I believe God

spoke to many hearts. In the evening we had another storm,

withmuch snow and sleet : However, our House at Margate

was well filled; and I was much comforted by the earnestness

of the congregation.

Fri. 28. A little preaching-house being just built at St.

Peter's, (two miles from Margate,) notice had been given, with-

out my knowledge, of my preaching there in the morning. It

was utterly inconvenient, on many accounts ; the wind was

piercing cold, and the ground coveredwith snow. However, I

would not disappoint the congregation; so I preached at nine,

and hastened to Canterbury, where the House was, as usual,

well filled ; and God gave us his blessing.

Tues. DECEMBER 2.-I went to Chatham, and preached in

theevening, on, " Wewalk by faith, not by sight. " Wednesday,

3. I went to Sheerness, where the society is considerably increased

since I was here before. Thursday, 4. At noon I preached at

Faversham, where, after a long winter, the seed seems to be

springing up. The congregation was very large, and deeply

attentive. In the evening I preached in the new House at

Brompton. I had not preached there between thirty and forty

years ; and there is now a fair prospect here also. Friday, 5.

I returned to London.

Mon. 8. I had the pleasure of meeting an old friend, who

gaveme a pleasing account of the glorious death of his mother,

which had made so deep an impression upon him that he was

almost persuaded to be a Christian. Wednesday, 10, and the

following days, I corrected my brother's posthumous poems ;

being short Psalms, (some few excepted,) [hymns) on the four

Gospels, and the Acts of the Apostles. They make five

volumes in quarto, containing eighteen or nineteen hundred

pages. They were finished April 25, 1765.

The revisal finished, April 24, 1774.

A second revisal finished, January 26, 1777.

A third revisal finished, February 20, 1780.

A fourth revisal finished.

Afifth revisal finished.


Asixth revisal finished.

A seventh revisal finished.

The last revisal finished, May, 1787.

Many of these are little, ifany, inferior to his former poems,

havingthe samejustness and strength of thought, with the same

beauty of expression ; yea, the same keenness of wit on proper

occasions, as bright and piercing as ever.

Mon. 15. In the evening I preached at Miss Teulon's

school in Highgate. I think it was the coldest night I ever

remember. The house we were in stood on the edge of the hill,

and the east wind set full in the window. I counted eleven,

twelve, one, and was then obliged to dress, the cramp growing

more and more violent. But inthemorning, not only the cramp

was gone, but likewise the lameness which used to follow it.

About this time I was reflecting on the gentle steps whereby

age steals upon us. Take only one instance. Four years ago

my sight was as good as it was at five-and-twenty. I then began

to observe that I did not see things quite so clear with my left

eye as with my right ; all objects appeared a little browner to

that eye. I began next to find some difficulty in reading asmall

printby candle-light. Ayear after, I found it in reading such

a print by day-light. In winter, 1786, I could notwell read our

four-shilling hymn-book, unless with a large candle ; the next

year I could not read letters, if wrote with a small or bad hand.

Last winter a pearl appeared on my left eye, the sight of which

grew exceeding dim. The right eye seems unaltered ; only I

am agreat deal nearer-sighted than ever I was. Thus are " those

that look out at the windows darkened ; " one of the marks of old

age. But I bless God," the grashopper is " not " aburden." I

am still capable of travelling ; and mymemory is much the same

as ever it was ; and so, I think, is my understanding.

This week I dedicated to the reading over my brother's works.

They are short poems on the Psalms, the four Gospels, and the

Acts of the Apostles. Some are bad ; some mean ; some most

excellently good: They give the true sense of Scripture, always

in good English, generally in good verse ; many of them are

equal to most, if not to any, he ever wrote ; but some still savour

ofthat poisonous mysticism,with which we were both not a little

tainted before we went to America. This gave a gloomy cast,

first to his mind, and thentomany of his verses : This made him

frequently describe religion as a melancholy thing : This so

Jan. 1789. |

often sounded in his ears, " To the desert ! " and strongly per-

suaded in favour of solitude.

Thur. 25.-(Being Christmas-Day.) We began the service, as

usual, at four in the new chapel. Notwithstanding the severe

frost which had now lasted a month, the congregation wasuncom-

monly large. I preached here again in the evening ; about

eleven, in the chapel at West-Street. This was a comfortable

day, aswere also the two following.

Sun. 28. I preached at Allhallows church, on those words

in the Service, " His commandments are not grievous." The

congregation was exceeding large, and seemed to taste the good

word.

Tues. 30. The frost continued severe ; yet the congregation

wasuncommonly large in the evening, and God warmed many

hearts.

Wed. 31.-A numerous company concluded the old yearwith a

very solemnwatch-night. Hitherto God hath helped us, andwe

neither see nor feel any of those terrible judgments which it

was saidGod would pour out upon the nation about the conclu-

sion of the year.

For near seventy years I have observed, that, before any war

or public calamity, England abounds with prophets, who confi-

dently foretel many terrible things. They generally believe

themselves, but are carried away by avain imagination. And

they are seldom undeceived, even by the failure of their predic-

tions ; but still believe they will be fulfilled some time or other.

Thur. JANUARY 1, 1789. If this is to be the last year of

my life, according to some ofthose prophecies, I hope it will be

the best. I am not careful about it, but heartily receive the

advice of the angel in Milton,一

"How well is thine : How long permit to Heaven."

Sun. 4. Although the extreme severity of the weather kept

many tender people away ; yet we had alarge congregation in

the evening to renew their covenant with God; and we always

find, when we avouch Him to be our God, he avouches us to

behis people.

Mon. 5.-At the earnest desire of Mrs. T-, I once more

sat for my picture. Mr. Romney is a painter indeed. He

struck off an exact likeness at once ; and did more in one hour

than Sir Joshua did in ten. Tuesday, 6. I retired to Highbury

Place, and on Thursday, 8, to Peckham. Here, in the even-

ing, I preached to a very serious congregation, although many

of them were of the better rank. But rich and poor seemed

equally determined to work out their own salvation.

Fri. 9. I left nomoney to any one inmy Will, because I had

none. But now considering, that, whenever I am removed,

money will soon arise by sale of books, I added a few legacies

by a codicil, to be paid as soon as maybe. But I would fain

do a little good while I live ; for who can tell what will come

after him ?

Sun. 11.-I again warned the congregation, as strongly as I

could, againstconformity tothe world. But who will [take thewarn-

ing] ? Ifhardly one in ten, yet is myrecordwith the MostHigh.

Tues. 13. I spent aday or two with my good old friends at

Newington. Thursday, 15. I retired to Camberwell, and car-

ried on my Journal, probably as far as I shall live to write it.

On Thursday I preached once more at Peckham; and did not

withhold from them that had ears to hear, the whole counsel

ofGod.

Fri. 16. I looked over the finest picture of atheistical religion

that ever I saw, in the account that Captain Wilson gives of

Thule, King of Pelew. But how utterly needless is either

the knowledge [or the grace] of God, (consequently, how idle

a book is the Bible,) if aman be all-accomplished, that has no

more knowledge of God than a horse, and no more of his

grace than a sparrow !

Tues. 20.-I retired in order to finish myyear's accounts. If

possible, I must be a better economist ; for instead of having

anything beforehand, I am now considerably in debt ; but this

I do not like. I would fain settle even my accounts before I die.

Sun. 25. Much of the power of Godwas in the congrega-

tion, both morning and afternoon ; as also onMonday evening ;

which gave me a good hope that God will carry on his own

work. Atthe earnest importunity of our friends, on Wednesday,

28, I went to open the new preaching-house at Rye. It is a

noble building, much loftier than most of our Houses, and finely

situated at the headof the town. Itwas throughly filled. Such

acongregation I never saw atRye before ; and their behaviour

was as remarkable as their number ; which, added to the peace-

able, loving spirit they are now in, gives reason to hope there

will be such a work here as has not been heretofore.

Feb. 1789. ]

Thur. 29.-I went over to Winchelsea ; once a large, flourish-

ing city ; but ever since it was burnt by the Danes, a little, incon-

siderable town, though finely situated on the top of a range of

hills. The new preaching-house was well filled with decent,

serious hearers,who seemed to receive the truth in the love of

it. I returned to Rye in the afternoon ; and in the evening

preached to another large and serious congregation. Friday,

30. We made ourway through miserable roads to Sevenoaks,

where the congregation, both evening and morning, was uncom-

monly large. So (whether I see them again or not) I cheerfully

commended them to God, and the next morning returned to

London.

Sun. FEBRUARY 1.-We had an exceeding solemn season,

both morning and evening. It seemed indeed as if the skies

poured down righteousness on all that lifted up their hearts

toGod.

Monday, 2, and the following days, I spent inmeeting the

classes. Friday, 6, being the Quarterly Day for meeting the

Local Preachers, between twenty and thirty of them met at

West-Street, and opened their hearts to each other. Taking

the opportunity ofhaving them all together, at the watch-night,

I strongly insisted on St. Paul's advice to Timothy, " Keep

that which is committed to thy trust;" particularly the doctrine

of Christian Perfection, which God has peculiarly entrusted to

the Methodists.

Wed. 11. I went to Brentford, and found the society still

alive, and increasing both in strength and number. Thursday,

12. I preached once more at Chelsea, where there is at length a

fair and promising prospect. Friday, 13. I took a view of that

noble building, Chelsea College, and all the parts of it. It is

designed to lodge five hundred old soldiers, who are furnished

with all things needful for life and godliness. Sunday, 15. We

had the usual blessing at Spitalfields . Monday, 16. I went to

Dorking. I scarce find any society inEngland like this. Year

after year, it seems at one stay, neither increasing nor decreasing ;

only if one or two die, one or two are quickly added to fill up

the number.

Tues. 17.-I examined the society at Deptford, and preached

there in the evening. Wednesday, 18. I retired into the country

to finish my writings. Sunday, 22. God was eminently present

with us at West-Street chapel, both in the morning and even


ing. Tuesday, 24. Mr. W-called upon me, andwe had an

agreeable and useful conversation. What ablessing is it to Mr.

P. to have such a friend as this ! In the evening I expounded

part of the Second Lesson, Eph. iii.

Friday, 25, was the daywhich I had ordered all our brethren

in Great Britain and Ireland to observe with fasting and prayer,

for the recovery of His Majesty's health ; but we hadthe satis-

faction to hear, that before we asked (unless in private) He

answered ; insomuch that the time intended for humiliation,

turned into a time of thanksgiving; and both at five, at nine, at

one, and in the evening, we were most employed in praises.

Sunday, MARCH 1, was a solemn day indeed. The new

chapel was sufficiently crowded both morning and afternoon; and

few that expected a parting blessing, were disappointed of their

hope. At seven in the evening I took the mail-coach ; andhav-

ing three of our brethren, we spent acomfortable night, partly

in sound sleep, and partly in singing praise to God. It will now

quickly be seen whether they who prophesied some time since,

that I should not outlive this month, be sent of God or not.

Oneway or the other, it is my care to be always ready.

Mon. 2-. At Bath the evening congregation was such as we

used to have on Sunday evening ; and I have seldom seen a

larger here. In the morning, a young gentleman, who had

heardme the evening before, desired to speak to me. He seemed

greatly affected, and was almost persuaded to be a Christian.

In the afternoon he sent his carriage, andwould needs have me

see his lady, though she had lain in but two or three days.

Whether they turn back or no, they bothseemnow not far from

the kingdom of God.

Wed. 3.-I went on to Bristol, where we had a crowded con-

gregation both this evening and the next. Sunday, 8. In the

evening I preached in Temple church to a large congregation.

It was an acceptable time, especially to the mourners in Zion.

Mr. Baddiley read Prayers for me,but couldnot stay to assist

me at the Lord's Supper. However, my strength was as my

day. Monday, 8, and the following days, I visited the classes,

which do not decrease either in grace ornumber. Tuesday, 10.

I had the pleasure of an hour's conversation with Mr.-,

whom I had hardly seen for several years. On all these even-

ings Godwas eminently present in the congregation. On Thurs-

day, 12, the grand day of rejoicing for His Majesty's recovery,

March, 1789. ] JOURNAL. 447

I preached on part of King Hezekiah's thanksgiving for his

recovery ; and indeed it was a season of solemnjoy ; particularly

when I applied those words, " The living, the living, he shall

praise thee, as I do this day."

Fri. 13. I spent some time with poor Richard Henderson,

deeply affected with the loss of his only son ; who, with as great

talents as most men in England, had lived two-and-thirty years,

and done just nothing. Saturday, 14. In the evening I

preached in Temple church ; perhaps for the last time, as good

Mr. Easterbrook was suddenly taken ill the next day. Well,

whatever is, is best. Sunday, 15. Having Mr. Baddiley to

assist me in the morning, I preached at Kingswood in the after-

noon ; and in the evening, at the Room. We concluded the

daywith asolemn and comfortable love-feast.

Mon. 16. We set out early, and dined at Stroud, where I

had proof that either people or Preachers, or both, had left

their first love. I strongly exhorted them to remember from

whence they were fallen, and do the first works. God applied

hisword, and I suppose two hundred were present at five in the

morning. Tuesday, 17. Many were present at Gloucester in

the evening ; but they seemed to be little affected. Wednesday,

18. I preached in Tewkesbury at noon. The Room was

crowded, and all seemed to feel what theyheard. I was informed

that one who, two or three years ago, had carried all his family

toAmerica, in quest of golden mountains, had crept back again,

being utterly beggared, and forced to leave his family behind

him. In the evening the House at Worcester was throughly

filled with a deeply-affected congregation ; but we were in great

want ofmore room. Indue time God will give us this also .

Fri. 20. We went on to Birmingham, still increasing on

every side. Hearing the cry of want of business, even in this

aswell as most other trading towns in England, I considered

what the meaning of it should be; and the case seems plainly

this : Two or three years ago, business poured into Birmingham,

and consequently more hands were wanting; but when business

returned into its usual channel, they were wanted no longer.

These men therefore certainly wanted business, and spread the

cry over the town. The same must be the case at Manchester,

Liverpool, and all other towns where there is an extraordinary

trade for a time: It must subside again ; and then arises the

cry ofwant of business .


Sat. 21. I had aday of rest, only preaching morning and

evening. Sunday, 22, was appointed for my opening the

House at the east end of the town. It would have been

crowded above measure, but that the friendly rain interposed;

so that we had only amoderate congregation. It was otherwise

in the evening, when heaps upon heaps were obliged togo away.

How white are these fields unto the harvest ! Monday, 23.

The congregation at Dudley pretty well filled the new House,

where I preached as I did at London fifty years ago. Thence

we hastened to Madeley, where I found Mrs. Fletcher better

than she had been for many years ; and young Mr. Fletcher

much alive to God, and swiftly growing up into the spirit of his

uncle. I preached in the evening, after Mr. Horne had read

Prayers, to a deeply serious congregation ; and again at nine in

the morning, Wednesday, 24, in the preaching-house she has

lately fitted up. Going on to Shrewsbury, at six I preached in

the preaching-house, on 1 Cor. xiii. 1-3. Several of the

Gentry and several Clergymen were there ; and, I believe, not

in vain. I had purposed to set out early in the morning, but

was persuaded to stay another day, there being now a fairer

prospect in Salop than had been before. I preached morning

and evening. I have cast mybread upon the waters, and hope

it will be found again, at least after many days.
Thur. 26. We set out early, and taking post-horses at

Clowrust, reached Conway between eight and nine o'clock ; hav-

ing travelled seventy-eight miles that day; twenty-eight more

than from Chester to Conway.

Fri. 27. We went on to Holyhead; and at eight in the

evening went on board the Claremont packet. The wind stood

fair three or four hours : It then turned against us, and blew

hard. I do not remember I was ever so sick at sea before ; but

this was little to the cramp which held most of the night with

little intermission. All Saturday we were beating to and fro,

and gaining little ground ; and I was so ill, throughout the day,

as to be fit for nothing ; but I slept well in the night, and about

eight in the morning, Sunday, 29, came safe to Dublin quay.

I went straight up to the new Room. We had a numerous

congregation, and as serious as if we had been at West-Street .

I preached on the sickness and recovery of King Hezekiah and

King George; and great was our rejoicing. I really took

knowledge of the change which God haswrought in this congre

April, 1789.1 JOURNAL . 440

gationwithin a few years. Agreat part of them were light and

airy ; now almost all appear as serious as death. Monday, 30.

I began preaching at five in the morning ; and the congregation,

both then and the following mornings, was far larger in propor-

tion than those at London. Meantime, I had letter upon letter

concerning the Sunday service ; but Icould not give any answer

till I had made a full inquiry both into the occasion and the

effects of it. The occasion was this :-About two years ago it was

complained, that few of our society attended the church on

Sunday ; most of them either sitting at home, or going on

Sunday morning to some Dissenting meeting. Hereby many of

them were hurt, and inclined to separate from the Church. To

prevent this, it was proposed to have service at the Room ;

which I consented to, on condition that they would attend St.

Patrick's every first Sunday in the month. The effect was,

1. That they went no more to the meetings. 2. That three

times more went to St. Patrick's (perhaps six times) in six or

twelve months, than had done for ten or twenty years before.

Observe ! This is done not to prepare for, but to prevent, a

separation from the Church.

On the mornings of this and the following week I expounded

the thirteenth chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthians :

Such a compendium of true religion as none but the author of

it can give. The evening congregations were exceeding large,

as well as deeply attentive. Friday, APRIL 3. I preached at

Bethesda ; and with much liberty of spirit. Saturday, 4. I

preached in Gravel-Walk House, so filled as I never saw it.

before ; and they all seemed to hear as for life. Itwas a com-

fortable night.

Sun. 5.-I preached in the new Room at seven. At eleven

Iwent to the cathedral. I desired those of our society who did

not go to their parish churches, wouldgo with me to St. Patrick's.

Many of them did so. It was said, the number of communi-

cants was about five hundred ; more than went there in the

whole year before the Methodists were known in Ireland.

Mon. 6.-To-day, and for some days following, I was so

overborne with letters, that I had hardly time to do anything

but to read and answer them. Wednesday, 8. I visited and

administered the sacrament to our poor widows ; four-and-twenty

of whom are tolerably provided for in our Widows' House.

The frowardness and stubbornness of some of these was, for a


time, a grievous trial to the rest ; but this is past : They are all

now of a better spirit, and adorn the doctrine of God our

Saviour.

Thur. 9. In the evening I met, for the second time, the

bands. I admired them much: They are more open than

those either in London or Bristol ; and I think here is agreater

number of those that are now clearly perfected in love, than I

now find even in London itself.

APRIL 10.-(Being Good-Friday.) I accepted of the pressing

invitation of Mr. Smyth, and preached at Bethesda both morn-

ing and evening; in the morning on the New Covenant, as it is

now given to the Israel of God; and in the evening on Heb.

ix. 13, 14, " If the blood ofbulls," &c. At both times we had

abrilliant congregation, amongwhomwereHonourable andRight

Honourable persons: But I felt they were all given into my

hands; for Godwas in the midst. What a mercy it is, what a

marvellous condescension in God, to provide such places as

Bethesda, and Lady Huntingdon's chapels, for these delicate

hearers, who could not bear sound doctrine if it were not set off

with these pretty trifles !

APRIL 12.-(Being Easter-Day.) We hada solemn assembly

indeed ; many hundred communicants in the morning ; and in
the afternoon far more hearers than our Room would contain ;

though it is now considerably enlarged. Afterwards I met the

society, and explained to them at large the original design of

the Methodists, viz., not to be a distinct party, but to stir up

all parties, Christians or Heathens, to worship God in spirit and

in truth ; but the Church of England in particular ; to which

they belonged from the beginning. With this view I have

uniformly gone on for fifty years, never varying from the

doctrine of the Church at all; nor from her discipline, of choice,

but of necessity : So, in a course of years, necessity was laid

uponme, (as I have proved elsewhere,) 1. To preach in the

open air. 2. To pray extempore. 3. To form societies. 4. To

accept of the assistance ofLay Preachers : And, in a few other

instances, to use such means as occurred, to prevent or remove
evils that we either felt or feared.

We set out early on Monday, 13, and about twelve reached

Clonard; five-and-twenty Irish miles from Dublin. Three or

four times as many as the house could contain met together

at five o'clock. The power of God was remarkably present ;
April, 1789. ] JOURNAL.

when divers were cut to the heart; and perhaps none more so

thanthe master of the house. We had another good opportu-

nity at seven in the morning, Tuesday, 14, which we closed with

a serious, pointed conversation, and then went on to Tyrrel's

Pass.

Though the windwas piercing cold, the multitude of people

obliged me to preachabroad in the evening ; after which I gave

them all a plain account of the design of Methodism ; namely,

not to separate from the Church, but to unite together all the

children of God that were scattered abroad.

Wed. 15.-About ten I preached to a small congregation in

the Court-House, in Molingar. We had a far different congre-

gation, both as to number and spirit, in Longford Court-House

in the evening. It was a beautiful sight. Great part of them

came again at seven in the morning, and seemed to relish those

words, " He that doeth the will ofGod, the same is mybrother,

and sister, and mother."

Thur. 16.-Heavy rain came on in the evening ; yet the

preaching-house at Kenagh would not contain the people.

Friday, 17. I came to my old friends at Athlone; but, to my

surprise, I found them heaps upon heaps. I hastened to hear

thecontending parties face to face ; andwas amazed to find how

much matter a little fire kindles. Some of the Leaders had

causelessly taken offence at theAssistant. He called on Mr. R. ,

andwarned him against imbibing the same prejudice; telling

him if he did he must beware of the consequence; meaning

thereby, the mischief it woulddo among the people. Misunder

standing this word, he grew very angry. Others took partwith

him, and the society was in anuproar. I talkedwith him till I

was tired ; but in vain: One might as wellhave talked to the north

wind. So I gave him up to God, and only endeavoured to

quench the flame among the people.

Saturday, 18, was aday ofpeace. Sunday, 19. The Com-

manding Officer sending to offer me the use of any part of

the barracks, I preached at five in the riding-house, a very spa-

cious building, to amultitude of people, on, " Believe on the

Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved." I think the word

did not fall to the ground. Monday, 20. I preached about

eleven at B ; and at six in the church at Aghrim. It was

much fuller than when I preached here before ; and many

Papists were there ; who, as the Minister informed me, had


attended the church ever since I was there before. Tuesday,

22. About ten I preached in Eyre-Court church, so filled as,

I suppose, it never was before ; and many ofthe hearers seemed
to feel the word. Thence we went on to Birr. How is the

scene changed here ! One of the dullest places in Ireland is

become one of the liveliest ! But I could not preach abroad in

the evening, by reason of the rain ; so we made all the room we

could in the Room and in the yard; and a most solemn oppor-

tunity wehad.

Wed. 22.-About noon I preached in the beautiful new

Court-House, at Tullamore. Deep attention sat on the rich as

well as the poor ; as it did likewise at Coolylough in the evening.

Thursday, 23, being the Thanksgiving Day for the recovery of

His Majesty's health, I preached in the Court-House,at Port-

1 arlington, as soon as the Church Service ended. The congre-

gation was exceeding well dressed, but exceeding careless and

ill-behaved. At six I preached in the church at Mount-Mellick,

exceedingly crowded with hearers of quite another kind: They

were all attention; and in the morning filled the preaching-

house. Friday, 24. The church at Maryborough was far larger,

and one of the most elegant that I have seen in the kingdom.

It was throughly filled in the evening, although many of the

hearers looked as if theyhad not been in a church before. But

in half an hour they were serious as death; andinthemorning,

Saturday, 25, the lower part of the church was well filled.

Surely many will remember that day. In the evening I

preached in our preaching-house at Carlow ; where, that I

might not overshoot the congregation, I preached on, " So

teach us to number our days, that we mayapply our hearts
unto wisdom."

Sun. 26. I preached in the morning, and at five in the

evening. The people were very civil, and many ofthem atten-

tive ; but I think the time of Carlow is not yet come. Monday,

27. I reached Enniscorthy about noon ; andpresently after, as it

had continued to rain, I preached in the place prepared for me,

which was a large, though not very elegant, cow-house. How-

ever, God was there ; as likewise in the assembly-room, at

Wexford, where I preached to a large congregation in the

evening.

Tues. 28.-About noon we reached the ferry, on the west

side of which Mrs. Deaves was waiting. She pressed me much

May, 1789.]

to go with her in the chaise, and, at least, to dine at her

house; saying, Mr. Deaves was willing to settle the House in

anyway that I desired ! The samething he said to me himself ;

so I hoped all things would endwell. In the evening I preached

to a numerous congregation, on Mark iii. 35. The God of

peace and love was in the midst of us, and seemed to affect the

whole assembly.

Wed. 29. We had a large congregation in the morning.

At breakfast and at tea, on these two days, I met all the society ;

(eight or ten excepted ; ) and we greatly confirmed our love to

each other. In the evening I preached to a larger congregation

than before, on, " I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ."

Afterwards I strongly exhorted them all to rehearse no past grievances ; and only to provoke one another to love and good works.

Fri. MAY 1. We wentto Capoquin. The rain preventing

my preaching abroad, I accepted of a very large room which

was offered me in the barracks. As we went up the street, we

had a very numerous retinue, hallooing and shouting with all

their might : But the centinel keeping out the mob, we had a

quiet congregation within. A Popish gentleman inviting me to

lodge at his house, I spent a comfortable evening.

Sun. 3.-The House was sufficiently filled with people, as

well as with the power ofGod. Monday, 4. So itwas again at

five, when I endeavoured to quench the fire which some had

laboured to kindle among the poor, quiet people, about separating

from the Church. In the evening I preached on Luke viii. 24 ;

and the word was as fire ; it pierced to the dividing of soul and

spirit, joints and marrow. Tuesday, 5. Being not very well in

the morning, I desired Joseph Bradford to preach. In the

evening I preached on, "Remember from whence thou art

fallen, and repent, and do the first works." Many, I believe, are

earnestly purposed so to do. MayGod give them the power !

Wednesday, 6. I preached on that remarkable prophecy, Gen.

ix. 27, which is so eminently fulfilled at this day, wherein God

does " seize the servile progeny of Ham." Thursday, 7. I

went to Bandon, and finished the Life of Baron Trenck ; the

strangest I ever read. Was there ever such a fiend incarnate

as the late King of Prussia ? To inflict such unheard-of tor-

ments for so many years, for no fault ! Good had it been for

him, if he had never been born. Yet, what a wretch was

Trenck himself ! He made not the least scruple of adultery and

:

!

murder ; and does not appear to have had a jot more religion

than an inhabitant of Otaheite ! I think, therefore, this is a

most dangerous book ; Iwishnone that cares for his soulwould

read a page of it .

In the evening I preached in the new preaching-house, twice

or thrice as large as the old. Itwas well filled both this evening

and the next ; but I did not find the same life in this people as

in those at Cork. ButGod is able to cause all grace to abound

here also. Saturday, 9. I returned to Cork, and earnestly

enforced, " Thou shalt have no other gods before me."

Sun. 10. After preaching, I administered the Lord's Supper

to about four hundred and fifty communicants. I was enabled

to speak with power in the evening to more than the House

could contain, and afterwards to the society. MayGod write it

on all their hearts ! I am now clear of their blood.

Mon. 11.-At half an hour after two we reached Kilkenny ;

and at six I preached, on, "One thing is needful." A few

seemed to understand what I meant ; as also at five in the

morning, when I expounded, " There is neither work, nor

device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou

goest. " Tuesday, 12. I felt myself a good deal out of order.

However, I pushed on to Limerick, where the Rev. Mr. Ingram

(one of the Chaplains of the cathedral) gladly received me : So

did Mrs. Ingram, and all the lovely family ; where I wanted

nothing which the kingdom could afford. At six the House

would not contain the congregation. I preached on, " There

is one God; " andit seemed as ifall under the roof were sensible

ofhis presence.

Wed. 13. I was not well able to preach in the morning; so

Joseph Bradford tookmy place. But about eleven I preached

myself at Pallas, about twelve miles from Limerick. All the

remains of the Palatine families came hither from Balligarane,

Court-Mattris, and Ratheal ; in all which places anuncommon

flame has lately broke out, such as was never seen before,

Many in every place have been deeply convinced, many con-

verted to God, and some perfected in love. Some societies are

doubled in number, some increased six or even ten fold. All

the neighbouring Gentry were likewise gathered together ; so

that no House could contain them, but I was obliged to stand

abroad. The people, as it were, swallowed every word; and

great was our rejoicing in the Lord.

May,1789.1

Thur. 14. I preached in the morning on Rev. ii. 4, 5; in

the evening on Luke iv. 18. All the congregation were, for

the present, much affected : With many, I trust, the impression

will continue.

Fri. 15. We set out at five ; and between three and four

reached Castlebay. In the evening I preached at Killchrist, to

so large a congregation that I was obliged to preach abroad,

though it rained all the time. As I had not been well for some

days, this did me no good; but I held up till Saturday, 16,

when we came to Ballinrobe, and then gave up, and let another

preach. After a very uneasy night, on Sunday, 17, I went on

to Castlebar, and, finding myself much better, preached in the

evening to a lovely congregation. But I was obliged to let

Joseph Bradford preach in the morning, on Monday, 18. Being

stronger in the evening, I preached again, and met the earnest

society, increasing both in number and grace. Tuesday, 19.

Retiring to a friend's house about a mile from the town, I took

afull account of the late wonderful affair of Mr. F-d.

Mr. GeorgeRobert F -d, at his first settling near Castlebar,

about the year 1776, made himselfvery popular ; but, meantime,

his pride was excessive; affirming that, being the head ofthe Des-

mond family, he was the premier Nobleman of Ireland. There-

fore he expected that all the country should submit to him :

Hence he fell into disputes with his father; and by turns with his

brother ; and kept his neighbours in perpetual alarm. In 1779,

when volunteering began, he raised a Company, which was

wholly subject to him. Soon after he engaged Patrick Randal

M'Donald, a relation, as a Captain in his Company ; but not

long after, a dispute arose between them, relative to the driving

ofsome cattle. Mr. M'D., being informed that Mr. F. intended

violence to him, placed some men near his own house ; and

ordered them, if he approached the house, to fire. Mr. F.

approaching, one of them did fire ; which killed his horse, and

wounded him in the knee and leg. On this he prosecuted Mr.

M'D. at the following Assizes ; but, after a full hearing, hewas

acquitted.

Another matter of contention soon ensued: Mr. M'D., being

an Attorney, was employed against Mr. F., and carried the suit.

This inflamed Mr. F. beyond measure, of which Mr. M'D. was

frequently informed. This continued, however, to the close of

the year 1785 ; when Mr. MD., being at Castlebar one night,

[May, 1789.

a blunderbuss, charged with eight or nine bullets and slugs, was

discharged through the window of the room where he used to sit.

Immediately after Christmas, the witness, Mr. R. G. ,was sitting

in Mr. M.'s cellar, bottling some wine,when he heard a very

uncommon sound ofamusket, and a loud shriek following it.

Going out, the first thing he saw was Mr. M'D. , wounded in

the leg. On his cry, three men ran out of the little house of

Mr. F., whence the gun had been fired from ahole through the

wall, which had been made on purpose.

He then took a lodging in Castlebar ; but on the 20th of

February, 1786, accompanied by Mr. G. , Mr. H. , and M., went

to his house in the country. They had been but a while

there, when they found it surrounded by many armed men ; on

which Mr. M'D.'s friends made their escape to a neighbouring

village. Meantime they broke into his house; and, not finding

him, broke into several houses. At length they came to the

house where he was, and fired several balls through the doors and

windows : Then theybroke in, and made M'Donald, Gallagher,

andHipson, prisoners ; and one Fulton said he had a warrant

against them. They desired he would bring them before Sir

NealO'Donnel , a Magistrate, then within five miles ; but, instead

of this, they were tied, and dragged to F.'s house, in Turlogh,

wherethey continued all night.

Tuesday, February 21. About six they were marched out

with a large company, under pretence ofcarrying them before a

Magistrate. Gallagher and Hipson were tied together, M'Don-

ald being suffered to ride, because ofhis wound ; a ruffian hold-

ing his bridle. When theygot about halfa milefrom Turlogh,

a shot was fired from the rear, which wounded one ofthe ruffians ;

F -dcontriving it so, thatthey might cry a rescue ; on hearing

of which they were ordered instantly to dispatch the prisoners.

Immediately several shot were fired at the prisoners. Hipson

was shot dead, and Gallagher wounded : M'Donald had both

his arms broke ; but his horse took fright, and broke from the

ruffian : Gallagher had crept a little way, but they soon found

him. Some were for despatching him instantly; but others

moved to carry him to Mr.-F d's. At his house he was kept

prisoner all the night.

Wednesday, 22. The news coming to Castlebar, Mr. Ellison,

the Magistrate, went up with a large party of the army to Tur-

logh. They rushed in, but, after scarching all the house, could

May, 1789.1 457

not find F.; till two young menwent into aroom where was a

large trunk, on touching the hasp ofwhich, he jumped up like

aharlequin, fell upon his knees, and begged they would not kill

him. He was then carried out, and committed to Castlebar

gaol, where he remained till the June following. Hewas found

guilty on June 6th, and executed the 12th.

After drinking a bottle of port, he went out of prison with

the air of one going to a ball. He gave a spring off the ladder,

which snapped the rope in two. He fell down, but instantly

leaped up. All his courage was gone, and none could die more

penitent.

Sun. 17. Having been a good deal out of order for some

days, I had thoughts of returning straight to London : But I

judged it best to try a little longer; so I set out for Castlebar.

In a moment I felt an entire change; only I felt a little feverish.

But this did not hinder my preaching in the evening, nor God

from giving us an uncommon blessing. The same attended us

on the following evening; but more eminently on Tuesday,

both morning and evening ; as well as in the administration of

the Lord's Supper, in which two Clergymen desired to partake

with us.

Wed. 20. We set out between three and four, and in just

twelve hours reached Sligo. There I met S. Pennington once

more, with her lovely daughter and son-in-law. I never before

saw such a congregation in Sligo, so numerous, and so serious.

Does there yet another day of visitation appear even for this

desolateplace?

Thur. 21.-I was constrained, by the earnestness of the

people, to preach at five, though with much difficulty ; my

tongue literally cleaving to the roof of my mouth, through

extreme dryness. Between nine and ten I was agreeably sur-

prised at Manorhamilton, where I expected little good. But

the power of God fell upon the congregation in a very uncom-

mon degree ; so that scarce any one was unaffected. We then

hobbled on, through wonderful roads, to Annadale ; where we

soon forgot all the labours of the day, for which the amiable

family, and the earnest congregation, made us large amends.

Fri. 22. We went on to Ballyconnel, where I was nothing

glad that the rain drove us into our melancholy House. How-

ever, we had a comfortable meeting ; and I believe many found

their desires increased of worshipping God in spirit and in truth .

[May, 1789.

Saturday, 23. Between ten and eleven I preached at Killeshan-

dra, in apleasant meadow, to a large and attentive congregation,

though we had a few light showers of rain. Hence we went

through a most beautiful country, equal to any in England, to

Killmore. After dining at Mr. Creighton's, we took a walk to

see the remains of the venerable Castle where Bishop Bedell was

confined, It stands in a fine lake, being built exactly round,

with walls nine feet thick. It is remarkably high, but has been

for many years without inhabitant; one side of it being beaten

down by Oliver Cromwell. Avery large congregation, from all

parts, assembled in the evening ; to whom I proclaimed, " Jesus

Christ, made of God unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and

sanctification, and redemption."

Sun. 24. At seven I preached in the Town-Hall at Cavan,

to a very large and well-behaved congregation. As I went

through Ballyhays, the poor people flocked round me on every

side, and would not be contented, till I came out of the chaise,

and spent some time with them in prayer. I expected, being a

fair morning, to see a huge congregation at Clones ; but while

we were at church, the rain came on : So all I could do in the

evening was, to let Joseph Bradford preach to as many as the

House would contain, and to administer the Lord's Supper to

our own society.

Mon. 25.-I preached to a multitude of people in the Old-

Camp, on, " All things are ready ; come ye to the marriage."

The congregation seemed ready to receive every word. I hardly

saw, since I left Cork, such congregations, either for number or

seriousness, as is this at Clones .

Tues. 26. The rain prevented my preaching abroad at

Brooksborough, although the congregation was exceeding large.

Part of them were sheltered by a spacious turf-house, and the

rest little regarded the rain; for the Lord watered us, in an

uncommon degree, with the dew of his blessing: And a more

affectionate family than Mr. M'Carty's, I have not found in the

kingdom. This appeared more particularly in the morning,

Wednesday, 27. When we were talking together, one and ano-

ther fell upon their knees all round me, and most of them burst

out into tears and earnest cries, the like of which I have seldom

heard ; so that we scarce knew how to part. At noon I preached

to an unwieldy multitude, in the market-house at Enniskillen;

and, I am persuaded, not in vain : God was there of a truth. I

June, 1789.1 459

concluded the day by preaching at Sidare, to the old, steady

congregation.

Thur. 28. I went on to Kirlish-Lodge, through storms of

wind and rain ; yet we had a large congregation of serious peo-

ple; though divers came from far. In the morning, Friday, 29,

we spent an hour at Lord Abercorn's seat, three miles from

Newtownstewart. The house is elegant in the highest degree,

both within and without. It stands on a little eminence over a

fine river, in a most beautiful park: But the owner has not so

much as the beholding it with his eyes ; spending all his time in

England.

Between Newtown and Moyle we had such rain as I never

saw in Europe before. In two minutes the horsemen were

drenched from head to foot. We dined at the Rector's, Dr.

Wilson, a man of very uncommon learning, particularly in the

Oriental tongues. At six he took me in his coach to the Castle-

yard, where a numerous congregation soon assembled. Almost

as soon as I began to preach, the rain began. Observing the

people begin to scatter, I prayed aloud, that God would " stay

the bottles of heaven." He did so : The people returned ; and

we had a comfortable, refreshing shower of heart-reviving love,

Sat. 30.-I took a view of the improvements round the

house, which are wonderfully pleasant. I have seen few.com-

parable to them in the kingdom, except Dr. Lesley's at Tan-

deragee.

MAY 31.-(Being Whitsunday.) I preached at London-

derry at ten, (two hours before the Church Service began,) on,

" They were all filled with the Holy Ghost."

I found an agreeable prospect here : A neat, convenient

preaching-house just finished ; asociety increasing and well uni-

ted together ; and the whole city prejudiced in favour of it. On

Monday and Tuesday, the congregations were uncommonly

large, though we had rain every day, particularly on Tuesday

evening, when the hearts of the people seemed to be as melting

wax; and likewise at five on Wednesday morning. I preached

on, " Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord:" A good

farewell to Londonderry.

Wed. JUNE 3.-A quarter of an hour after I set out, the

axletree ofmy chaise snapped in two. In about half an hour I

procured another chaise, and in three hours reached Newtown

Limavaddy. Finding a congregationwas waiting for me in the


preaching-house, I went to them without delay. The House

was throughly filled with deeply-attentive hearers ; and the

power of God was among them.

Wewent hence, through miserable roads, to Coleraine ; but the

company there made amends for them. We met with a right

English society, in spirit, in carriage, and even in dress ; but I

was concerned to find John Stephens, a lovely young Preacher,

in adeepconsumption ; from which, Ijudge, nothing can recover

him, unless perhaps a total butter-milk diet. In the evening

the large meeting-house which was offered me was well filled,

though the rain was heavy.

Thur. 4.-I was fully employed in answering a heap of let-

ters. In the evening, the rain continuing, (as it has done almost

every day since we set out from Dublin,) I was glad to accept

of the meeting again, which was fuller than the evening before.

Friday, 5. We went a few miles out of our way, to call at a

small village, where abundance of people flocked to the church,

and appeared to be quite ripe for the Gospel: So I preached
"Now is the accepted time; now is the day of salvation."

on,

Thence we hastened on to Ballymena, where the rain did us no

harm by driving us into the meeting-house ; where a large con-

gregation cheerfully heard the word that is able to save their

souls.

Sat. 6.-The largest meeting-house I have been in was that

which I preached inat Antrim ; and the people behaved exceed-

ing well ; the children as well as the rest. In the evening I

was at the new chapel at Lisburn, the largest and best-finished

in the north of Ireland. Sunday, 7. It was well filled at nine.

We went to church alittle before twelve, where the singingwas

admirably good ; the Clerk who teaches them to sing, having

been formerly a Leader in our society. The day continuing

stormy, I could not preach in the street, but we were glad to

retreat into the Linen-Hall. Here was such a congregation as

I have not seen since I came into the kingdom ; but some things,

called gentlemen, were walking to and fro, and talking during

the greatest part of the sermon. If these had been poor men,

probably they would have had common sense. Themeeting of

the society which followed, at which we permitted many others

to be present, was exceeding solemn. The power of God fell

uponmany. I observed one gentlewoman in particular, that

wept and trembled exceedingly. I did not wonder, therefore,

June, 1789.1

that the Room was filled at five; and that we had a parting

blessing.

Mon. 8.-We went on to Belfast. I had at first thought of

preaching in the Linen-Hall ; but the weather being very

uncertain, I went to the heads of the large meeting-house, to

desire the use of it, which they granted in the most obliging

manner. It is the completest place of public worship I have

ever seen . It is of an oval form ; as I judge by my eye, a hun-

dred feet long, and seventy or eighty broad. It is very lofty,

and has two rows of large windows ; so that it is as light as our

new chapel in London : And the rows ofpillars, with every other

part, are so finely proportioned, that it is beautiful in the highest

degree.

The House was so crowded both within and without, (and

indeed with some of the most respectable persons in the town,)

that it was with the utmost difficulty I got in; but I then found

I went not up without the Lord. Great was my liberty of

speech among them; great was our glorying in the Lord : So

that I gave notice, contrary to my first design, of my intending

topreach there again in the morning; but soon after, the sex-

ton sent me word, it must not be ; for the crowds had damaged

the House, and some of them had broke off and carried away

the silver which was on the Bible in the pulpit: So I desired

one of our Preachers to preach in our little House, and left

Belfast early in the morning.
Tues. 9.-About eight I came once more to Newtown, where

I had not been for eleven years, and preached at nine to a mul-

titude of people, in the Presbyterian meeting-house. All of

them seemed to be not a little affected. God grant the impres-

sion may continue ! From hence we had a pleasant ride to

Portaferry, a pretty large sea-port town, and one of the quietest

I ever saw, either in England, Scotland, or Ireland. Here

likewise I preached in a large meeting-house, to a serious and

well-behaved congregation, on, " Stand ye in the old paths ;"

andmany seemed determined to " walk therein."

Wed. 10. We had twice or thrice as many people in the

morning as our House would have contained. We had then a

lovely passage to Strangford ; but the question was, where to

preach. I was inclined to preach in the open air, as I did eleven

years ago, till the Vicar called upon me, and, after a little friendly

conversation, asked me if I would not preach in the chapel. As


wewalked together through the street,the people gathered from

every quarter : So that the church was over filled ; many being

constrained to stand without the door ; and greatly was the

mighty power ofGod displayed in the midst of them.

We came to Downpatrick before one. Inthe afternoon we

viewed the venerable ruins of the Abbey. Great men have

talked of rebuilding it for many years ; but none moves a hand

towards it. At six I preached to a numerous congregation in

the Grove, on, " How long halt ye between two opinions ?"

Afterwards I met the society, now well established, and still

increasing both in number and strength. Thursday, 11. I

preached in Rathfriland about noon ; and before two, set out for

Tanderagee : But in about half an hour, the iron part of my

fore-axletree broke ; so I walked forward with two of our breth-

ren, which was easier than riding either of their horses. But

beforewe came to Loch-Brickland, my strength was so exhausted,

I was glad to stop at a little inn, and send to Bannbridge, about
!

two miles off, for a post-chaise. It came soon after six o'clock,

and I set out immediately. I had gone about a mile, when Mrs.

Lesley met me with her chaise, (who set out as soon as ever she

heard that my chaise was broke down,) and took me with her to

Tanderagee. A multitude of people were waiting ; (twice as

many as were in the Green at Downpatrick;)when, finding no

want of strength, I earnestly proclaimed, "Godwas in Christ,

reconciling the world unto himself." Such a congregation I have

not seen since I came into the kingdom ; neither such a pleasing

place, shaded with tall, spreading trees, near which ran a clear

river : And all the people listened with quiet and deep attention,

[when invited ] to " drink of the water of life freely."

Fri. 12.-I had a day of rest in the same delightful grove;

and preached on, " Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all

thy heart and with allthy soul." Saturday, 13. I had another

quiet day to answer my letters and revise my papers. I think

the evening congregation was the largest we have seen in the

kingdom; and they all seemed to feel the application of these

words, whichGod applied with uncommon power, " Thou shalt

love thy neighbour as thyself."

Sun. 14. I preached to near as large acongregationat nine,

on, " Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous." After preaching in the

evening, I lodged at Killiman, and preached at seven in the

morning at Mr. Caulfield's door. In the evening I preached in

June, 1789.] JOURNAL. 463

theCastle-yard at Dungannon, on , " There is oneGod," with the

demonstration of the Spirit. It is a lovely place, and contained

a huge congregation. Tuesday, 16. I preached in the street

at Blackwater-Town, on 1 Cor. x. 13. The word sunk deep

into many hearts; for the power of God was in the midst of the

congregation. In the evening I preached once more to a mul-

titude of people, in Mr. M'Gough's avenue ; to whom I paid

probably the last visit, as he is just tottering over the grave.

Wed. 17.-I went on to Newry, and preached once more in

the Presbyterian meeting-house, well filled with rich and poor.

It was a blessed season ; as it was nearly at five in the morning.

Thursday, 18. About ten I began in the market-place at Dun-

dalk : The congregation was large and exceeding quiet. They

were tolerably quiet at Drogheda in the evening, and deeply

attentive at six in the morning. Friday, 19. About eleven I

preached in the street at Swords ; and in the afternoon reached

Dublin.

Sun. 21. I preached and administered the Lord's Supper ;

inthe conclusion ofwhich

The' o'erwhelming power of grace divine

overshadowed the congregation. On Monday, Tuesday, and

Wednesday, I visited the classes ; now containing a little above

a thousand members, after I had excluded about a hundred.

Thursday, 25. I went on to Mrs. Tighe's, at Rosanna, near

Wicklow, an exceeding pleasant seat, deeply embosomed in

woods on every side. In the evening I preached in the great

hall, to about a hundred very genteel persons. I believe most

ofthem felt as well as heard ; someperhaps may bring forth fruit.

Fri. 26. After spending aquiet day, Iwent in the afternoon

to Wicklow, and preached in the Court-House to a large con-

gregation, civil, though unawakened enough : Yet a few

appeared to be deeply attentive; and I hope will " seek the

Lord while he may be found."

Sat. 27. We returned to Dublin by the Glen of the Downs,

much resembling that which lies north above Keswick-Water.

All this country is remarkably fruitful and pleasant ; having, in

many parts, a fine sea, as well as land, prospect.

Sun. 28. In the conclusion of the morning service we had

a remarkable blessing; and the same in the evening, moving the

whole congregation as the heart of one man.

:

[July, 1789.

This day I enter on my eighty-sixth year. I now find I

grow old: 1. My sight is decayed ; so that I cannot read a small

print, unless in a strong light: 2. My strength is decayed ; so that

I walk much slower than I did some years since: 3. My mem-

ory of names, whether of persons or places, is decayed; till I stop

a little to recollect them. What I should be afraid of, is, if I
:

took thought for the morrow, that my body should weigh down

mymind ; and create either stubbornness, by the decrease ofmy

understanding ; or peevishness, by the increase ofbodily infirmi-

ties: But Thou shalt answer for me, O Lord myGod.

Fri. JULY 3. Our little Conference began in Dublin, and

ended Tuesday, 7. On this I observe, 1. I never had between

forty and fifty such Preachers together in Ireland before ; all of

them, we had reason to hope, alive to God, and earnestly
devoted to his service : 2. I never saw such anumber of Preach-

ers before, so unanimous in all points, particularly as to leaving

the Church ; which none of them had the least thought of. It is

no wonder, that there has been this year so large an increase of

the society.

Sun. 5. I desired as many as chose it of our society, to go

to St. Patrick's, being the first Sunday in the month. The

Dean preached a serious, useful sermon ; and we had such a

company of communicants as, I suppose, had scarce been seen

there together for above a hundred years. Our House would

not contain them that came in the evening ; many ofwhom

being little awakened, I preached on, " It is a fearful thing to

fall into the hands of the living God." On Monday and Tues-

day we settled the rest of our business ; and on Wednesday

morning we parted in the same love that we met.

Ihad much satisfaction in this Conference ; in which, convers-
!

ing with between forty and fifty Travelling Preachers, I found

such a body ofmen as I hardly believed could have been found

together in Ireland ; men of so sound experience, so deep piety,

and so strong understanding. I am convinced, they are noway

inferior to the English Conference, except it be in number.

Friday, 10, we observed as a day of fasting and prayer,

chiefly for the increase of the work of God. This was concluded

with a very solemn watch-night, wherein the hearts ofmany were

greatly comforted.

Sun. 12.-At seven I preached in Marlborough-Street, where

(though it rained all the morning) we had afullcongregation of

July, 1789. ] JOUR 4

serious people. Wemet at the new Room at half-hour past nine ;

and truly God was with us. Wehad never somany communi-

cants before ; but asmyday, so was my strength. About two

we left Dublin, and hastened down to the ship ; the Princess

Royal, of Parkgate ; the neatest and mostelegant packet I ever
saw. But the wind failing, we did not get out of the bay till

about twelve. We had exceeding agreeable company; and I

slept as well as if I had been in my own bed. Monday, 13.

The sea being smooth,I shut myselfup inmy chaise, and read

over the life of the famous Mr. George F-, one of the most

extraordinary men (ifwemay callhim aman)that has lived for

many centuries. I never heard before of so cool, deliberate,

relentless a murderer! Andyet from the breaking of the rope

at his execution, which gavehim two hours ofvehementprayer,

there is room to hope he found mercy at last.

Inthe evening we sang ahymn upondeck, which soon drew

all the company about us. I then, without anydelay,began

preaching on, " It is appointed untomenonce todie." I believe

all were a little affected for the present. We were then con-

strained to slacken sail, and to lieby for some hours, not having

water to pass the bar : However, we landed between four and

five inthe morning, Tuesday, 14 ; and, after resting an hour, I

went to Chester. I lodged atT. Briscoe's ; a lovely family indeed ;

just such another as Miss B.'s, at Keynsham. The children,

indeed, are not quite so genteel, but full as much awakened ;

and, I think, the most loving I ever saw. The House was

throughly filled inthe evening, (itbeing thefair-time,) as wellas

the following. Thursday, 16. When I took my leave of the

family, they came all intears. It is long since I saw the like.

About noon I preached to a large and much-affected congrega-

tion at Northwich. A flame is lately broke out here, such as

never was seen here before. In theevening I preached at Man-

chester. Saturday, 18. I consulted Dr. Easton, finding my

thirst and fever much increased. His medicine immediately

took place ; and I was somuch better in the morning,Sunday,

19, that I preached, and, with Dr. Coke's assistance, adminis-

tered the sacrament to eleven or twelve hundred communicants.

Ipreached again in the evening; but it was too much for me,

and brought back my fever. Monday, 20. I wenton to Halifax,

where, in the evening, I preached to a noble congregation ; and

afterwards spent near another hour in exhorting the society.
Ин

466 [Aug. 1789.

Tuesday, 21. I hid myself at Otley, and prepared for the Con-

ference. Friday, 24. I preached to a lovely congregation, on

Ephes. iv. 14. Saturday, 25. I preached inDewsbury, in the

evening, on Rev. xiv. 1-4. It rained all the time. I and

several more people were wet to the skin. I lodged in Joseph

Taylor's house, at Gomersal, who labours for peace, and

would fain reconcile Christ and Belial.

In this journey I employed some part of myleisure time

in reading Mr. Forster's "Voyage round the World." In many

parts of this, one would think he was almost persuaded to be a

Christian. But how is it, then, thathe says, (vol. i. , p. 136,)

"We listened to our boat's crew, who recited a number of dull

stories, intermixed with hearty curses, oaths, and indecent

expressions, &c. , (obscenity,) but seldom without real humour?"

Now, what need ofmentioning these " hearty curses and oaths,"

with such profound indifference, if it were not to screen himself

from the imputation ofbelieving the Bible ?

Sun. 26.-1 preached at noon in Birstal House, to as lively

acongregation as ever was seen there ; and at five preached on

the education of children.

Mon. 27.-Being not well able to preach in the morning,

through the heat and dryness of my mouth, in the evening I

preached on 1 Tim. vi. 20. Tuesday, 28. The Conference

began: About a hundred Preachers were present, and never

was our Master more eminently present with us. Thecase of

separation from the Church was largely considered, and we were

all unanimous against it. Saturday, AUGUST 1. We considered

the case of Dewsbury House, which the self-elected Trustees

have robbed us of. The point they contended for was this,-

that they should have a right of rejecting any Preachers they

disapproved of. But this, we saw, would destroy itinerancy.

So they chose J. A. for a Preacher, who adopted W. E. for his

Curate. Nothing remained but to build another preaching-

house, toward which we subscribed two hundred and six pounds

on the spot.

Sun. 2. Knowing the church would not contain half of our

congregation added to its own, we began at our Room, at half

an hour past nine. After preaching, with the assistance of

three other Clergymen, I administered the sacrament to fifteen

or sixteen hundred persons ; I hope, all desirous to be inward

Christians. Tuesday, 4. Having before preached to the people
Aug. 1789.1 467

at large, I now spoke directly to the Preachers, on, " If any

man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God ; " and, I am

persuaded, God applied his word to many of their hearts.

Wed. 5.-About noon we left Leeds; and that evening went

to Newark, about seventy miles. Thursday, 6. We set out

early, and between four and five reached Hinxworth. I was

now pretty well inclined to rest; but a congregation soon get-

ting together, I would not disappoint them, but preached on,

" We love him becausehe first loved us;" and after preaching,

and travelling fourscore miles, I was no more tired than when

I set out in the morning.

Fri. 7. We reached London between one and two; and

found great reason to praisethe Gracious Power, which had pre-

served us by sea andby land, in allknown and unknown dan-

gers, unto the present hour.

Sat. 8-. I settled allmytemporal business, and, in particular,

chose a new person to prepare the Arminian Magazine ; being

obliged, however unwillingly, to dropMr. O , for only these

two reasons : 1. The errata are unsufferable ; Ihave borne them

for these twelve years, but can bearthem no longer. 2. Several

pieces are inserted without my knowledge, both in prose and

verse. I must try whether these things cannot be amended for

the short residue of my life.

Sun. 9. The new chapel was sufficiently crowded, both in

the morning and at four in the afternoon. At seven we set

out, and about noon, on Monday, 10, reached Bristol. Finding

all things here in a flourishing state, I set out for the west early

on Tuesday morning, and had an exceeding pleasantjourney to

Taunton ; where we had afull and serious congregation in the

evening. Wednesday, 12. I had no thought of preaching at

Collumpton, though we were to pass through it ; but I yielded

to importunity, and preached at one to a numerous audience.

Thence we went on to Exeter, where the people were in high

expectation of seeing the King, who appointed to be there the

next day : However, a pretty large congregation assembled; to

which I preached at six o'clock. We set out at three, on

Thursday, 13, and reached Plymouth between one and two in

the afternoon. I preached to a large audience in the evening ;

andalthough the day was extremely hot, yet I found myself

better yesterday and to-day than I have been for some months.

Fri. 14. In the afternoon I went on to the Dock, having

[Aug. 1789

previously determined not to say or hear anything of their late

senseless quarrel ; wherein I couldnot but blame both sides, and

knew not which to blame most. So I spent this and the next

day in peace, and answered all my letters. Sunday, 16. In

the morning, I believe, we had not less than six hundred com-

municants; but they were all admirablywell-behaved, as ifthey

indeed discerned the Lord's body. But when I preached in the

afternoon, the House would not hold half the congregation. I

chose the space adjoining the south side of the House, capable

of containing some thousands of people. Besides, some hun-

dreds sat on the ridge of the rock which ran along at my left

hand. I preached on part of the Gospel for the day, " He

beheld the city, and wept over it ; " and it seemed as if every

one felt,

Hisheart is made of tenderness ;

Hisbowels melt with love.

Mon. 17.-Setting out at three, we easily reached our friends

at St. Austle by dinner-time. But I knew not where to preach,

the street being so dirty, and the preaching-house so small. At

length we determined to squeeze as many as we could into the

preaching-house ; and truly God was there. Tuesday, 18. We

went on to Truro, where I had appointed to preach at twelve

o'clock ; but here an unforeseen hinderance occurred. I could

not get through the main street to our preaching-house. It was

quite blocked up with soldiers to the east, and numberless tin-

ners to the west ; ahuge multitude ofwhom, being nearly starved,

were come to beg or demand an increaseoftheirwages ; without

which they could not live. So we were obliged to retire to the

other end of the town, where I preached under the Coinage-

Hall, to twice as many people, rich and poor, as the preaching-

house would have contained ; andmany ofthemwouldnot have

come thither at all. How wise are all the ways of God !

In the afternoon, as we could not pass by the common road,

we procured leave to drive round by some fields, and got to Fal-

mouth in good time. The last time I was here, above forty

years ago, I was taken prisoner by animmensemob,gaping and

roaring like lions: But how is the tide turned ! High and low

now lined the street, from one end ofthe town to the other, out

of stark love and kindness, gaping and staring as if the King

were going by. In the evening I preached on the smooth top

of the hill, at a small distance from the sea, to the largest con

Aug. 1789.1 469

gregation I have ever seen in Cornwall, except in or nearRed-

ruth. And such a time I have not known before, since I

returned from Ireland. God moved wonderfully on the hearts

of the people, who all seem to know the day of their visitation.

Wed. 19. I preached at noon in the High-Street in Helstone,

to the largest and most serious congregation which I ever

remember to have seen there. Thursday, 20. I went on to St.

Just, and preached in the evening to a lovely congregation,

many ofwhom have not left their first love. Friday, 21. About

eleven I preached at Newlyn, and in the evening at Penzance ;

at both places I was obliged to preach abroad. Saturday, 22.

I crossed over to Redruth, and at six preached to a huge mul-

titude, as usual, from the steps of the market-house. The word

seemed to sink deep into every heart. I know not that ever I

spent such a week in Cornwall before.

Sun. 23. I preached there again in the morning, and in the

evening at the amphitheatre ; I suppose, for the last time ; for

my voice cannot now command the still increasing multitude.

It was supposed they were now more than five-and-twenty

thousand. I think it scarce possible that all should hear.
Mon. 24.-Calling at Marazion, in myway to Penzance, where

Ihad promised to preach once more, the House was filled in a

few minutes, so that I could not refrain from preaching a short

sermon ; and God was there of a truth. We had a rainy after-

noon ; so I was obliged to preach in the new preaching-house,

considerably the largest, and, inmany respects, far the best, in

Cornwall.

Tues. 25.-I went to St. Ives, and preached, as usual, on one

side of the market-place. Well nigh allthe town attended, and

with all possible seriousness. Surely forty years' labour has not

been in vain here.

Wed. 26. I returned to Redruth, and applied to the great

congregation, "God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto

himself. " I then met the society, and explained at large the

rise and nature of Methodism ; and still aver, I have never read

or heard of, either in ancient or modern history, any other church
!

which builds on so broad a foundation as the Methodists do ;

which requires of its members no conformity either in opinions

or modes of worship, but barely this one thing, to fear God,

and work righteousness.

Thur. 27.We set out early, and reached Truro soon after

[Sept. 1789.

five. I preached at six, to a House full of serious people, on,

" Awake, thou that sleepest." The congregation seemed to be

awake. Thence we hasted forward to Port-Isaac. I preached in

the evening, in an open part ofthe town, to almost allthe inhabit-

ants ofit. Howchanged [since thetime] whenhe that invitedme

durst not take me in, for fear his house should be pulled down !

Fri. 28. I preached at nine in our new House at Camelford,

throughly filled, though at a short warning; and at six in the

evening, in the new House at Launceston; still too small for the

congregation, who seemed exceeding lively. So there is a fair

prospect in Cornwall, from Launceston to the Land's End. Sat-

urday, 29. Going through Tavistock, a poor man asked me to

preach. I began in about aquarter of an hour, the preaching-

house being filled directly; but with so poor a congregation as

Ihave not seen before, for twice seven years. In the evening I

preached at Plymouth-Dock, to a very different congregation,

but equally serious.

Sun. 30. Our service began at ten. The rain prevented the

chapel being too much crowded. In the evening I preached at

Plymouth, on the words in the First Lesson, " How long halt

ye between two opinions ?" It was an awful season. Afterwards

I spent a comfortable evening with a few of our serious brethren.

The jars both here and at the Dock seem now to be over, and

the contending parties arewilling to live inpeace.

Mon. 31. We set out at three, in a lovely morning, and

reached Exeter between twelve and one. Here the scene was

much changed: Many of the people were scattered, and the

rest faint and dead enough. The preaching-house was swiftly

running to ruin, the rain running through the roof into it

amain ; and five or six tenants living in the house were noisy

enough, having none to control them. We called earnestly

upon God to arise, and maintain his own cause : He did so in

the evening congregation, (which was much larger than usual,)

while I strongly enforced the parable of the Sower ; and the

dread of God seemed to rest on the whole congregation.

Tues. SEPTEMBER 1.-We went through a delightful coun-

try to Tiverton. In the evening, the Independent Minister offer-

ing the use of his meeting-house, far larger than ours, I willingly

accepted his offer. The congregationwas far the largest I have

seen in Tiverton for manyyears. I preached on Mark iii. 25 ;

and it seemed all had ears to hear.

Sept. 1789.1 471

Wed. 2.-I preached at Halberton.' I spoke here before in

the open air ; but the rain prevented it now. So as many as

could, conveniently, got into the House. When we set out,

one of my horses was quite lame; so that it was with great diffi-

culty I could get to Taunton. In the evening, we had such a

congregation, as, I suppose, was never in that House before.

Surely the ancient work will some time revive, and the prayers

ofthat blessed man,Joseph Alleine, be answered.

Thur. 3.-Being obliged to take post-horses at Taunton, we

went on to Castle-Carey. Here we found a little company of

lively Christians. We found such another, Friday, 4, at Dit-

cheat; but the rain drove us into the House, where as many as

could squeeze in seemed to be much affected. In the evening

I preached at Shepton, where the flame, kindled some time since,

is not yet extinguished. The next day we went on to Bristol.

Sun. 6. I read Prayers and preached, and administered the

sacrament to many hundred communicants. I preached in the

evening as usual ; and spent a little more time with the society

than I commonly do: But it was more than I could well do :

Yet in four-and-twenty hours I was as well as usual. The fair

brought abundance of strangers to the preaching on Monday,

Tuesday, and Wednesday. Thursday, 10. I went over to

Thornbury, where we preached near fifty years, and hardly saw

any fruit ; but whom can we despair of? Now at length it seems

that God's time is come. Afew men of substance in the town

havebuilt a neat and commodious preaching-house. It was filled

within and without with serious hearers ; andtheydid not hear

invain.

Fri. 11. I went over to Kingswood: Sweet recess ! where

everything is now just as I wish. But

Man was not born in shades to lie !

Letuswork now ; we shall restby andby. Saturday, 12. I spent

some time with the children; all ofwhom behaved well ; several

are much awakened, and a few rejoicing inthe favour ofGod.

Sun. 13.-As Mr. Baddiley assisted me in the morning, I

took the opportunity of preaching at Kingswood in the after-

noon, and abroad in the evening; and was abundantly better in

the evening than in the morning. Monday, 14. I spent an

agreeable hour with Mr. Ireland and Mr. Romaine, at Brisling-

ton. I could willingly spend some time here; but I have none


to spare. Tuesday,15. In the evening I preached at Pensford,

to anuncommoncongregation,and with anuncommon blessing.

Wednesday, 16. Iwent on to Midsummer-Norton. I never saw

the church so full before. I preached on that verse in one of

the Psalms for the day,"Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill

it." Many, I believe, found thepromisetrue. In the evening

Ipreached to our honest, earnest colliers, at Coleford; most of

whom attended again at five in the morning. Thursday, 17. I

preached at Frome, to amuch larger audience, and withmuch

of the presence of God. Friday, 18. At noon I preached at

Trowbridge, in anopenplace, to amultitude ofpeople; and in

the evening, to our old, steady congregation at Bradford ; but

many of them aregone into a better world. Scarce any ofthe

rich and honourable are left; but it is enough that the Gospel

is preached to the poor. Saturday, 19. At Bath the scene is

changed again. Herewehavethe rich and honourable in abun-

dance; andyet abundance ofthem came evenin a stormynight,

and seemed as attentive as colliers.

Sun. 20.-I know not that ever I had so large a number of

communicants before; after I had applied strongly, " Neither

circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new

creature." In the afternoon I applied full as strongly, "God

forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus

Christ;" and inthe evening returned to Bristol.

On Monday, 21, and the three following days, I visited the

classes at Bristol. Friday, 25. I spent an hour at Clare-Hill

with Mr. Henderson ; I believe the best Physician for lunatics

inEngland: But he could not save the life of his only son, who

wasprobably taken to bring his father to God.

Sun. 27-. I preached at the new Room morning and even-

ing, and in the afternoon at Temple church ; but it was full as

much as I could do. I doubt I must not hereafter attempt to

preach more than twice aday. Monday, 28. I strongly enforced

the caution of St. Paul, "Be not conformed to this world; " but

whocan enforce it enough ? For what destruction does this con-

formity bring upon the children of God ! Tuesday, 29. Being

much importuned, I went to Churchill, about twelve miles west

of Bristol. The rain was heavy ; yet many of the poor people

made their way through it ; so that the church (they said) has

scarce ever been so filled before. After the Service many stayed

in the church, because of the rain: So I spent some time with

Oct. 1789.1 JOURNAL. 473

them in singing and prayer; and our hearts were much com-

forted together.

Thur. OCTOBER 1.-I went over to Bath, and preached once

more to a very large congregation, on 1 Pet. i. 14. Friday, 2 .

We had a solemn watch-night at Kingswood, and most of the

people stayed to the end. Sunday, 4. I purposed preaching

abroad once more in the afternoon ; but just before five the rain

began ; so I could only enforce in the Room those solemn words,

in the first Lesson for the day, " Turn ye, turn ye, from your

evil ways," &c.

Mon. 5.-We set out at four, and, hiring post-horses, reached

Mr. Whitchurch's, at Sarum, before dinner. In the evening

the House was crowded extremely, and the voice of God was

heard among them; especially in the meeting of the society, to

whom I delivered my own soul once for all. Tuesday, 6. About

nine I spoke full as plain at Winchester, I think, to the largest

congregation I have seen there ; and it seemed the most

serious ; on that awful subject, Mark ix. 44. The audience at

Portsmouth-Common, in the evening, were of another kind ; to

whom, therefore, I spake in quite another manner, from Eph.

iii. 14, &c. Wednesday, 7. About one I preached to another

very serious congregation in the town ; whom, therefore, I

exhorted to leave the first principles, and go on to perfection.

Thursday, 8. I set out early, and in the afternoon we were

brought to London.

I am now as well, by the good providence of God, as I am

likely to be while I live. My sight is so decayed that I cannot

well read by candle-light ; but I can write as well as ever : And

my strength is much lessened, so that I cannot easily preach

above twice a day. But, I bless God, my memory is not much

decayed ; and my understanding is as clear as it has been these

fifty years.

Sun. 11. I preached at West-Street morning and afternoon,

and then buried the remains of Dorothy Hundlebee, who, after

an exemplary life, went to God in the full triumph of faith .

Tuesday, 13. I preached partly upon the subject at the new

chapel ; and strongly exhorted the congregation to be followers

of her as she was of Christ. In the evening Iwent in the mail-

coach to Barton-Mills, and thence in a chaise to Lynn.

Wed. 14. The heavy rain prevented tender people from

attending in the evening. Sunday, 25. In the morning I


preached at West-Street, on Matt. xxii. 11 : " He saw there a

man which had not on a wedding garment ; " and showed that

this has no manner of respect, either to the Lord's Supper, or the

righteousness of Christ ; but that it means neither more nor

less than holiness. At three I preached to a crowded audience

at Allhallows church, on Matt. vi. 8. At both places I believe

God strongly applied his word to many hearts.

Mon. 26. I set out early, dined at Wallingford, just fifty

miles from the new chapel, and preached in the evening to far

more people than the preaching-house could contain. It was a

day of God's power, and I believe most of the stout-hearted

trembled at his word.

Tues. 27.-I went on to Witney. Here I found a lively

people, many ofwhomwere hungering and thirsting after righte-

ousness . Of what use to a whole community may one person

be, even awoman that is full of faith and love ! The Lord

strengthen thy heart, and fully prepare thee for every good

word and work !

Thur. 29.-I returned to Oxford ; and as notice had been

given, though without my knowledge, of my preaching at noon,

Idid so, on, " There is one God," to a very serious congrega-

tion; but in the evening such a multitude ofpeople pressed in,

that they hindered one another from hearing. I know not when

we have had so noisy a congregation; so that by their eagerness

to hear, they defeated their own purpose.

Fri. 30.-In my way to Wycomb, I spent an hour at Mr.

Smith's, in Cudsdem. He has ten children, from eighteen to a

year or two old ; but all under government : So that I met the

very picture of my father's family. What awretched steward

was he, who influenced LordH-to put away such a tenant!

In the evening the House at High-Wycomb, though full, was

still as night. Saturday, 31. We came safe andwell to London.

Sun. NOVEMBER 1.-Being All-Saint's Day, a day that I

peculiarly love, I preached on Rev. vii. 1 ; and we rejoicedwith

solemn joy. Monday, 2. Miss H. met me at Hatfield, and took

me on to Hinxworth. I never saw that preaching-house so full

as it was this evening ; and the people now begin not only to

understand, but to relish, what they hear. Tuesday, 3. We

went over to Wrestlingworth, where likewise the church was fuller

than ever before. I spoke exceeding closely the next evening

at Hinxworth, which the people are now able to bear ; and at

Dec. 1789.1 475

length that excellent woman that has so tenderly cared for them

sees some fruit of her labour.

Mon. 9. I returned to London ; and the four following days

I employed in visiting the classes. Sunday, 15. We had, as

usual, a large congregation, and asolemn opportunity, at Spital-

fields ; and another at Shoreditch church ; where I preached a

charity sermon, after the Prayers had been read in such aman-

ner as I never heard before. At five I preached at the new

chapel, and met the society ; but it was too much for me.

Mon. 16. After an intermission ofmany weeks, through the

dryness of my mouth, I resolved to try if I could not preach at

five in the morning ; anddid so with not much difficulty ; and I

now hope to hold on a little longer. Wednesday, 18. I found

much life in the society at Brentford : So little cause have we to

despair of any people, though for the present ever so dead !

Thursday, 19. I preached to a large congregation at Lambeth.

On Friday and Saturday I answered my letters.

Sun. 22. We had large congregations and a comfortable

opportunity, both morning and evening, at West-Street chapel.

Monday, 23. I set out for Northamptonshire ; and in the even-

ing preached at Whittlebury ; but the House would ill contain

the congregation, which were all serious as death. So they

were the next evening. Wednesday, 25. The Dissenting Min-

ister at Towcester offering me the use of his meeting-house, it

was well filled; and I believe our Lord was in the midst.

Thence we went on to Northampton, where I spent two even-

ings with very great satisfaction; although the greatmanwhowas

so affected at Bath last year was, as I expected hewould, ashamed

to seeme. Friday, 27. We hada pleasantjourney to London.

Sun. 29. I preached at the new chapel in the morning, on,

" Love is the fulfilling of the law ; " and in the evening, on, "Owe

noman anything, but to love one another : " And each time God

was eminently present. Monday, 30. I went to Deptford, and

found the society in peace ; but nearly at one stay. I endea-

voured to stir up both them and the congregation, in the even-

ing, to go on to perfection. Tuesday, DECEMBER 1. I called

on Mr. Dornford, and found he kept his bed, being ill of a

stubborn ague ; but it came no more. At noon I preached in

the new preaching-house at Mitcham ; and examined the little

earnest society, almost all rejoicing in the love of God. I then

retired to the lovely family at Balham.

[Dec. 1789.

Here I had leisure on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday,

to consider throughly the account of the Pelew Islands. It is

ingenious ; but I esteem it a dangerous book, which I cannot

believe, if I believe the Bible ; for the direct tendency of it is to

show, that the Bible is quite needless ; since if menmay be as

virtuous without revelation as with it, then it is quite super-

fluous ; then the fable of Jesus Christ, and that of Mahomet,

are equally valuable. I do not say that Mr. Keate, much less

Captain Wilson, designed to inculcate this consequence ; but it

necessarily follows, ifyou believe the premises. I cannot believe

there is such a Heathen on earth as Abba Thulle ; much less

such a heathen nation as are here painted.

But what do you think of Prince Lee Boo ? I think he was

a good-natured, sensible young man, who came to England with

CaptainWilson, and had learned his lesson well ; butwasjust as

much a Prince, as Tomo Chachi was a King.

Mon. DECEMBER 7.-I went to Chatham, and preached, as

usual, to far more than the House could contain : And it is no

wonder, considering that the spirit and behaviour of the people

confirm the doctrine they hear. Tuesday, 8. We took a walk

in the dock-yard. In the evening I preached in the elegant

House at Brompton ; but it is already far too small. The peo-

ple flock in on every side, to hear peacefully the Gospel.

Thur. 10. I returned to London, and preached at the new

chapel.

Sun. 13.-Feeling much concern for poor backsliders, I

endeavoured to explain and apply the concluding words of the

parable ofthe Prodigal Son : " This thy brotherwas dead, and

is alive again : He was lost, and is found ; " and in the evening

those of Hosea viii. 11 .

Mon. 14.-I went to Canterbury, and preached in the evening, on, " There is one God." The House would in nowise

contain the congregation, in which were several Clergymen. It

pleased God to give me uncommon liberty of spirit ; as also at

Dover the next evening, where the new House, large as it is,

was far too small, so that many could not get in. Wednesday,

16. Being quite hoarse, I could neithersing nor speak : However,

I determined to show myself, at least, where I had appointed to

preach. Coming to Sandwich about noon, and finding the con-

gregation was waiting, I trusted in God, and began to speak :

The more I spoke, the more my voice was strengthened ; so that

Dec. 1789. J

in afew minutes I think all could hear ; and many, I believe,

took knowledge that what they heard was not the word of man

but ofGod.

Ipreached again at Margate inthe evening, till my voice was

near as clear as before I begun. The Spirit of God was with

us of a truth.

Thur. 17.-I returned to Canterbury, and spent half an

hour with my old friend Mr. Perronet, the last of the six sons,

and nearly worn out, and just tottering over the grave. In

the evening we had another numerous congregation, and all

deeply serious. Friday, 18. We returned to London.

Mon. 21. I went to Sevenoaks, where the work ofGod has

been at a stand for many years. It was a rainy night ; notwith-

standing which, the chapel was crowded from end to end : God

seemed to rest in anuncommon degree upon the whole congre-

gation. I was still more surprised to see the House filled in a

very dark, rainy morning ; a sight which has not been for many

years. Surely God is about to give this poor, dead people yet

another gracious visitation.

Fri. 25.-(Being Christmas-Day.) We began the service in

the new chapel at four o'clock, as usual ; where I preached

again in the evening, after having officiated in West-Street at

the common hour. Saturday, 26. We had a very uncommon

congregation in the evening, with a very uncommon blessing.

Sunday, 27. I preached in St. Luke's, our parish church, in
the afternoon, to a very numerous congregation, on, "The

Spirit and the Bride say, Come." So are the tables turned, that

I havenow more invitations to preach in churches than I can

accept of.

Mon. 28.-I retired to Peckham ; and at leisure hours read

part ofa very pretty trifle,-the Life of Mrs. Bellamy. Surely

never did any, since John Dryden, study more

Tomake vice pleasing, and damnation shine,

than this lively and elegant writer. She has a fine imagination ;

a strong understanding ; an easy style, improved by much read-

ing; a fine, benevolent temper ; and every qualification that

could consist with a total ignorance ofGod. But God was not

in all her thoughts. Abundance of anecdotes she inserts , which

may be true or false. One of them, concerning Mr. Garrick, is

curious. She says, " When he was taking ship for England, a

(Jan. 1790.

lady presented him with a parcel, which she desired him not to

open till he was at sea. When he did, he found Wesley's

Hymns, which he immediately threw overboard." I cannot

believe it. I think Mr. G. had more sense. He knew my

brother well ; and he knew him to be not only far superior in

learning, but in poetry, to Mr. Thomson, and all his theatrical

writers put together: None of them can equal him, either in

strong, nervous sense, or purity and elegance oflanguage. The

musical compositions of his sons are not more excellent than

the poetical ones of their father.

In the evening I preached to a crowded congregation, some

of whom seemed a good deal affected. Thursday, 31. I

preached at the new chapel ; but, to avoid the cramp, wentto

bed at ten o'clock. I was well served. I know not that I ever

before felt so much ofit in one night.

Fri. JANUARY 1, 1790.-I am now an old man, decayed

from head to foot. My eyes are dim ; my right hand shakes

much ; my mouth is hot and dry every morning ; I have a

lingering fever almost every day; my motion is weak and slow.

However, blessed be God, I do not slack my labour : I can

preach and write still.

Sat. 2-. I preached at Snowsfields, to the largest congrega-

tion I have seen there this year, on, " I am not ashamed of the

Gospel of Christ." Sunday, 3. I suppose near two thousand

met at the new chapel to renew their covenant with God; a

scriptural means of grace which is now almost everywhere for-

gotten except among the Methodists.

Tues. 5.-I paid a visit to my old friend Mark Davis ; and

in the evening I preached to a small audience at Leytonstone.

Wednesday, 6. I preached to a larger and more awakened con-

gregation at Stratford. Tuesday, 12. I retired to Highbury-

Place to answer my letters. Sunday, 17. I buried Mrs. Dorn-

ford, (a good woman,) and preached her funeral sermon. In

the afternoon I preached in Great St. Helen's, to a large con-

gregation. It is, I believe, fifty years since I preached there

before. What has Godwrought since that time !

Thur. 21.-I paid a visit to an eminent sister, of whom

every one despaired. She resolved to set out once more. May

God uphold herwith his right hand ! Sunday, 24. We had

alove-feast for all the society, atwhich many spoke their experi-

ence with much simplicity. Monday, 25. I went to Dorking ;

Feb. 1790.] 479

and laboured to awaken aharmless, honest, drowsy people, who

for many years have seemed to stand stock-still, neither increas-

ing nor decreasing.

Fri. 29. We had our general Quarterly Meeting, whereby

it appeared, that the society received and expended about three

thousand pounds a year ; but our expense still exceeded our

income. Saturday, 30. I began meeting the classes, which

took up this day and all the next week.

Sun. FEBRUARY 7.-I preached the funeral sermon of that

saint of God, Robert Windsor, many years a burning and a

shining light. He was born a few months after me ; was a

prudent, serious, diligent man, full of mercy and good fruits ;

without partiality, and without hypocrisy. He seemed on the

brink of death some months ago ; but was suddenly raised up

again ; praised God without ceasing a few days ; and then laid

down, and died.

Wed. 10. We found much of the presence of God in the

chapel at Brentford, where the congregation was exceeding large.

So it was the next evening at Lambeth, though perhaps not so

much alive. Saturday, 13. The meeting of the penitents in the

evening was exceeding solemn ; as indeed it generally is. Sun-

day, 14. I preached a sermon to the children at West-Street

chapel. They flocked together from every quarter ; and truly

God was in the midst of them, applying those words, " Come,

ye little children ; hearken unto me; and I will teach you the

fear of the Lord."

Tues. 16.-I retired to Balham for a few days, in order to

finish my sermons, and put all my little things in order.

Thur. 18.-I preached once more at poor Wandsworth.

The Housewas more crowded than it has been for several years;

and I could not but hope that God will once more build up the

waste places. Friday, 19. I preached to a large audience at

Chelsea; and examined the little society, who do not decrease ;

but rather grow in grace, and strengthen each other's hands.

Sun. 21. I preached to the children at the new chapel ; and

I believe not in vain. Monday, 22. We had a comfortable

opportunity at West-Street ; and another on Tuesday evening

at the new chapel, where we had also a solemn meeting of the

Leaders. I submitted to importunity, and once more sat for

my picture. I could scarce believe myself;-the picture ofone

in his eighty-seventh year !


Wed. 24. I preached once more at Wapping, to a crowded

audience ; and the next evening at the new chapel , throughly

filled. Friday, 26. I preached at Rotherhithe, where also there

is lately a remarkable revival of the work of God. Saturday,

27. I dined at Mr. Baker's, one of the Sheriffs of London ; a

plainman, who still lives in an inn-yard ! In the evening I

had such a congregation at Snowsfields, as has not been seen

there before for many years. Afterwards I met the penitents

for the last time. They quite filled the Room ; and God was

in the midst ofthem .

Sun. 28. We have not had such a congregation at the new

chapel since the renewal of the covenant ; nor such a blessing :

The hearts of the people were like melting wax. Most of them

were in tears ; and I trust they will not soon forget the exhort-

ation which was then given them .

In the afternoon I preached at West-Street chapel, on Eph.

v. 1 , 2. The chapel would not near contain the congregation.

All that could squeeze in seemed much affected ; and it was

with difficulty I broke through and took chaise for Brentford ;

where I came before six o'clock. The congregation here also

was by far the largest I ever saw here ; so that, it seems, our

labour even here will not be in vain.

Mon. MARCH 1.-I left Brentford early in the morning, and

in the evening preached at Newbury. The congregation was

large, and most of them attentive ; but a few were wild as colts

untamed. We had none such at Bath the following evening, but

all were serious as death. Indeed, the work of God seems to

flourish here, deepening as well as widening. Wednesday, 3.

I took a view of the new buildings. There are at present none

like them in England. They have not only added a second

Crescent, with two beautiful rows of houses, near Ludstown, but

a whole town on the other side of the city, which is swiftly

increasing every day. And must all these fine buildings be

burned up ? Yea,-

Earth and heaven destroy'd,

Nor left even one in the mighty void !

Thur. 4.-I went on to Bristol, where I found a people ready

prepared for the Lord. The Preachers are in earnest, the fruit of

which plainly appears in the congregations. Friday, 5. Hearing

Mr. W , of Bolton, was dying, I went over, and spent an

March, 1790.] 481

hour with him. His spirit was much comforted, and in a few

days he was nearly as well as ever. Saturday, 6. I preached

in the evening at Temple church. Mr. Easterbrook has lately

been very ill ; but God has again lifted up his head to be a

father to the poor a little longer. Sunday, 7. I preached at

theRoom morning and evening ; and about two in the after-

noon at Kingswood. Just as I concluded my sermon in the

Room, a lady came inher carriage in all haste; and,finding the

sermon was over, earnestly desired to stay at the society. After-

wards she importuned me much to call on her at the Hot Wells,

where her husband, Governor Johnstone, died two years ago.

On Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, she came

to the preaching, and seemed to be much affected. On Friday

evening I was at Kingswood, and preached to such a congrega-

tion, as I have not seen there on a week-day for forty years,

unless it was at awatch-night. Saturday, 13. I spent two hours

with her atGranby-House, and answered all her questions. She

appeared quite willing to know the truth, and to be altogether a

Christian ; and vehemently desired, if our lives were prolonged,

that I would visit her in London. But if we should live, would

she then be willing to see me? If she is, it would be a miracle

indeed.

This week I visited the classes in Bristol. I wonder we do

not increase in number, although many are convinced, many

justified, and a few perfected in love. I can impute the want

of increase to nothing but want of self-denial. Without this,

indeed, whatever other helps they have, no believers can go

forward.

Sunday, 14, was a comfortable day. In the morning I met

the Strangers' Society, institutedwholly for the relief, not of our

society, but for poor, sick, friendless strangers. I do not know

that I ever heard or read ofsuch an institution till within a few

years ago. So this also is one ofthe fruits of Methodism.

Mon. 15.-I set out early, and dined at Stroud ; but in the

evening we knew not what todo. The preaching-housewas far

too small to contain the congregation ; so that several hundreds

(it was supposed) were obliged to go away. But the power of

God remained with us ; and great was our rejoicing in him.

Tues. 16. At noon I preached at Painswick, to as many as

the House would contain : In the evening, at Gloucester, we

had a large multitude ; but many of them would neither hear


nor let others hear. Indeed, theythat sat in the galleries could

hear well ; but very few of them that were below.

Wed. 17. In the way to Tewkesbury, at the earnest desire

of Samuel Vernon, I called on him and his five daughters, (all

grown up,) who are latelyjoined to that society ; all ofwhom are

now in great earnest, and bid fair to adorn the Gospel of God

our Saviour. I preached at Tewkesbury about twelve ; buthere

also the House would not contain the congregation. We went

on to Worcester in the afternoon, and found much comfort

among awell-established people. They have nojars now, but

all hold the unity of the Spirit in the bond ofpeace. Thursday,

18. We went on to Stourport, which is now full twiceas large

as it was two years ago. The first chapel was built about three

years ago, by the joint contributions of Arminians and Calvinists,

agreeing that theyshould preach by turns. Butin a short time

the poor Arminians were locked out. On this one or two gen-

tlemen built another, far larger and more commodious. But it

was not large enough to contain them in the evening, to whom

I explained that solemn passage in the Revelation, " I saw the

dead, small and great, stand before God." They seemed to be

all serious and attentive as long as I was speaking; but the

moment I ceased, fourscore or one hundred began talking all at

once. I do not remember ever to have been present at such a

scene before. This must be amended ; otherwise (if I should

live) I will see Stourport no more.

Fri. 19.-About eleven,coming to Quinton, I found a con-

gregationwaiting for me. So, that Imight not disappoint them,

I preached immediately, on, "We love him, because he first

loved us ; " and then went on to Birmingham, which I think is

thrice as large as when I saw it fifty years ago.

The congregation in the evening were well squeezed together,

and most ofthem got in. The behaviour of the rich and poor

is such, as does honour to their profession; sodecent, so serious,

so devout, from the beginning to the end ! It was the same the

next evening. Sunday, 21. The Prayers began at the new

House about half an hour after ten. It is a little larger than

the new House at Brompton, and admirably well constructed.

But several hundreds, I suppose, could not get in. I think all

who did, found thatGodwasthere. Thegreat Houselikewise in

the evening was utterly insufficient to contain the congregation.

But God is able to supply this want also ; and his time is best.

March, 1790.]

Mon. 22.-I went on to our old friends at Wednesbury,

where the work of God greatly revives. Business has exceed-

ingly decreased, and most of them have left the town. Somuch

the morehave the poor grown in grace, and laid up treasure in

heaven. But we were at a great loss in the evening. I could

not preach abroad after sunset, and the House would not near

containthepeople. However, as many as possibly could squeezed

in; and their labour was not in vain.

Tues. 23.-About one I preached in the new House at Dud-

ley; one of the neatest inEngland. Itwas a profitable season,

where two persons, they informed me,found peacewith God.

Wehad a pleasant ride to Wolverhampton. This evening the

rainbegan and continued about twenty hours, after more than

four-and-twenty weeks of fair weather ; such a winter as I never

saw before.

Amelancholy event fell out the day before:-The mistress

of the house adjoining boiling some varnish, it boiled over, and

took fire, which seized onher, and burnt her so that her life is

despaired of.

The rain a little lessened our congregation, so that the House

contained us tolerably well ; and many, even of the genteel

hearers, seemed almost persuaded not to halt between two

opinions.

Wed. 24. We rode to Madeley through a pleasant rain,

which did not hinder the church from being throughly filled ;

and, I believe, all whohad spiritual discernment perceived that

it was filled with the presence ofGod. Thursday, 25. At nine

I preached to aselect congregation, onthe deep things ofGod ;

and in the evening, on, "He is able to save unto the uttermost all

themthat come unto God through him." Friday, 26. I finished

my sermon on the Wedding Garment; perhaps the last that I

shall write. My eyes are now waxed dim ; my natural force is

abated. However, while I can, I would fain do alittle for God

before I drop into the dust.

In the evening I preached to a crowded audience at Salop,

on, "Acquaint now thyself with him, and be at peace." But I

was much ashamed for them. The moment I had done speak-

ing, I suppose fifty ofthem were talking all at once ; and no

wonder they had neither sense nor good manners, for they

were gentlefolks !

Sat. 27.-I preached in the evening to a sensible and well

behaved congregation atNewcastle-under-Lyne. (Observe, that

is the name of the river which runs above the town.) Sunday,

28. I preached soon after one in Mr. Myat's yard, at Lane-End:

The House would not have contained a quarter ofthe people.

At Burslem also I was obliged to preach abroad, such were the

multitudes of the people. Surely the people of this place were

highly favoured. Mercy embraced them on every side.

Mon. 29. At nine I preached inthe new chapel, at Tunstal ;

the most elegant I have seen since I left Bath. My text was,

" Let us go on unto perfection ; " and the people seemed to

devour the word.

In the evening I preached at Congleton. The Minister, the

Mayor, and all the heads of the town, were present ; so, that I

might not overshoot them, I preached on Psalm xc. 12: And,

I believe, God applied it to their hearts.

Tues. 30.-I went on to Macclesfield, and preached to a

crowded audience,both this and the following night. On Thurs-

daymorning one of my horses died. I judged it best to leave

the other till I could procure another, and took post-chaises to

Stockport. A large congregation was ready at six in the even-

ing. Inthemorning, on Good-Friday, we went on to Oldham.

The new House would innowise containthecongregation; but

I preached to as many as it would contain, on 1 Cor. vi. 19;

and at Manchester in the evening, Saturday, APRIL 3, on

Heb. iv. 14.

APRIL 4.-(Being Easter-day.) I think we had about one

thousand six hundred communicants. I preached, both morning

and evening, without weariness ; and in the evening lay down in

peace.

Mon. 5.-Calling at Altringham, I was desired to speak a

few words to the people in the new chapel ; but almost as soon

as I got thither, the House was filled ; and soon after, more than

filled. So I preached on 1 Pet. i. 3; and many praised God

with joyful lips. About twelve I preached in the chapel at

Northwich, to a large and very lively congregation; and, in the

evening, met once more with our old affectionate friends at

Chester. I have never seen this chapel more crowded than

to-night ; but stillit could not near contain the congregation.

Both this and the following evening, I was greatly assisted to
declare the power of Christ's resurrection; and to exhort allthat

were risen with him to set their affections on the things above.

May, 1790.1

Here I met with one ofthe most extraordinary phenomena that

I ever saw, or heard of:-Mr. Sellers hasin his yard a large New-

foundland dog, and an old raven. These have fallen deeply in

love with each other, and never desire to be apart. The bird

has learned the bark of the dog, so that few can distinguish

them. She is inconsolable when he goes out ; and, if he stays

out a day or two, she will get up all the bones and scraps she

can, and hoard them up for him till he comes back.

Wed. 7.-About eleven I preached at Warrington. The

chapel was well filled with serious hearers ; but the great con-

gregationwas at Liverpool. If those without were added to

those within, I believe it would have exceeded even that at

Manchester ; and surely the power of God was present with

them also.

Thur. 8. Such another congregation we had on Thursday,

among whom were many that had never been there before.

They seemed utterly amazed when I explained, “ Now faith is

the evidence of things unseen." I believe many were then con-

vinced ; but, alas, how soon will that conviction die away !

Fri. 9. We went to Wigan, for many years proverbially

called, wicked Wigan : But it is not now what it was : The inha-

bitants in general have taken a softer mould. The House in the

evening was more than filled ; and all that could get in seemed

to be greatly affected, while I strongly applied our Lord's words ,

" I will ; be thou clean." Saturday, 10. I crossed over to North-

wich, and again found the wisdom ofjudging nothing before the

time. The removal, which I used to ascribe to caprice, I find

was the effect of necessity. Awretched man, who had persuaded

his father-in-law to give the staff out of his own hands, now

abridges him of half his five hundred ayear ; and has the con-

science to take fifty pounds a year out of the remainder, for the

board of his son, apprenticed to him. In the evening I preached

in the lovely House at Bolton, to one of the loveliest congrega-

tions in England; who, by patient continuance in well-doing,

have turned scorn and hatred into general esteem and good-will.

[Part of the manuscript having been lost, causes a chasm

here']

Mon. MAY 24.-We set out at four, and reached Forglen

about noon. The face of the country is much changed for the

better since I was here before. Agriculture increases on every

side ; so do manufactories, industry, and cleanliness.

[June, 1790.

But I found poor Lady B. (one of the most amiablewomen

in the kingdom) exceeding ill ; and I doubt whether she will be

much better till she removes to her own country. I spent a

very agreeable afternoon with the lovely family, and preached

to a serious congregation in the evening. Tuesday, 25. We

returned to Aberdeen ; and I took a solemn farewell of a

crowded audience. If I should be permitted to seethem again,

well; if not, I have delivered my own soul.

Wed. 26. Taking the midland road,we spent an hour at

Lawrence-Kirk; which, from an inconsiderable village, is, by

the care and power of Lord Gordon, soon sprung up into a

pleasant, neat, and flourishing town. His Lordship has also

erected a little library here, adjoining to a handsome and well-

furnished inn. The country from hence to Brechin is as plea-

sant as a garden : Happy would Scotland be, if it hadmany

such gentlemen andnoblemen. In the evening I began preach-

ing at Brechin, in the Freeman's Lodge ; but Iwas so faint and

ill, that I was obliged to shorten mydiscourse. Thursday, 27.

Wewent on through Forfar (now a handsome and almost a

new town) and Cupar to Auchterarder. Herewe expected poor

accommodations, but were agreeably disappointed. Food, beds,

and everything else, were as neat and clean as at Aberdeen or

Edinburgh. Friday, 28. We travelled through a delightful

country, by Stirling and Kilsythe, to Glasgow. The congrega-

tion was miserably small ; verifying what I had often heard

before, that the Scots dearly love the word of the Lord-on the

Lord's day. If I live to come again, I will take care to spend

only the Lord's day at Glasgow.

Mon. 31. We set out at two, and came to Moffat soon after

three in the afternoon. Taking fresh horses, we reached Dum-

fries between six and seven, and found the congregationwaiting:

So after a few minutes, I preached on Mark iii. 35 : "Whoso-

ever shall do the will ofGod, the same is my brother, and sister,
and mother."

Tues. JUNE 1.-Mr. Mather had agoodcongregation at five.

In theday I conversed with manyofthe people; acandid,humane,

well-behaved people ; unlike most that I have found in Scotland.

In the evening the Housewas filled; and trulyGod preached to

their hearts. Surely God will have a considerable people here.

Wed. 2.-We set out early, and reached Carlisle about noon.

The work a little increases here : A small handful of people

June, 1790.] 487

stand firm ; and those that opposed are broken to pieces. Our

House would not near contain the congregation ; and the word

of Godwas with power. Thursday, 3. We rode to Hexham,

through one of the pleasantest countries that I have lately seen.

The road lay (from Haisle) on the side of a fruitful mountain,

shaded with trees, and sloping down to a clear river ; which ran

between ours and another fruitful mountain, well wooded and

improved. At Hexham they have lately built a convenient

preaching-house; but it is too small already. Here is a loving

people, much alive to God, and consequently increasing daily.

Friday, 4. We reached Newcastle. In this and Kingswood

house, were I to do my own will, I should choose to spend the

short remainder ofmy days. But it cannot be; this is not my

rest. This and the next evening we had a numerous congrega-

tion ; and the people seemed much alive.

Sun. 6.-I was invited to preach in Lemsley church, on the

side of Gateshead-Fell ; but some hours after, the Minister

changed his mind. So I preached in our own preaching-house,

which contained the greater part of the congregation tolerably

well ; among whom were Sir Henry Lyddal and his Lady, with

agreat number of his servants. The chapel was hot as a stove ;

but neither high nor low seemed to regard it: For God was

there ! The Orphan-House was equally crowded in the evening ;

but the rain would not suffer me to preach abroad.

Mon. 7.-I transcribed the Stations of the Preachers. Tues-

day, 8. I wrote a form for settling the preaching-houses, without

any superfluous words, which shall be used for the time to come,

verbatim, for all the Houses to which I contribute anything. I

will no more encourage that villanous tautology of lawyers, which

is the scandal of our nation. In the evening I preached to the

children of our Sunday-school ; six or seven hundred of whom

were present. N. B. None of our masters or mistresses teach

for pay : They seek a reward that man cannot give.

Wed. 9. Having dispatched all the business I had to do

here, in the evening I took a solemn leave of this lovely peo-

ple ; perhaps never to see them more in this life ; and set out early

in the morning, Thursday, 10. About noon I preached at

Wolsingham, in a House throughly filled, on Isaiah xxxv. 8 ;

and in the evening in Weardale, which hardly contained the

congregation. The same spirit was still in the congregation,

that has been for many years ; andmany felt, the Lord's hand


is not shortened that it cannot save, nor his ear heavy that it

cannothear.

Fri. 11.-About seven I preached at Stanhope ; but no

House would contain the congregation. So I stood in a broad

placenear the church ; and enforced," If any man thirst, let him

come unto me and drink." In going through Wolsingham, we

called at Mr. W.'s, who was in low circumstances till a few years

ago, when many thousands were heaped upon him unawares ;

and yet he seems to walk unhurt in fire ! What is too hard

forGod?

Hence we went on to Durham. Here likewise I was obliged

to preach in the open air, to a multitude of people, all ofwhom

were serious and attentive. Saturday, 12. We went through a

lovely country to Sunderland, where I preached in the evening

to a numerous congregation. Sunday, 13. In the morning I

preached a charity sermon in Monkwearmouth church, for the

Sunday-school ; which has already cleared the streets of all the

children that used to play there on aSunday from morning to

evening. I preached at five near the Pens, to several thousands

of people. Here, it is plain, our labour has not been in vain.

Mon. 14. In the evening I preached to as many as the

Town-Hall would contain at Hartlepool. Tuesday, 15. I

received a farther account of Mrs. B., from two that had lived

withher ayear and a quarter ; andwasthroughlyconvinced, that

she is awoman of strong sense, and a lively imagination; but

that she is given up to a strong delusion, (whether natural or

diabolical I know not,) to believe a lie. One proofmay suffice:

Some time since, she told the community, as from God, that the

day ofjudgmentwould begin that evening. But how could she

come off when the event did not answer ? Easily enough.

" Moses," said she, " could not see the face of God, till he had

fasted forty days and forty nights. We must all do the same."

So for three weeks they took no sustenance, but three gills of

water per day ; and three weeks more, they took each three gills

of water-gruel per day. What amercy that half of them did

not die in making the experiment !

Aboutnoon I preached abroad to a large congregation, and

in the afternoon went on to Stockton. The congregation was at

least double to that at Stockton, all ofwhom seemed to feel that

God was there. Wednesday, 16. I preached in the main street

at Yarm, to a dull, attentive people, Thursday, 17. About

June, 1790.|

noon I preached at Potto, to a deeply serious congregation ; and

to another such in the evening at Hutton-Rudby. Twenty

years this society was a pattern to all the country for seriousness

and deep devotion. I think seventeen of them were perfected in

love ; but only three of them remain, and most of the rest are

either removed, or grown cold and dead.

Fri. 18. I preached at Stokesley in the morning ; and then

went on to Whitby. It was very providential, that part of the

adjoining mountain fell down, and demolished our old preaching-

house,with many houses besides ; bywhich means we have one

of the most beautiful chapels inGreat Britain, finely situated on

the steep side of the mountain. At six it was pretty well filled

with such a congregation of plain,earnest people, as is not often
seen. I conversed with many of them the next day, who were

much alive to God. Sunday, 20. The House contained us at

seven tolerably well. The church likewise was well filled. But

in the evening we were much straitened for room ; but as many

as couldhear, stood on the pavementwithout. In all England I

have not seen a more affectionate people than those at Whitby.

Mon. 21. Being importuned by our friends at Malton to

call there, (it being but about thirty miles out of the way,) I set

out early, to prevent the heat of the day. Calling at Pickering,

some of the society soon found me out, with whom I went to the

preaching-house ; whichwas full enough in a few minutes' time.

So was the House at Malton,in the evening; where I found the

society more loving and united together than they had been for

many years.

Tues. 22.-I crossed over to Scarborough. The congregation

in the evening was unusually small, being notyet recovered from

the blessed fruits of the election. This was the hottest day we

have had this year : And about one in the afternoon, the thun-

der, which had long lain at adistance, came near, with thick

flashes of lightning,and impetuous rain: The thunder continued

in one roll, for an hour and a quarter. I never heard the like

before, since my return from America. Thursday, 24. The

DissentingMinister offering me the use of his chapel in Bridling-

ton, twice as large as ourown, (the wind being too high for me

to stand abroad,) I willingly accepted his offer. Friday, 25.

About noon I preached at Beverley, to a serious, well-behaved

congregation ; and in the evening to one equally serious, and

far more numerous, at Hull.

!

July, 1790.

Saturday, 26, was aday of satisfaction. I preached at seven

inthe morning, and at six in the evening, to as many as our

House could contain ; the ground being too wet for the congre-

gation to stand abroad. Monday, 28. This day I enter intomy

eighty-eighth year. For above eighty-six years, I found none

of the infirmities of old age ; my eyes did not wax dim, neither

was my natural strength abated : But last August I found

almost a sudden change. My eyes were so dim, that no glasses

would help me. My strength likewise now quite forsook me ; and

probably will not return in this world. But I feel no pain from

head to foot ; only it seems nature is exhausted ; and, humanly

speaking, will sink more and more, till

Theweary springs of life stand still at last.

Tues. 29.-I crossed over through Epworth toOwstone, and

passed a comfortable day with many of the Preachers. This,

which was one of the last societies in the Circuit, is now become

first, in grace, as well as number. The new preaching-house not

being able to contain one half of the congregation, I preached

abroad inthe calm, mild evening ; and I believe God applied his

word tomany hearts.

Thur. JULY 1.-I went to Lincoln. After dinner we took a

walk in and round the Minster ; which I really think is more

elegant than that at York, in various parts of the structure,

as well as in its admirable situation. The new House was

throughly filled in the evening, and with hearers uncommonly
serious . There seems to be a remarkable difference between the

people of Lincoln, and those of York. They have not so much

fire and vigour ofspirit ; but far more mildness and gentleness ;

by means of which, if they had the same outward helps, they

would probably excel their neighbours.

Some miles short of Lincoln, our post-boy stopped at an inn
on the road, to give his horses a little water. As soon aswe

went in, the inn-keeper burst into tears, as did his wife ; wringing

her hands, and weeping bitterly. "What ! " he said, " are you

come into my house ! My father is John Lester, ofEpworth."

I found both he and hiswife had been of our society, till they

left them. We spent some time in prayer together ; and I trust
not invain.

Fri. 2.-About eleven I preached at Newton; but the

preaching-house would not contain half the congregation. No

Aug. 1790.] JOURNAL. 491

rain fell during the time of preaching ; but it rained both before

and after. I was struck with the preaching-house at Gainsbo-

rough, (one of the handsomest towns in Lincolnshire,) so neat,

so elegant ! just taking up one side of a small, neat Square. I

found uncommon liberty of speech, and received it as a token for

good. Surely this poor society, which has been so miserably

depressed, will again lift up its head ! Saturday, 3. I reached

Epworth ; and, after preaching in the evening, met the society ;

and reminded them ofwhat they were some years ago, andwhat

they are now ; scarce retaining the shadow of their former zeal

and activity in all the ways ofGod.

Sun. 4-. I went over to Misterton, where likewise the work

of God was exceedingly decayed. The House being far too

small to contain the multitude ofpeople, I stood under a spread-

ing tree ; and strongly exhorted them to "strengthen the things

that remained," which were " ready to die." Thence I hastened

back to Epworth ; but I could not reach it till the Church Ser-

vice was begun. It was observed Mr. Gibson read the Prayers

with unusual solemnity ; and I believe he was not displeased to

see five times as many at church, and ten times as many at the

Lord's table, as usual. As soon as the Afternoon Service ended,

Ibegan in the market-place to press that awful question, " How

shall we escape, ifwe neglect so great salvation ? " on such a

congregation as was never seen at Epworth before.

Fri. AUGUST 27.-I returnedto Bristol. In the evening, and

at thewatch-night, the House was sufficiently filled. Finding the

account of Mrs. Scudamore's life and death (an excellentwoman,

though mistaken in this point) has revived in some the imagina-

tion of the expiatory nature of sufferings, and hence their abso-

lute necessityto salvation, I discussed the subject at large ; and

showed that both these notions had their rise in Popery ; and

that neither the one nor the other of them had any foundation

in Scripture.

Sun. 29. Mr. Baddiley being gone to the north, and Mr.

Collins being engaged elsewhere, I had none to assist in the ser-

vice, and could not read the Prayers myself; so I was obliged

to shorten the service, which brought the Prayers, sermon, and

Lord's Supper, within the compass of three hours. I preached

in the afternoon near King's Square ; and the hearts of the peo-

ple bowed down before the Lord.

Mon. 30. About noon I preached at Castle-Carey. Since

[Sept. 1790.

Iwas here God has taken to himself that amiable woman,

Mrs. Clark; who, to a fine person and a good understanding,

joined a very uncommon degree ofdeep religion. This inclined

me toapply earnestly Eccles. ix. 10; and all the peopleseemed to

feel it. Afterwards, I called on her deeply-afflicted husband, who

spent some hours with us the nextday. I hope hewill no longer

sorrow as one without hope,but will trust to meet her in a better

place. In the evening I preached in the new House at Ditcheat.

Itwould not hold the congregation; but many could hear at

the windows, which they seemed right willing to do. A flame

appears to be kindled here already. God grant it may continue

and increase ! Tuesday, 31. William Kingston, the man born

without arms, came to see me of his own accord. Some time

since he received a clear sense of the favour of God; but after

some months he was persuaded by some of his old companions

to join in a favourite diversion, whereby he lost sight of God,

and gaveup all he had gained : But God now touched his heart

again, and he is once more in earnest to save his soul. He isof

a middling height and size, has a pleasing look and voice, and

an easy, agreeable behaviour. At breakfast he shook off his

shoes, which are made on purpose, took the tea-cup between his

toes, and the toast with his other foot. He likewise writes a

fair hand, and does most things with his feet which we do with

our hands. About noon I preached to a lovely congregation

at Shepton-Mallet ; and in the evening at Pensford. The House

was crowded with earnest hearers, and I trust the word did not

fall to the ground.

Wed. SEPTEMBER 1.-I returned to Bristol ; and, it being the

first day of the fair, I spoke strongly from the words of Solomon,

" Buy the truth, and sell it not." In the two following days, I

corrected and abridged the account of that excellent woman,

Mrs. Scudamore ; a burning and shining light, till the Mystics

persuaded her to put herlight under abushel: So that for above

two years she renounced all conversation with even her pious

friends ! How does this agree with Scripture? " All my delight

is in the saints that are on the earth, and with them that excel

invirtue ! " How far was the experience of Jane Cooper, or

Elizabeth Harper, preferable to that of such a solitary !

Sat. 4.-I went on to Bath, and preached in the evening to

a serious, but small congregation, for want of notice. Sunday,

5. At ten we had a numerous congregation, and more commu-

Sept. JOURNAL
1790. .

] 493

nicants than ever I saw here before. This day I cut off that

vile custom, I know not when or how it began, of preaching

three times adayby the same Preacher, to the same congrega-

tion ; enough to weary out both the bodies and minds of the

speaker, as well as his hearers. Surely God is returning to this

society ! They are now in earnest to make their calling and

election sure.

Mon. 6. This evening the congregation was almost as large

as it was the night before ; and the power of God was mightily

present : And so it was on Tuesday and Wednesday evening

at Bristol. Thursday, 9. I read over the experience of Joseph

Humphrys ; the first Lay Preacher that assistedme inEngland,

in the year 1738. From his own mouth I learn, that he was

perfected in love, and so continued for at least a twelvemonth.

Afterwards he turned Calvinist, andjoinedMr. Whitefield, and

published an invective against my brother and me in the news-

paper. In a while he renounced Mr. Whitefield, and was

ordained a Presbyterian Minister. At lasthe received Episco-

pal ordination. He then scoffed at inward religion ; and when

reminded of hisown experience, replied, " That was one of the

foolish things which I wrote in the time ofmy madness !"

Fri. 10. I preached to a large congregation at Chew-Stoke,

nine miles from Bristol on those words in the Second Lesson,

" Come unto me,all ye that are weary and heavy laden;" and

in the evening at Mrs. Griffith's house.

Sun. 12.-I intended to preach abroad ; but the weather

would not permit. Monday, 13, andthe three following days, I

met the classes of the society, which contains nine hundred and

forty-four members. Still I complain offalse musters. It was

told in London that this society contained above a thousand

members ; and yet it falls so far short of a thousand. There is

altogether a fault in this matter.

Thur. 16. I was desired to see amonster properly speaking.

Hewas as large as the largest lion in the tower ; but covered

with rough hair, ofabrown colour ; has the head ofa swine, and

feet like a mole. It is plain to me, it was begotten between a

bear and a wild boar. He lives on fruit andbread, chiefly the

latter. The keeper handles him as he pleases, puttinghis hand

in his mouth, and taking hold ofhis tongue ; but he has a horri-

ble roar, between that ofa lion and ofabull.

At the same time I saw apelican. Is it not strange that we

[Sept. 1790.

have no true account or picture of this bird ? It is one of the

most beautiful in nature ; being indeeda large swan, almost twice

as big as a tame one ; snow-white, and elegantly shaped. Only

its neck is three quarters of a yard long, and capable ofbeing so

distended as to contain two gallons of liquid or solid. She

builds her nest in some wood, not far from a river ; from which

she daily brings a quantity of fish to her young : This she carries

in her neck, (the only pouch which she has,) andthen divides it

among her young ; and hence is fabricated the idle tale of her

feeding them with her blood.

Fri. 17-. I went over to Thornbury, and preached at noon

to avery large and deeply serious congregation. In the evening

we had a solemnwatch-night at Kingswood. Saturday, 18. I

calledupon Mr. Easterbrook, ill ofa disorder which no Physician

understands, and which it seems God alone can cure. Heis a

pattern to all Bristol, and indeed to all England; having beside

hisother incessantlabours, which never were intermitted,preached

in every house in his parish ! It waswhile he was preachingin

his own church, that hewas suddenly struck with a violent pain

in his breast. This confounds all the Physicians, and none of

their medicines alter it.

Sun. 19.-Mr. Collins assisted me in the morning, so I had

aneasy day's work. Monday, 20, and the next day, I read over

the King of Sweden's tract upon the Balance of Power in

Europe. If it be really his,he is certainly one of the most sen-

sible, as well as one of the bravest, Princes in Europe ; and if

his account be true, what awoman is the Czarina ! But stillGod

is over all!

Wed. 22. I preached once more in Temple church, on, " All

things are possible to him that believeth."

Sat. 25. Mr. Hay, the Presbyterian Minister of Lewens-

mead meeting, came to desire me to let him have the use ofour

preaching-house on Sundays, at those hours when we did not

use it ourselves, (near ten in the morning and two in the after-

noon,) while his House was re-building. To this I willingly

consented, and he preached an excellent sermon there the next

day at two. I preached at five in the morning to morethan the
House would well contain.

Mon. 27-. I left Bristol ; about eleven I preached in the

Devizes ; and in the evening at Sarum. I do not know that

ever I saw the House so crowded before, with high and low,

Oct. 1790. ] JOURNAL. 495

rich and poor : So that I hope we shall again see fruit here

also.

Wed. 29.-About noon I preached at Winton. The congre-

gationwas larger than usual, and, what was stranger still, seemed

not a little affected ! How long have we cast our bread upon the

waters here ! And shall we find it again after many days ?

In the evening I preached to a crowded and deeply-attentive

congregation at Portsmouth-Common. Thursday, 30. It being

a lovely morning, we went in a wherry, through Cowes har-

bour, to Newport ; one of the pleasantest, neatest, and most

elegant towns in the King's dominions. Both the nights I

preached here, the preaching-house would by no means contain

the congregation. I was likewise well pleased with the poor,

plain, artless society. Here, at least, we havenot lost our labuor.

Friday, OCTOBER 1. We purposed to return to Portsmouth,

(about twenty miles,) it being a calm sunshiny morning, in the

wherry we came ; but a friend offering us a kind of hoy, we

willingly accepted his offer. It was well he did ; for as soon as

we were out of the harbour, the wind rose, and the sea raged

horribly. The wherry would soon have been swallowed up.

Thewaves washed over us on both sides. Having no decks,

we were well soaked from head to foot ; but, before noon, we got

safe to Portsmouth.

Sat. 2-. Setting out, as usual, at two, we came to Cobham

between ten and eleven ; and found a party of our friends from

Londonready to receive us. We walked an hour in thegardens ;

but the innkeeper informed us, strangers were not admitted,

unless on Tuesday and Friday. However,hearing Mr. Hopkins

was at home, I sent in my name, and desired thatfavour ; which

was immediately granted. We spent an hour very agreeably in

those lovely walks ; but still the eye was not satisfied with seeing.

An immortal spirit canbe satisfied with nothing but seeingGod.

In the afternoon we went on to London.

Sunday, 3, was indeed a comfortable day. I preached at

the new chapel, morning and evening, with great enlargement

of spirit. At the love-feast which followed, great was our

rejoicing ; many declared what God had done for their souls ;

and many were filled with consolation.

Having answered my letters, and finishedmy other little busi-

ness for the present, on Tuesday, 5, I went to Rye. Though

the warning was short, the congregation was exceeding large,

[Oct. 1790.

and behaved with remarkable seriousness. While our people

mixed with the Calvinists here,we were always perplexed, and

gained no ground; but since they kept tothemselves, they have

continually increased in grace as well as in number. Iwas now

informed how signally Godhad overtaken that wretch who mur-

dered Mr. Haddock some years since. Being lately overtaken by

Captain Bray in one of the King's cutters, hemade a desperate

resistance ; and even when boarded, fought still, anddrew apistol

at Captain Bray ; who then hewedhim in pieces with his cutlass.

Thur. 7.-I went over to that poor skeleton of ancient

Winchelsea. It is beautifully situated on the top of a steep

hill, andwas regularly built in broad streets, crossing each other,

and encompassing a very large Square ; in the midst of which

was alarge church, now in ruins. I stood under a large tree,

on the side of it, and called to most ofthe inhabitants of the

town, " The kingdom ofheaven is at hand ; repent, and believe

the Gospel." It seemed as ifallthat heard were, for the present,

almost persuaded to be Christians .

Here an eminently pious woman, Mrs. Jones, at whosehouse

I stopped, gave me a very strange account :-Manyyears since

she was much hurt in lying-in. She had various Physicians,

but still grew worse and worse ; till, perceiving herself to be no

better, she left them off. She had acontinual pain in her groin,

with such a prolapsis uteri, as soon confined her to her bed :

There she lay two months, helpless and hopeless ; till a thought

came one day into her mind, " Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst

make me whole ! Be it according to thy will! " Immediately

the pain and the disorder ceased. Feeling herself well, she rose,

and dressed herself. Her husband coming in, and seeing her

in tears, asked, " Are those tears of serious joy ?" She said,

" Ofjoy ! " on which they wept together. From that hour she

felt no pain, but enjoyed perfect health. I think our Lord

never wrought a plainer miracle, even in the days of his flesh.

In the evening I preached onc emore at Rye ; and the word

did not fall to the ground. In the morning we left this loving,

well united people, and dined at Sevenoaks. After dinner, we

spent an hour in the Duke of Dorset's house. I could not but

observe some change for the worse here. The silk covers are

removed from several of the pictures,particularly that of Count

Ugolino and his sons; and it is placed in aworse light ; so that

I could hardly discern the little boy that, when he saw his father

Oct. 1790.1 497

gnawing his own arm for anguish, cried out, " Papa, if you are

hungry, do not eat your own arm, but mine." The preaching-

house was filled in the evening with people,and with the pre-

sence of God.

Sat. 9-. We returned to London. Monday, 11. I went on

to Colchester, and still found matter of humiliation. The society

was lessened, and cold enough; preaching again was discon-

tinued, and the spirit of Methodism quite gone, both from the

Preachers and the people : Yet we had awonderful congregation

in the evening, rich and poor, Clergy and laity. So we had

likewise on Tuesday evening. So that I trust God will at

length build up the waste places.

Wed. 13. We set out early, but found no horses at Cob-

dock ; so that we were obliged to go round by Ipswich, and

wait there half an hour. Nevertheless, we got to Norwich

between two and three. In the way we read Captain Carrel's

Travels, admirably well wrote, and giving, I believe, a just

account of the interior parts of North-America. Here is no gay

account of the Islands of Pelew, or Lapita, but a plain relation

ofmatter of fact. Surely eastern and western savages are much

alike ; and some good might be found in the east as well as the

west. But to see nature in perfection, either at Pelew, or else-

where, we need only look on the savages at Fort-William Henry,

butchering, in cold blood, so many hundreds of helpless, unre-

sisting men, in the very spirit of the old murderer.

In the evening I preached at Norwich; but the House would

in no wise contain the congregation. How wonderfully is the

tide turned ! I am become an honourable man at Norwich.

God has at length made our enemies to be at peace with us ; and

scarce any but Antinomians open their mouth against us.

Thur. 24. I went to Yarmouth ; and, at length, found a

society in peace, and much united together. In the evening the

congregation was too large to get into the preaching-house ; yet

they were far less noisy than usual. After supper a little com-

pany went to prayer, and the power ofGod fell upon us ; espe-

ciallywhen ayoung woman broke out into prayer, to the surprise

and comfort of us all. Friday, 15. I went to Lowestoft, to a

steady, loving, well-united society. The more strange it is,

that they neither increase nor decrease in number. Saturday,

16. I preached at Loddon about one ; and at six in Norwich.

Sunday, 17. At seven I administered the Lord's Supper to


about one hundred and fifty persons,near twice as many as we

had last year. I take knowledge, that the last year's Preachers

were in earnest. Afterwards we went to our own parish church ;

although there was no sermon there, nor at any of the thirty-six

churches in the town, save the cathedral, and St. Peter's. I

preached at two. When I had done, Mr. Horne called upon

me, who preached at the cathedral in the morning; an agreeable

man, both in temper and person; and, I believe, much alive to

God. At half an hour after five I preached again, to as many

as the House would contain; and even those that could not get

in stayed more quiet and silent than ever I saw them before.

Indeed they all seemed to know that Godwas there; and I have

no doubt but he will revive his work here also.

Mon. 18. No coach going out for Lynn to-day, I was

obliged to take apost-chaise. But at Dereham no horses were

to be had ; so we were obliged to take the same horses to Swaff-

ham. Acongregationwas ready here, that filled the House,

and seemed quite ready to receive instruction. But here neither

could we procure any post-horses ; so that we were obliged to

take a single-horse chaise. The wind, with mizzling rain, came

full in our faces ; and we had nothing to screen us from it; so

that Iwas throughly chilled from head to foot before I came to

Lynn. But I soon forgot this little inconvenience ; for which

the earnestness of the congregation made me large amends.

Tues. 19. In the evening all the Clergymen in the town,

except one who was lame, were present at the preaching. They

are all prejudiced in favour ofthe Methodists ; as indeed are most

of the townsmen ; who give a fair proof by contributing so much

to our Sunday-schools ; so that there is near twenty pounds in

hand. Wednesday, 20. I had appointed to preach at Diss ; a

town near Scoleton ; but the difficulty was,where I could preach.

The Minister was willing I should preach in the church ; but

feared offending the Bishop, who, going up to London, was

within a few miles of the town. But a gentleman asking the

Bishop whether he had any objection to it, was answered,
"None at all. " I think this church is one of the largest in

this county. I suppose it has not been so filled these hundred

years. This evening and the next I preached at Bury, to a

deeply attentive congregation, many ofwhom know in whom

they have believed. So that here we have not lost all our

labour. Friday, 22. We returned to London.

Oct. 1790.] 499

Sun. 24. I explained, to a numerous congregation in Spital-

fields church, " the whole armour of God." St. Paul's, Shad-

well, was still more crowded in the afternoon, while I enforced

that important truth, " One thing is needful ;" and I hope

many, even then, resolved to choose the better part.

In the name of God, Amen.

I, JOHN WESLEY, Clerk, some time Fellow of Lincoln

College, Oxford, revoking all others, appoint this to be my last

Will and Testament.

I give all my books, now on sale, and the copies of them,

(only subject to a rent-charge of eighty-five pounds a year, to

the widow and children of my brother,) to my faithful friends,

JohnHorton, Merchant; George Wolff, Merchant ; and William

Marriott, Stock-Broker, all of London, in trust, for the general

Fund of the Methodist Conference, in carrying on the work of

God, by Itinerant Preachers ; on condition that they permit the

following Committee, Thomas Coke, James Creighton, Peard

Dickenson, Thomas Rankin, George Whitfield, and the London

Assistant, for the time being, still to superintend the printing-

press, and to employ Hannah Paramore and George Paramore,

as heretofore ; unless four of the Committee judge a change to
be needful.

I give the books, furniture, and whatever else belongs to

me, in the three houses at Kingswood, in trust, to Thomas

Coke, Alexander Mather, and Henry Moore, to be still em-

ployed in teaching andmaintaining the children of poor Travel-

ling Preachers .

I give to Thomas Coke, Doctor John Whitehead, and

Henry Moore, all the books which are in my study and bed-

chamber at London, and inmy studies elsewhere, in trust, for

the use of the Preachers who shall labour there from time to

time.

I give the coins, and whatever else is found in the drawer

of my bureau at London, to my dear grand-daughters,Mary
and Jane Smith.

I give all my manuscripts to Thomas Coke, Doctor White-

head, and Henry Moore, to be burned or published as they see

good.

I give whatever money remains inmy bureau and pockets,

at my decease, to be equally divided between Thomas Briscoe,

William Collins, John Easton, and Isaac Brown.

I desire my gowns, cassocks, sashes, and bands, may remain

in the chapel for the use of the Clergymen attending there.

I desire the London Assistant, for the time being, to divide

the rest of mywearing apparel between those four of the Travel-

ling Preachers that want it most ; only my pelisse I give to the

Rev. Mr. Creighton ; my watch to my friend Joseph Bradford ;

my gold seal to Elizabeth Ritchie.

I give my chaise and horses to James Ward and Charles

Wheeler, in trust, to be sold, and the money to be divided,

one half to Hannah Abbot, and the other to the members of the

select society.

Out of the first money which arises from the sale of books,

I bequeath to my dear sister, Martha Hall, (if alive,) forty

pounds ; to Mr. Creighton aforesaid, forty pounds ; and to the

Rev. Mr. Heath, sixty pounds.

And whereas I am empowered, by a late Deed, to name

the persons who are to preach in the new chapel, at London,

(the Clergymen for a continuance,) and by another Deed, to

name a Committee for appointing Preachers, in the new chapel,

at Bath, I do hereby appoint John Richardson, Thomas Coke,

James Creighton, Peard Dickenson, Clerks ; Alexander Mather,

William Thompson, Henry Moore, Andrew Blair,John Valton,

Joseph Bradford, James Rogers, and William Myles, to preach

in the new chapel at London, and to be the Committee for

appointing Preachers in the new chapel at Bath.

I likewise appoint Henry Brooke, Painter ; Arthur Keene,

Gent.; and William Whitestone, Stationer, all of Dublin, to

receive the annuity of five pounds, (English,) left to Kingswood

School, by the late Roger Shiel, Esq.

I give six pounds to be divided among the six poor men,

named by the Assistant, who shall carrymy body to the grave ;

for I particularly desire there may be no hearse, no coach, no

escutcheon, no pomp, except the tears of them that loved me,

and are following me to Abraham's bosom. I solemnly adjure

my Executors, in the name of God, punctually to observe this.

Lastly, I give to each of those Travelling Preachers who

shall remain in the Connexion six months after my decease, as

a little token of my love, the eight volumes of sermons.

I appoint John Horton, George Wolff, and William

Marriott, aforesaid, to be Executors of this my last Will and

Testament ; for which trouble they will receive no recompence

till the resurrection of the just.

Witness myhand and seal, the 20th day of February, 1789.*

JOHN WESLEY. (Seal.)

Signed, sealed, and delivered, by the said Testator, as and

for his last Will and Testament, in the presence of us,

Should there be any part of my personal estate undisposed

of by this my last Will, I give the same untomy two nieces,

E. Ellison and S. Collet, equally.

Feb. 25, 1789.

I give my types, printing-presses, and every thing pertaining

thereto, to Mr. Thomas Rankin, and Mr. George Whitfield, in

trust, for the use of the Conference.

*"Above a yearand ahalf after making this Will, Mr. Wesleyexecuted aDeed,

inwhich he appointed seven gentlemen, viz., Dr. Thomas Coke, Messrs. Alexander

Mather, Peard Dickenson, John Valton,James Rogers, Joseph Taylor, andAdam

Clarke, Trustees for all his books, pamphlets, and copyrights, for carrying on the

work of God by Itinerant Preachers, according to the Deed of Declarationenrolled

in the High Court of Chancery : But Dr. Coke being inAmerica at the time of

Mr. Wesley's death, the Deed was suffered to lie dormant till his return. Thethree

Executors then took the advice of two of the most eminent Counsellors in the king-

dom, who informedthem, that the Deed was of a testamentarynature, andtherefore

superseded the Will, with respect to the books, &c. The Deed wasthenpresented

to the Judge of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury, who received it as the third

Codicil of Mr. Wesley's Will ; on which the three Executors delivered up their

general Probate, and received a new one, limited to those particulars which were

not mentioned in the Deed. At the same time a Probate was granted by the

Court to the seven Trustees, constituting them Executors for all the books, pam-

phlets, and copyrights, of which Mr. Wesley died possessed ; and empowering

them to pay all his debts and legacies. "-EDIT.

To all to whom these Presents shall come, JOHN WESLEY,

late of Lincoln College, Oxford, but now of the City-Road,

London, Clerk, sendeth greeting :-

Whereas divers buildings, commonly called chapels, with a mes-

suage and dwelling- house, or other appurtenances, to each of

the same belonging, situate in various parts of Great Britain,

have been given and conveyed, from time to time, by the

said John Wesley, to certain persons and their heirs, in each

of the said gifts and conveyances named ; which are enrolled

in His Majesty's High Court of Chancery, upon the acknow-

ledgment of the said John Wesley (pursuant to the Act of

Parliament in thatcase made and provided) ; upon trust, that

the Trustees in the said several Deeds respectively named,

and the survivors of them, and their heirs and assigns, and

the Trustees for the time being, to be elected as in the said

Deeds is appointed, should permit and suffer the said John

Wesley, and such other person and persons as he should for

that purpose from time to time nominate and appoint, at all

times during his life, at his will and pleasure to have and

enjoy the free use and benefit of the said premises, that he

the said John Wesley, and such person and persons as he

should nominate and appoint, might therein preach and

expound God's Holy Word ; and upon further trust, that

the said respective Trustees, and the survivors of them, and

theirheirs and assigns, and the Trustees for the time being,

should permit and suffer Charles Wesley, brother of the said

John Wesley, and such other person and persons as the said

Charles Wesley should for that purpose from time to time

nominate and appoint, in like manner during his life, to

have, use, and enjoy the said premises respectively, for the

like purposes as aforesaid ; and after the decease of the sur-

vivor of them, the said John Wesley and Charles Wesley,

then upon further trust, that the said respective Trustees, and

the survivors of them, and their heirs and assigns, and the

Trustees for the time being forever, should permit and suffer

such person and persons, and for such time and times, as

should be appointed at the yearly Conference of the people

called Methodists, in London, Bristol, or Leeds, and no

others, to have and enjoy the said premises for the purposes

aforesaid : And whereas divers persons have, in like manner,

given or conveyed many chapels, with messuages and dwelling-

houses, or other appurtenances, to the same belonging, situate

in various parts ofGreat Britain, and also in Ireland, to cer-

tain Trustees, in each of the said gifts and conveyances

respectively named, upon the like trusts, and for the same

uses and purposes as aforesaid (except only that in some of

the said gifts and conveyances, no life-estate or other interest

is therein or thereby given and reserved to the said Charles

Wesley) : And whereas, for rendering effectual the trusts

created by the said several gifts or conveyances, and that no

doubt or litigation may arise with respect unto the same, or

the interpretation and true meaning thereof, it has been

thought expedient by the said John Wesley, on behalf of

himself as donor of the several chapels, with the messuages,

dwelling-houses, or appurtenances, before-mentioned, as ofthe

donors of the said other chapels, with the messuages, dwelling-

houses, or appurtenances, to the same belonging, given or con-

veyed to the like uses and trusts, to explain thewords , " Yearly

Conference of the people called Methodists," contained in all

the said Trust Deeds, and to declare what persons are mem-

bers of the said Conference, and how the succession and iden-

tity thereof is to be continued :-

Now therefore these presents witness, that, for accomplishing the

aforesaid purposes, the said John Wesleydoth hereby declare,

that the Conference of the people called Methodists, in Lon-

don, Bristol, or Leeds, ever since there hath been any yearly

Conference of the said people called Methodists in any ofthe

said places, hath always heretofore consisted of the Preachers

and Expounders of God's Holy Word, commonly called

Methodist Preachers in connexion with, and under the care

of, the said John Wesley, whom he hath thought expedient

year after year to summons to meet him, in one or other of

the said places, of London, Bristol, or Leeds, to advise with

them for the promotion of the Gospel of Christ, to appoint

the said persons so summoned, and the other Preachers and

Expounders of God's Holy Word, also in connexion with,

and under the care of, the said John Wesley, not summoned

to the said yearly Conference, to the use and enjoyment of

the said chapels and premises so given and conveyed upon

trust for the said John Wesley, and such other person and

persons as he should appoint during his life as aforesaid, and

for the expulsion of unworthy and admission of new persons

under his care, and into his connexion, to be Preachers and

Expounders as aforesaid, and also of other persons upon trial

for the like purposes ; the names of all which persons so sum-

moned by the said John Wesley, the persons appointed, with

the chapels and premises to which they were so appointed,

together with the duration of such appointments, and of those

expelled or admitted into connexion or upon trial, with all

other matters transacted and done at the said yearly Confer-

ence, have, year by year, been printed and published under

the title of " Minutes of Conference. "

And these presents further witness, and the saidJohnWesleydoth

hereby avouch and further declare, that the several persons

herein-after named, to wit, the said John Wesley and Charles

Wesley ; Thomas Coke, of the city of London, Doctor of

Civil Law ; James Creighton, of the same place, Clerk ; Tho-

mas Tennant, of the same place ; Thomas Rankin, of the

same place ; Joshua Keighley, of Sevenoaks, in the county of

Kent; James Wood, of Rochester, in the said county of

Kent ; John Booth, of Colchester ; Thomas Cooper, of the

same place ; Richard Whatcoat, of Norwich ; Jeremiah Bret-

tel, of Lynn, in the county of Norfolk ; Jonathan Parkin, of

the same place; Joseph Pescod, of Bedford ; Christopher

Watkins, of Northampton ; John Barber, of the same place ;

John Broadbent, of Oxford ; Joseph Cole, of the same place ;

Jonathan Cousins, of the city of Gloucester ; John Brettel, of

the same place ; John Mason, of Salisbury ; George Story,

of the same place ; Francis Wrigley, of St. Austle, in the

county of Cornwall ; William Green, of the city of Bristol ;

John Moon, of Plymouth-Dock ; James Hall, of the same

place ; James Thom, of St. Austle, aforesaid ; Joseph Tay-

lor, of Redruth, in the said county of Cornwall ; William

Hoskins, of Cardiff, Glamorganshire ; John Leech, of Brecon ;

William Saunders, of the same place ; Richard Rodda, of

Birmingham ; John Fenwick, of Burslem, Staffordshire ;

Thomas Hanby, of the same place ; James Rogers, of Mac-

clesfield ; Samuel Bardsley, of the same place; John Mur-

lin, of Manchester ; William Percival, of the same place;

Duncan Wright, of the city of Chester ; John Goodwin, of

the same place ; Parson Greenwood, of Liverpool ; Zecha-

riah Udall, of the same place; Thomas Vasey, of the same

place ; Joseph Bradford, of Leicester ; Jeremiah Robertshaw,

of the same place ; William Myles, of Nottingham ; Thomas

Longley , of Derby ; Thomas Taylor, of Sheffield ; William

Simpson, of the same place ; Thomas Carlill, of Grimsby,

in the county of Lincoln ; Robert Scott, of the same place ;

Joseph Harper, of the same place ; Thomas Corbit, of Gains-

borough, in the county of Lincoln; James Ray, of the same

place ; William Thompson, of Leeds, in the county of York ;

Robert Roberts, of the same place ; Samuel Bradburn, of the

same place ; John Valton, of Birstal, in the said county;

John Allen, of the same place ; Isaac Brown, of the same

place; Thomas Hanson, of Huddersfield, in the said county ;

John Shaw, of the same place ; Alexander Mather, ofBrad-

ford, in the said county; Joseph Benson, of Halifax, in the

said county ; William Dufton, of the same place; Benjamin

Rhodes, of Keighley, in the said county ; John Easton, of

Colne, in the county of Lancaster ; Robert Costerdine, of

the same place ; Jasper Robinson, ofthe Isle of Man ; George

Button, of the same place ; John Pawson, of the city of

York ; Edward Jackson, of Hull; Charles Atmore, of the

said city of York ; Lancelot Harrison, of Scarborough ;

George Shadford, of Hull, aforesaid ; Barnabas Thomas, of

the same place ; Thomas Briscoe, of Yarm, in the said

county of York ; Christopher Peacock, of the same place ;

William Thom, of Whitby, in the said county of York;

Robert Hopkins, of the same place ; John Peacock, of Bar-

nard-Castle ; William Collins, of Sunderland ; ThomasDixon,

of Newcastle-upon-Tyne ; Christopher Hopper, of the same

place ; William Boothby, of the same place ; William Hun-

ter, of Berwick-upon-Tweed ; Joseph Saunderson, of Dun-

dee, Scotland ; William Warrener, of the same place; Dun-

can M'Allum, of Aberdeen, Scotland ; Thomas Rutherford,

of the city ofDublin, in the kingdom of Ireland; Daniel Jack-

son, of the same place ; Henry Moore, of the city of Cork,

Ireland; Andrew Blair, of the same place ; Richard Watkin

son, of Limerick, Ireland ; Nehemiah Price, of Athlone,

Ireland ; Robert Lindsay, of Sligo, Ireland; George Brown,

of Clones, Ireland ; Thomas Barber, of Charlemont, Ireland ;

Henry Foster, of Belfast, Ireland ; and John Crook, of

Lisburne, Ireland, Gentlemen ; being Preachers and Ex-

pounders of God's Holy Word, under the care and in con-

nexion with the said John Wesley, have been, and now are,

and do, on the day of the date hereof, constitute the members

of the said Conference, according to the true intent andmean-

ing of the said several gifts and conveyances wherein the

words, Conference of the people called Methodists, are men-

tioned and contained ; and that the said several persons

before-named, and their successors for ever, to be chosen as

hereafter mentioned, are and shall for ever be construed,

taken, and be, the Conference of the people called Methodists.

Nevertheless, upon the terms, and subject to the regulations

herein-after prescribed; that is to say,

First, That the members of the said Conference, and their suc-

cessors for the time being for ever, shall assemble once in

every year, at London, Bristol, or Leeds, (except as after-

mentioned,) for the purposes aforesaid ; and the time and place

of holding every subsequent Conference shall be appointed at

the preceding one, save that the next Conference after the

date hereof shall be holden at Leeds, in Yorkshire, the last

Tuesday in July next.

Second, The act of the majority in number of the Conference

assembled as aforesaid, shall be had, taken, and be the act of

the whole Conference, to all intents, purposes, and construc-

tionswhatsoever.

Third, That after the Conference shall be assembled as afore-

said, they shall first proceed to fill up all the vacancies occa-

sioned by death or absence, as after-mentioned.

Fourth, No act of the Conference assembled as aforesaid, shall

be had, taken, or be the act of the Conference, until forty of

the members thereof are assembled, unless reduced under

that number by death since the prior Conference, or absence

as after-mentioned ; nor until all the vacancies occasioned by

death or absence shall be filled up by the election of new

members of the Conference, so as to make up the number

one hundred, unless there be not a sufficient number of per-

sons objects of such election; and during the assembly of the

Conference, there shall always be forty members present at

the doing of any act, save as aforesaid, or otherwise such act

shall be void.

Fifth, The duration of the yearly assembly of the Conference

shall not be less than five days, nor more than three weeks,

and be concluded by the appointment of the Conference, if

under twenty-one days ; or otherwise the conclusion thereof

shall follow of course at the end of the said twenty-one days ;

the whole of all which said time of the assembly of the Con-

ference shall be had, taken, considered, and be the yearly

Conference of the people called Methodists ; and all acts of

the Conference, during such yearly assembly thereof, shall be

the acts of the Conference, and none other.

Sixth, Immediately after all the vacancies occasioned by death

or absence are filled up by the election of new members as

aforesaid, the Conference shall choose a President and Secre-

tary of their assembly out of themselves, who shall continue

such until the election of another President or Secretary in

the next, or other subsequent Conference ; and the said Presi-

dent shall have the privilege and power of two members in

all acts of the Conference during his presidency, and such

other powers, privileges, and authorities, as the Conference

shall from time to time see fit to entrust into his hands .

Seventh, Any member of the Conference absenting himselffrom

the yearly assembly thereof for two years successively, without

the consent or dispensation of the Conference, and be not pre-

sent on the first day of the third yearly assembly thereof, at

the time and place appointed for the holding of the same,
shall cease to be a member of the Conference from and after

the said first day of the said thirdyearly assembly thereof, to

all intents and purposes, as though he were naturally dead.

But the Conference shall andmaydispense with or consent

to the absence of any member from any of the said yearly
i

assemblies for any cause which the Conference may see fit or

necessary ; and such member, whose absence shall be so dis-

pensed with or consented to by the Conference, shall not by

such absence cease to be a member thereof.

1 Eighth, The Conference shall andmay expel and put out from

being amember thereof, or from being in connexion there-

with, or from being upon trial, any person, member of the

Conference, or admitted into connexion, or upon trial, for any

cause which to the Conference may seem fit or necessary ; and

every member of the Conference so expelled and put out,

shall cease to be a member thereof, to all intents and pur-

poses, as though he was naturally dead. And the Confer-

ence, immediately after the expulsion of any member thereof

as aforesaid, shall elect another person to be a member of the

Conference, in the stead of such member so expelled.

Ninth, The Conference shall and may admit into connexion

with them, or upon trial, any person or persons whom they

shall approve, to be Preachers and Expounders of God's Holy

Word, under the care and direction of the Conference ; the

name of every such person or persons so admitted into con-

nexion or upon trial as aforesaid, with the time and degrees of

the admission, being entered in the Journals or Minutes of

the Conference.

Tenth, No person shall be elected amember of the Conference,

whohath not been admitted intoconnexionwith the Conference,

as a Preacher and Expounder of God's Holy Word, as afore-

said, for twelve months.

Eleventh, The Conference shall not, nor may, nominate or

appoint any person to the use and enjoyment of, or to preach

and expound God's Holy Word in, any of the chapels and

premises so given or conveyed, orwhich may be given or con-

veyed upon the trusts aforesaid,who is not either a member

of the Conference, or admitted into connexion with the same,

or upon trial as aforesaid ; nor appoint any person for more

than three years successively, to the use and enjoyment of any

chapel and premises already given, or to be given or conveyed,

upon the trusts aforesaid, except ordained Ministers of the

Church of England.

Twelfth, That the Conference shall andmay appoint the place

of holding the yearly assembly thereof, at any other city, town,

or place, than London, Bristol, or Leeds, when it shall seem

expedient so to do .

Thirteenth, And for the convenience of the chapels and pre-

mises already, or which may hereafter be, given or conveyed

upon the trusts aforesaid, situate in Ireland, or other parts

out of the kingdom of Great Britain, the Conference shall and

may, when and as often as it shall seem expedient, but not

otherwise, appoint and delegate any member or members of

the Conference, with all or any of the powers, privileges, and

advantages, herein-before contained or vested in the Confer-

ence ; and all and every the acts, admissions, expulsions, and

appointments whatsoever of such member or members of the

Conference, so pointed and delegated as aforesaid, the same

being put into writing, and signed by such delegate or dele-

gates, and entered in the Journals or Minutes of the Confer-

ence, and subscribed as after-mentioned, shall be deemed,

taken, and be, the acts, admissions, expulsions, and appoint-

ments of the Conference, to all intents, constructions, and

purposes whatsoever, from the respective times when the same

shall be done by such delegate or delegates ; notwithstanding

anything herein-contained to the contrary.

Fourteenth, All resolutions and orders touching elections,

admissions, expulsions, consents, dispensations, delegations,

or appointments and acts whatsoever of the Conference, shall

be entered and written in the Journals or Minutes of the

Conference, which shall be kept for that purpose, publicly

read, and then subscribed by the President and Secretary

thereof for the time being, during the time such Conference

shall be assembled ; and when so entered and subscribed,

shall be had, taken, received, and be, the acts of the Confer-

ence, and such entry and subscription as aforesaid, shall be

had, taken, received, and be, evidence of all and every such

acts of the said Conference, and of their said delegates, with-

out the aid of any other proof; and whatever shall not be so

entered and subscribed as aforesaid, shall not be had, taken,

received, or be, the act of the Conference: And the said

President and Secretary are hereby required and obliged to

enter and subscribe, as aforesaid, every act whatever of the

Conference.

Lastly, Whenever the said Conference shall be reduced under

the number of forty members, and continue so reduced for

three yearly assemblies thereof successively, or whenever the

members thereof shall decline or neglect to meet together

annually for the purposes aforesaid,during the space of three

years, that then, and in either of the said events, the Confer-

ence of the people called Methodists shall be extinguished,

and all the aforesaid powers, privileges, and advantages shall

cease, and the said chapels and premises, and all other cha-

pels and premises, which now are, or hereafter may be, settled,

given, or conveyed, upon the trusts aforesaid, shall vest in

the Trustees for the time being of the said chapels and pre-

mises respectively, and their successors for ever ; UPON TRUST

that they, and the survivors of them, and the Trustees for the

time being, do, shall, and may appoint such person and per-

sons to preach and expound God's Holy Word therein, and

to have the use and enjoyment thereof, for such time, and in

such manner, as to them shall seem proper.

Provided always, that nothing herein contained shall extend, or

be construed to extend, to extinguish, lessen, or abridge the

life-estate of the said John Wesley and Charles Wesley, or

either of them, of and in any of the said chapels and premises,

or any other chapels and premises, wherein they the said John

Wesley and Charles Wesley, or either of them, now have, or

may have, any estate or interest, power or authority whatso-

ever.

En witness whereof, the said John Wesley hath hereunto set his

hand and seal, the twenty-eighth day of February, in the

twenty-fourth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord

George the Third, by the grace of God of Great-Britain,

France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, and so

forth, and in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hun-

dred and eighty-four.

Sealed and delivered (being first duly stamped)

in the presence of

WILLIAM CLULOW, Quality Court, Chancery-Lane, London.

RICHARD YOUNG, Clerk to the said William Clulow.

Taken and acknowledged by the Rev. John Wesley, party

hereto this 28th of February, 1784, at the Public Office,

before me,

The above is a true Copy of the original Deed, (which is

enrolled in Chancery,) and was therewith examined by us,

Dated Feb. 28th, 1784 .

The Rev. John Wesley's Declaration and Appointment of the

Conference of the people called Methodists, enrolled in His

Majesty's High Court of Chancery, the ninth day of March,

in the year of our Lord 1784, being first duly stamped

according to the tenor of the Statutes, made for that purpose.

JAMES NICHOLS, Printer, 2, Warwick-Square,Newgate-Street, London.
1
!