

[Journal, 1762] July 1762

[Journal, 1762] In Ireland

[Journal, 1762] Sunday the 4th was a day of solemn joy, equal to any I had seen in Dublin. At the lovefeast in the evening it appeared that God had now visited Limerick also. Five persons desired to return thanks to God for a clear sense of His pardoning love; several others for an increase of faith, and for deliverance from doubts and fears. And two gave a plain, simple account of the manner wherein God had cleansed their hearts, so that they now felt no anger, pride, or self-will; but continual love, and prayer, and praise.

[Journal, 1762] Mon. 5.-I rode to Clonmel, and preached in the evening near the barrack-gate, to a wild, staring multitude, many of whom would have been rude enough, but they stood in awe of the soldiers.

[Journal, 1762] Tues. 6.-I rode to Carrick-on-Suir. Having been informed there was one family here also wherein both the man and his wife feared God, I immediately sent to the house. The woman presently came, from whom I learned that her husband died the Saturday before, and left her with nothing but four little children and an unshaken confidence in God. Her words, her look, her whole carriage, were of a piece, and showed the dignity of Christian sorrow. I could not but admire that God should send me just at such a time! And her tears were turned into tears of joy. In the evening I preached at Waterford, in a court adjoining to the main street.

[Journal, 1762] Wed. 7.-Four of the Whiteboys, lately condemned for breaking open houses, were executed. They were all, notwithstanding the absolution of their priest, ready to die for fear of death. Two or three of them laid fast hold on the ladder, and could not be persuaded to let it go. One in particular gave such violent shrieks as might be heard near a mile off. Oh what but love can cast out the fear of death! And how inexpressibly miserable is that bondage!

[Journal, 1762] On this and the two following days God remembered poor Waterford also. Several backsliders were healed, many awoke out of sleep, and some mightily rejoiced in God their Savior.

[Journal, 1762] The Rev. James Hervey The Rev. Vincent Perronet. The Rev. William Romaine The Rev. Henry Venn.
511

[Journal, 1762] Sat. 10.-We rode to Kilkenny, one of the pleasantest and the most ancient cities in the kingdom, and not inferior to any at all in wickedness, or in hatred to this way. I was therefore glad of a permission to preach in the town hall,[ The present town-hall or tholsel (i.e. custom-house) as it was called, is the third erected in Kilkenny. The building was completed during the mayoralty of Walter Blunt, in the year before Wesley's visit. It is said to have been designed by an Italian architect. (Vf.H.S. vol. vii. p. 121.)] where a small, serious company attended in the evening.

[Journal, 1762] Sun. 11.-I went to the cathedral, one of the best built which I have seen in Ireland. The pillars are all of black marble, but the late bishop [Dr. Edward Maurice, who died in 1756. VOL. IV] ordered them to be whitewashed! Indeed, marble is so plentiful near this town that the very streets are paved with it.

[Journal, 1762] At six in the evening I began preaching in the old bowlinggreen, near the castle. Abundance of people, Protestants and Papists, gathered from all parts. They were very still during the former part of the sermon; then the Papists ran together, set up a shout, and would have gone further, but they were restrained, they knew not how. I turned to them and said,' Be silent, or be gone!' Their noise ceased, and we heard them no more; so I resumed and went on with my discourse, and concluded without interruption.

[Journal, 1762] When I came out of the green they gathered again, and gnashed upon me with their teeth; one cried out,' Och![ See Crookshank, Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. p. 162.] what is Kilkenny come to!' But they could go no further. Only two or three large stones were thrown; but none was hurt save he that threw them, for, as he was going to throw again, one seized him by the neck and gave him a kick and a cuff which spoiled his diversion.

[Journal, 1762] Mon. 12.-I went to Dunmore Cave, three or four [Seven miles, not three or four (see W.H.S. vol. vii. p. 122; also above, vol. iii. p. 478). Ray gives a good description of Poole's Hole in his Itineraries, p. 113. Forty of Dermot's men were smothered in Dunmore Cave by McKedmund, who piled up straw and brambles at the mouth of the cave.] miles from Kilkenny. It is full as remarkable as Poole's Hole or any other in the Peak. The opening is round, parallel to the horizon, and seventy or eighty yards across. In the midst of this there is a kind of arch twenty or thirty feet high. By this you enter into the first cave, nearly round, and forty or fifty feet in diameter. It is encompassed with spar-stones, just like those on the sides of Poole's Hole. On one side of the cave is a narrow passage, which goes under the rock two or three hundred yards; on the other a hollow, which no one has ever been able to find an end of. I suppose this hole too, as well as many others, was formed by the waters of the deluge retreating into the great abyss, with which probably it communicates.

[Journal, 1762] Tues. 13.-I rode to Birr. About forty persons attended in the evening, and half as many in the morning. I saw there was but one way to do any good, so in the evening I preached abroad. I had then hundreds of hearers, and God Himself spoke to many a cold heart. The next morning at five the room was full and light sprung out of darkness, so that many poor withered souls began to revive and rejoice again in God their Saviour.

[Journal, 1762] Thur. 15.-I took my old standing in the market-place at Mountmellick, but the next evening the rain drove us into the market-house. Afterward we had a joyful lovefeast. Indeed, hitherto God has been pleased to mark all our way with blessings.

[Journal, 1762] Sat. 17.-I went on to poor dead Portarlington. And no wonder it should be so while the preachers coop themselves up in a room with twenty or thirty hearers. I went straight to the market-place and cried aloud,' Hearken! Behold a sower went forth to sow.' God made His word quick and powerful, and sharp as a two-edged sword. Abundantly more than the room could contain were present at five in the morning. At eight I began in the market-place again on ' How shall I give thee up, Ephraim' Solemn attention sat on every face, and God repeated His call to many hearts. In the evening I preached in the market-place at Tullamore.

[Journal, 1762] Mon. 19.-Between two and three in the morning was such thunder and lightning as I never knew in Europe. The crack and the flash were in the same instant. Most of the houses shook, and yet no hurt was done in the whole town. But some good was done, for at five o'clock the preaching-house was quite filled, and the inward voice of the Lord was mighty in operation. This also was ' a glorious voice.'

[Journal, 1762] Tues. 20.-We had our quarterly meeting at Coolalough. On Wednesday I preached at Clara, Thursday the 22nd at Tyrrell's Pass, and on Friday went on to Edenderry. Here I found some who had been long laboring in the fire and toiling to work themselves into holiness. To show them a more excellent way, I preached on Rom. x. 6, 7, 8. They found this was the very thing they wanted, and at the meeting of the society God confirmed the word of His grace in so powerful a manner that many wondered how they could help believing.

[Journal, 1762] Sat. 24.-I rode to Dublin, and found the flame not only continuing, but increasing. The congregation used to be small on Saturday night, but it was as large now as formerly on

[Journal, 1762] Sunday.

[Journal, 1762] Mon. 26.-At five in the morning the congregation was larger than it used to be in the evening. And in these two days and a half, four persons gave thanks for a sense of God's pardoning mercy, and seven (among whom were a mother and her daughter) for being perfected in love.

[Journal, 1762] The person by whom chiefly it pleased God to work this wonderful work was John Manners,[ An itinerant, born at Sledmore, near Malton, Yorkshire, in 1731; he died at York in 1763 in the triumph of faith (see Atmore's Memorial, p. 247, and Arm. Mag. 1780, p. 275, where he gives a short account of himself). One of his letters to Wesley was published in the Magazine for 1782, p. 103.] a plain man of middling sense, and not eloquent, but rather rude in speech; one who had never before been remarkably useful, but seemed to be raised up for this single work. And as soon as it was done he fell into a consumption, languished a while, and died.

[Journal, 1762] I now found he had not at all exceeded the truth in the accounts he had sent me from time to time. In one of his first letters after I left the town he says:

[Journal, 1762] The work here is such as I never expected to see. Some are justified or sanctified almost every day. This week three or four were justified, and as many, if not more, renewed in love. The people are all on fire. Such a day as last Sunday I never saw. While I was at

[Journal, 1762] prayer in the society the power of the Lord overshadowed us, and some cried out, ' Lord, I can believe!' The cry soon became general, with strong prayers. Twice I attempted to sing, but my voice could not be heard. I then desired them to restrain themselves, and in stillness and composure to wait for the blessing; on which all but two or three, who

[Journal, 1762] could not refrain, came into a solemn silence. I prayed again, and the softening power of grace was felt in many hearts. Our congregations increase much, and I have no doubt but we shall see greater things than these.

[Journal, 1762] Four days after he writes:

[Journal, 1762] The work of God increases every day. There is hardly a day but some are justified, or sanctified, or both. On Thursday three came and told me that the blood of Jesus Christ had cleansed them from all sin. One of them told me she had been justified seven years, and had been five years convinced of the necessity of sanctification. But this easy conviction availed not. A fortnight since she was seized with so keen a conviction as gave her no rest till God had sanctified her and witnes: it to her heart.

[Journal, 1762] Three days after (May n) he writes thus:

[Journal, 1762] God still continues His marvellous lovingkindness to us. On Sunday last Dorfothea King [Mrs. Dorothea King, daughter of Thomas Garrett, a native of Holland, who had settled in Dublin, was one of the ' memorable women of Irish Methodism.' Four of her letters to Wesley are contained in the Arm. Mag. for 1781. For the tragic sacrifice of her marriage, and her conversion, see Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. p. 123. It was under the ministry of Mr. Manners that she entered into the rest of perfect love, a blessing which, fifty-three years later, she still retained. Her father, Thomas Garrett, wrote a diary, to which Mr. Crookshank was to some extent indebted in writing his history. She afterwards married John Johnson, a retired minister at Lisburn. See Crookshank's Memorable Women of Irish Methodism, p. 53; above, p. 157.] entered into the rest. She had been seeking it for some time, but her convictions and desires grew stronger and stronger as the hour approached. A while ago she told me she grew worse and worse, and her inward conflicts were greater than ever; but on the Lord's Day she felt an entire change, while these words were spoke to her heart: ' Thou art all fair, my love; there is no spot in thee.' She now walks in sweet peace, and rejoices evermore. Her father received the blessing a few days before her, and is exceeding happy.

[Journal, 1762] The fire catches all that come near. An old soldier,[ William Price (Arm. Mag. 1796, P503)] in his return from Germany to the north of Ireland, fell in one night with these wrestling Jacobs, to his great astonishment. He was justified seventeen years ago, but afterward fell from it for five years. As he was going to Germany, in the beginning of the war, the Lord healed him in Dublin; and, in spite of all the distresses of a severe campaign, he walked in the light continually. On his return through London he was convinced of the necessity of sanctification, and soon after he came hither his heart was broken in pieces while he was with a little company who met daily for prayer. One evening, as they were going away, he stopped them and begged they would not go till the Lord had blessed him. They kneeled down again, and did not cease wrestling with God till he had a witness that he was saved from all sin.

[Journal, 1762] The case of Mr. Timmins is no less remarkable. He had been a notorious sinner. He was deeply wounded two months since. Ten days ago, on a Friday, God spake peace to his soul. The Sunday following, after a violent struggle, he sunk down as dead. He was cold as clay. After about ten minutes he came to himself, and cried, ' A new heart, a new heart!' He said he felt himself in an instant entirely emptied of sin, and filled with God. Brother Barry likewise had been justified but a few days before God gave him purity of heart.

[Journal, 1762] May 15 he writes:

[Journal, 1762] God still makes me a messenger of good tidings. His work goes on. Our last night's meeting was remarkable for the presence and power of God, while several were relating what He had done. One said, ' All that day in which God delivered me, I felt the blessing just at hand, but could not open my heart to receive it. I was fast shut up till, under the sermon in the evening, I felt God open my heart, remove the bar of unbelief, and give me power to receive the blessing freely.'

[Journal, 1762] There are now three places in the city wherein as many as have opportunity assemble day and night, to pour out their souls before God for the continuance and enlargement of His work.

[Journal, 1762] May 29.-Since my last account many have been sanctified and several justified. One of the former is William Moore.[ Afterwards unhappily associated with a secession at Plymouth (see below, Feb. 25, 1785). He was with JohnPawson at Bristol in 1781. See E.M.P. vol. iv. p. 49 (reprinted as Wesley's Veterans, vol. iv. p. 56).] He was a long time struggling for the blessing, and one night he was resolved not to go to bed without it. He continued wrestling with God for two hours, when he felt a glorious change, and the Spirit of God witnessing that the work was done.

[Journal, 1762] We begin now to meet with opposition from every quarter. Some say this is rank enthusiasm; others, that it is either a cheat, or mere pride; others, that it is a new thing, and that they can find no such

[Journal, 1762] thing in the Bible.

[Journal, 1762] June 3.-The Lord increases His work in proportion to the opposition it meets with. Between Monday morning and Tuesday night I have had eight bills of thanksgiving: for two justified, three renewed in love, and three backsliders healed.

[Journal, 1762] June 15.-There is no end of the mercies of God. Three days of this week are gone, in which God has justified five sinners. On Sunday, in the afternoon, I preached at three in the Barrack Square, and a more solemn time I have not seen; the hearers were as many as my voice could reach, and all remarkably attentive.

[Journal, 1762] In the evening a cry ran through the society, and four were justified that night. Two of these, Alexander Tate and his wife, were but lately joined. The power of God first seized her, and constrained her to cry aloud till she heard the still small voice. He continued calling upon God, and would not cease before God answered him also in the joy of his heart.

[Journal, 1762] Saturday, June 19.-We have had eight this week whose sins are blotted out, and two more have entered into that rest. One of them says she has enjoyed the love of God nine years, but felt as great a difference between that state and the state she is now in as if her soul was taken into heaven!

[Journal, 1762] June 26.-Last week eleven were justified or sanctified, and this week eleven more-eight of whom received remission of sins, and three a clean heart; and a troop are waiting for the moving of the water. Among them whom the power of God has seized lately are two eminent sinners, each of whom lived with a woman to whom he was never married. One of them already rejoices in God, the other mourns and will not be comforted. But the women are gone; they put away the accursed thing immediately.

[Journal, 1762] I had much fear about the children, lest our labor should be lost upon them; but I find we shall reap if we faint not. Margaret Roper, about eight years old, has been thoughtful for some time. The other day, while they were at family-prayer, she burst into tears and wept bitterly. They asked what was the matter. She said she was a great sinner, and durst not pray. They bade her go to bed. She no sooner came into the chamber than she began crying and clapping her hands, so that they heard her across the street; but God soon bound up her broken heart. Being asked how she felt herself, she said, ' Ten times better. Now I can love God. I wish you would sit up and sing with me all night.' She has been happy ever since, and as serious as one of forty.

[Journal, 1762] July 3.-Our joy is now quite full. The flame rises higher and higher. Since Saturday last eight sinners more are freely justified, and two more renewed in love. Our house was once large enough; now it is scarce able to contain us; and we have not many in the society who are not either wrestling with God for His love or rejoicing therein.

[Journal, 1762] Thus far the account of John Manners, quite unadorned, but plain and sensible.

[Journal, 1762] Upon further examination I found three or four and forty in Dublin who seemed to enjoy the pure love of God. At least forty of these had been set at liberty within four months. Some others who had received the same blessing were removed out of the city. The same, if not a larger number, had found remission of sins. Nor was the hand of the Lord shortened yet: He still wrought as swiftly as ever.

[Journal, 1762] In some respects the work of God in this place was more remarkable than even that in London. (l) It is far greater, in proportion to the time and to the number of people. That society had above seven-and-twenty hundred members; this not a fifth part of the number. Six months after the flame broke out there we had about thirty witnesses of the great salvation. In Dublin there were above forty in less than four months. (2) The work was more pure. In all this time, while they were mildly and tenderly treated, there were none of them headstrong or unadvisable: none that were wiser than their teachers; none who dreamed of being immortal or infallible, or incapable of temptation; in short, no whimsical or enthusiastic persons. All were calm and sober-minded.[ Wesley's views at this time, on Faith, Religious Enthusiasm, and a .reasonable service' may be gathered from a note he wrote in the Journal on Oct. 28, 1762 (see below, p. 532), with which it is instructive to compare his sermon, No. LXX, On the Case of Reason Impartially Considered ( Works, vol. v. P. 350). U may be well to remember that his carefully reasoned letter to Maxfield was written on Monday, Nov. I, in the same year.]

[Journal, 1762] I know several of these were, in process of time, moved from their steadfastness. I am nothing surprised at this; it was no more than might be expected. I rather wonder that more were not moved. Nor does this, in any degree, alter my judgement concerning the great work which God then

[Journal, 1762] wrought.

[Journal, 1762] Tues. 27.-I received a comfortable letter from Edenderry: ' When you came hither Satan had gained such an advantage over us that few, even of the society, would read your sermons, saying they were nothing but the law; but God has now taught us better. His power fell upon us first in the preaching, but abundantly more when the society met. At that time many who were in heaviness were filled with consolation, and two of the old believers were constrained to declare they believed God had cleansed them from all sin."

[Journal, 1762] Wed. 28.[ The fifth Irish Conference, the record of which Mr. Thomas Garrett preserved in his diary, was held on July 28. He writes: ' Have had a good time of it since Mr. Wesley and the preachers came amongst us. 2<)th.-Last night was a watch-night, when we had nine or ten preachers, the greatest number I remember to have seen at one time- Messrs. J. Wesley, Manners. Kead, Swindells, Deaves, Davis, Roberts, Guilford, Lee, and Harris'-nearly, if not all, the preachers then in Ireland. 'Ihomas Rourke was received into the itinerancy. (Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. p. 165.)]-I received farther accounts from Limerick [A letter from Wesley to Blackwell describes the troubled state of Ireland at that time. See W.M. Mag. 1848, p. 780.]; one letter ran thus:

[Journal, 1762] July 20, 1762.

[Journal, 1762] There is a glorious work going on at Limerick. Twelve or fourteen have a clear sense of being renewed; several have been justified this week; and on Sunday night, at the meeting of the society, there was such a cry as I scarce ever heard before, such confession of sins, such pleading with the Lord, and such a spirit of prayer, as if the Lord Himself had been visibly present among us. Some received remission of sins, and several were just brought to the birth. All were in floods of tears; they trembled, they cried, they prayed, they roared aloud, all of them lying on the ground. I began to sing, yet they could not rise, but sang as they lay along. When we concluded some of them could not go away, but stayed in the house all night; and, blessed be our Lord, they all hitherto walk worthy of their calling.

[Journal, 1762] Another writes:

[Journal, 1762] I will just tell you the Lord has made your last visit to us a great blessing. Such times were never before in Limerick. The fire which broke out before you left us is now spreading on every side. Four were happy before you left us; several others can now ' rejoice evermore ' and ' pray without ceasing.' And this certainly they could not do did they not love God with all their heart.

[Journal, 1762] A third letter, dated July 25, says:

[Journal, 1762] Blessed be God, His word runs swiftly. Last night His power was present indeed, and another was assured that God, who had before forgiven his sins, had now cleansed him from all unrighteousness. There are now ten women and thirteen men who witness the same confession, and their lives agree thereto. Eight have lately received the remission of their sins, and many are on the full stretch for God, 'and just ready to step into the pool.

[Journal, 1762] Hence it appears that, in proportion to the time, which was only three or four weeks, and the number of hearers (not one half, if a third part), the work of God was greater in Limerick than even in Dublin itself.

[Journal, 1762] Thur. 29.-I was informed[Probably he received these and other accounts from the Irish preachers assembled at the Conference, which, strange to say, he does not refer to in his Journal.] of a remarkable instance of divine mercy. A harmless, unawakened young woman came to one of the meetings for prayer in Dublin. While they were praying she felt herself a sinner, and began crying aloud for mercy. And when they rose to go away she cried with a bitter cry,' What, must I go without Christ' They began praying again, and in a short time she was as loud in praising God for

[Journal, 1762] His pardoning mercy.

[Journal, 1762] No less remarkable was the case of Alexander Tate. He and his wife were present where a few were met for prayer. Her sorrow was soon turned into joy. Her husband, who was before little awakened, was just then cut to the heart and felt the wrath of God abiding on him; nor did he cease crying to God till his prayers and tears were swallowed up in thanksgiving. So here are two instances of persons both convinced and converted in the same hour.[ On the soth he wrote to his ' old acquaintance Mr. Furly (see below, Sept. 14, 1768). The letter was published in the W.M. Mag. 1856, p. 987. It may be convenient here to explain this friendship. Samuel Furly was connected with the Methodists. While at Cambridge he formed a friendship with Venn. After ministering at Lakenheath, Kippax, and Slaithwaite (where he was very successful), he was presented by Mr. Thornton,

[Journal, 1762] of Clapham, to the living of Roche in 1766. He is described as ' a faithful and zealous preacher: rather a Boanerges than a Barnabas.1 Life of Countess of Huntingdon,vol. ii. p. 2 (see one of Wesley's letters to him in Arm. Mag. 1782, p. 40). He died in 1795-]

[Journal, 1762] Sat. 31.-Although I never before felt such a union of heart with the people of Dublin, yet, believing my present work in Ireland was ended, I cheerfully commended them to God, and embarked on board the Dorset for Parkgate. We weighed anchor at eight in the evening. Between nine and ten on Sunday morning the captain [Captain Caulder. For information concerning Wesley's forty-two voyages across the Irish Sea, the ships in which he sailed, and their captains, see W.H.S. vol. v. pp. 75-8; also Rev. F. F. Bretherton on 'John Wesley's Voyages to and from Parkgate,' Meth. Rtc. Winter No., 1903,p 49.] asked me if I would not go to prayers with them. All who were able to creep out were willingly present. After prayers I preached on Prov. iii. 17. We had scarce any wind when I began, but while I was preaching it sprung up, and brought us to Parkgate between six and seven.

[Journal, 1762] AUG. 2, Mon.-I rode on to Chester. Never was the society in such a state before. Their jars and contentions were at an end, and I found nothing but peace and love among them. About twelve of them believed they were saved from sin, and their lives did not contradict their profession. Most of the rest were strongly athirst for God, and looking for Him continually.

[Journal, 1762] Tues. 3.-I was desired to preach at Northwich, and one had stuck up notices in all parts of the town. But what place had they for me to preach in Only a little room which would hold about fifty people.[ The old Congregational Chapel, Crown Street, Hobson's old printing works. See ' Northwich and its Early Methodism,' Meth. Rec. Oct. 22, 1908.] Between twelve and one they gathered from all parts, noisy and rude enough.[ It is suggested that this probably was the occasion when the mob tried to throw Mr. Morris, who was with Wesley, over the bridge into the river (Arm. Mag. 1795, P76! Meth. Mag. 1830, p. 857).] I could not stand in the yard without just facing the sun, so I stood at the casement, that those without might hear-that is, if they had a mind to it. But a great part of them had no such intention; they came only either for sport or mischief. However, they were pretty quiet till I had done. Our friends would then have persuaded me to stay till the mob was dispersed, but, as they grew louder, and louder, I judged it best to walk immediately through the midst of them. Many things were thrown, but nothing touched me till I took horse and rode to Manchester.

[Journal, 1762] Here I received letters from Congleton, in Cheshire, and Burslem, in Staffordshire.[ See fully, and with extremely interesting detail, in the life of John Furz, one of the most remarkable of the early preachers (E.M.P. vol. v. pp. 127-30), and Atmore's Memorial, pp. 148-54.] Part of the former ran thus:

[Journal, 1762] August I, 1762.

[Journal, 1762] Aug. 1762

[Journal, 1762] Liverpool and Bolton

[Journal, 1762] The work of God for some time stood still here, but at the lovefeast on the zist of March last (glory for ever be to God!), there was an outpouring of His Spirit among us. Five persons were assured of their acceptance with God, of whom, by His free grace, I was one; four believed He had not only forgiven their sins, but likewise cleansed

[Journal, 1762] them from all unrighteousness. Many more have since found Him gracious and merciful; nor is His hand yet stayed at all.

[Journal, 1762] Part of the other is as follows:

[Journal, 1762] Before Mr. Furz came into these parts we were biting and devouring one another, and many who once had known God were ' in their works denying Him.' The society in general was cold and dead, and only two were converted to God in a whole year. But, glory be to God, the case is now altered. Those grievances are removed. The power of God is present with us, and the fire of His love is kindled among us. We are very weak, but, blessed be God, we are all alive. Many are crying out in the bitterness of their souls, ' God be merciful to me, a sinner!' Sometimes we have had two, at other times six or seven, justified in one week; others find the very remains of sin destroyed, and wait to be filled ' with all the fullness of God.'

[Journal, 1762] Wed. 4.-I rode to Liverpool, where also was such a work of God as had never been known there before. We had a surprising congregation in the evening, and, as it seemed, all athirst for God. This, I found, had begun here likewise in the latter end of March, and from that time it had continually increased till a little before I came. Nine were justified in one hour. The next morning I spoke severally with those who believed they were sanctified. They were fifty-one in all- twenty-one men, twenty-one widows or married women, and nine young women or children. In one of these the change was wrought three weeks after she was justified; in three, x seven days after it; in one, five days; and in Sus. Lutwich, aged fourteen, two days only. I asked Hannah Blakeley, aged eleven, ' What do you want now' She said, with amazing energy, the tears running down her cheeks, ' Nothing in this world, nothing but more of my Jesus.' How often ' out of the mouth of babes and sucklings' dost Thou ' perfect praise'!

[Journal, 1762] Fri. 6.-I was informed of the flame which had broken out at Bolton. One, writing to Mr. Furz, described a little of it in the following words: ' Glory be to God, He is doing wonders among us! Since you left us there have been seven (if not more) justified, and six sanctified, at one meeting. Two of these were, I think, justified and sanctified in less than three days. Oh what a meeting was our last class-meeting! In three minutes, or less, God, quite unexpectedly, convinced an old opposer of the truth and wounded many. I never felt the abiding presence of God so exceeding powerful before."

[Journal, 1762] I preached at Macclesfield in the evening to a people ready prepared for the Lord. An impetuous shower began just as we came into the town, but it did us no hurt. Inquiring how the revival here began, I received the following account: In March last, after a long season of dryness and barrenness, one Monday night John Oldham [See Benjamin Smith's Methodism in Maccltsficld, p. 62. John Oldham was one of the first itinerants. He died in 1766. See also Atmore's Memorial, p. 300. ] preached. When he had done, and was going away, a man fell down and cried aloud for mercy. In a short time so did several others. He came back and wrestled with God in prayer for them. About twelve he retired, leaving some of the brethren, who resolved to wrestle on till they had an answer of peace. They continued in prayer till six in the morning, and nine prisoners were set at liberty.

[Journal, 1762] They met again the next night, and six or seven more were filled with peace and joy in believing. So were one or two more every night till the Monday following, when there was another general shower of grace, and many believed that the blood of Christ had cleansed them from all sin.

[Journal, 1762] I spoke to these (forty in all) one by one. Some of them said they received that blessing ten days, some seven, some four, some three days, after they found peace with God; and two of them the next day. What marvel, since one day is with God as a thousand years

[Journal, 1762] The case of Ann Hooly [See Methodism in Macclesfield, p. 70.] was peculiar. She had often declared,' The Methodists' God shall not be my God. I will sooner go to hell than I will go to heaven in their way.' She was standing in the street with two young women when John Oldham, passing by, spoke to one and the other, and went on. She burst into tears, and said,' What! am I so great a sinner that he won't speak to me' About twelve he was sent for in haste. He found her in deep distress; but continued in prayer till all her trouble was gone, and her spirit rejoiced in God her Saviour. Yet three nights after she was in much distress again, crying,' I have a wicked heart, and I cannot rest till God takes it away." He did so in a few hours. Ever since she has been a pattern to all the young people in the town. She was thirteen years old. In about a year her spirit returned to God.

[Journal, 1762] Sat. 7.-I made one more trial at Northwich, preaching in Mr. Page's yard.[ See above, p. 522.] Abundance of people nocked together; nor did any one oppose, or make the least disturbance. And when I afterward rode quite through the town I had not one

[Journal, 1762] uncivil word.

[Journal, 1762] In the evening I spoke with those at Manchester who believed God had cleansed their hearts. They were sixtythree in number; to about sixty of whom I could not find there was any reasonable objection.

[Journal, 1762] Mon. 9.-I preached at Elland and Birstall in my way to Leeds, where our Conference began on Tuesday morning,[ The nineteenth Conference. Lady Huntingdon, J. Wesley, C. Wesley, Whitefield, Romaine, Madan, and Venn were present; of the proceedings we know nothing, except what little is stated by Mr. Story in E.M.P. vol. v. p. 237.] and we had great reason to praise God for His gracious presence from the beginning to the end.

[Journal, 1762] Sun. 15.-I preached about one at Birstall, and in the morning and evening at Leeds. I then rode about eighteen miles. On Monday morning I preached at Sheffield, and in the evening came to Derby.[ Methodism had been introduced into this town in the previous year by Mrs. Crosby and Mr. and Mrs. Dobinson, and in the house of the latter Wesley most likely stayed (see below, March 27, 1764, and Meth. Rec. Winter No., 1896, p. 35). It is thought that Mrs. Crosby, under the disguise of ' Sarah Williamson,' is probably the ' blessed woman' referred to in Adam Bede as Dinah Morris's chief friend in the society at Leeds. She came to Derby with those devoted London Methodists, Mr. and Mrs. Dobinson.] I had sent word that I did not intend to preach; but, after I had rested a while in my chamber, coming down and finding the house full of people, I spoke to them half an hour in a familiar manner, and then spent some time in prayer. I believe God touched some of their hearts; indeed it seemed none were unmoved.

[Journal, 1762] Tues. 17.-We rode to Northampton, the next day to Sundon, and on Thursday the igth to London.

[Journal, 1762] Fri. 20.-As I expected, the sower of tares had not been idle during my five months' absence; but I believe great part of his work was undone in one hour, when we met at West Street.

[Journal, 1762] I pointed out to those who had more heat than light the snares which they had wellnigh fallen into. And hitherto they were of a humble, teachable spirit. So for the present the snare was broken.

[Journal, 1762] Aug. 1762

[Journal, 1762] In Cornwall

[Journal, 1762] Sat. 21.-My brother and I had a long conversation with Mr. Maxfield, and freely told him whatever we disliked. In some things we found he had been blamed without cause; others he promised to alter; so we were thoroughly satisfied with the conversation, believing all misunderstandings were now removed.

[Journal, 1762] Mon. 23.-I set out, and on Tuesday reached Bristol. After spending two days there, on Friday the 2/th I set out for the west; and, having preached at Shepton [Mallet] and Middlezoy in the way, came on Saturday to Exeter. When I began the service there the congregation (beside ourselves) were two women and one Mon. Before I had done the room was about half full. This comes of omitting field-preaching.

[Journal, 1762] Sun. 29.-I preached at eight on Southernhay Green, to an extremely quiet congregation. At the cathedral we had a useful sermon, and the whole service was performed with great seriousness and decency. Such an organ[The organ Wesley saw and heard was built by John Loosemore in 1665, enlarged in 1713, and rebuilt by Jordan in 1741. It had a great reputation for the excellence of its tone, and for its being the first English organ to be provided with a double diapason. It has been restored, improved, enlarged and finally rebuilt in 1888, and for beauty of tone is still unsurpassed. Loosemore's original case, an elegant piece of Renaissance work, though deepened, is but little altered. The organist in 1762 was Richard Langdon, whose chant in F is No. 219 in the Methodist Choir ChantBook, 1910. Samuel Sebastian Wesley was organist from 1835 to 1842. Dr. Wood, the present organist of Exeter Cathedral 1(1912), who has supplied the above information, has found what he thinks is probably the identical composition referred to by Wesley. It is one of the pieces in a collection of Psalms,Anthems, &c., edited by Richard Langdon 'The Communion Hymn-Gloria in Excelsis' set to music by Rev. Tobias Langdon (Prebendary, grandfather of Richard Langdon) of Bodwyn, Cornwall, Subchanter, Priest-Vicar, and master of the choristers belonging to the Cathedral Church of Exeter. This collection, entitled Divine Harmony, &c,, was printed for the editor by Longman, Lukey & Co., 26 Cheapside, 1774.

[Journal, 1762] It was the custom when Dr. Wood went to Exeter (a custom which doubtless had obtained for many years) for the boys of the choir to remain on one Sunday of each month to the end of the Communion Service and sing the Gloria in Excelsis. It is quite conceivable that the simple and expressive melody sung by fresh young voices would make a deep impression on Wesley's mind and heart. Another Exeter Cathedral custom was recalled by Wesley's closing words. When,' writes Dr. Wood, ' I first came here it w as the custom for the communicants to seat themselves in alternate rows of chairs, and the bread and wine was carried to them by the officiating clergy." They literally ' sat down together." See also below, Aug. 18, 1782.] I never saw or heard before, so large, beautiful, and so finely toned; and the music of ' Glory be to God in the highest,' I think, exceeded the Messiah itself. I was well pleased to partake of the Lord's Supper with my old opponent, Bishop Lavington.[ See above, p. 3. See also the account given in the Life of the Countess of Huntingdon, vol. i. pp. 95, 96, of a spurious Charge, and Lavington's declaration thereon. The old controversialist, now at peace with Wesley, died on Sept. 13 of this year.] Oh may we sit down together in the kingdom of our Father!

[Journal, 1762] At five I went to Southernhay Green again, and found a multitude of people; but a lewd, profane, drunken vagabond had so stirred up many of the baser sort that there was much noise, hurry, and confusion. While I was preaching several things were thrown, and much pains taken to overturn the table; and, after I concluded, many endeavored to throw me down, but I walked through the midst and left them.

[Journal, 1762] Mon. 30.-We rode to Plymouth Dock.

[Journal, 1762] SEPT. 1, Wed.-I came about two to Polperro, a little village four hours' drive from Plymouth Passage, surrounded with huge mountains. However, abundance of people had found the way thither. And so had Satan too; for an old greyheaded sinner was bitterly cursing all the Methodists just as we came into the town. However, God gave His blessing, both to us and the congregation.

[Journal, 1762] In the evening I preached at Medrose, the next evening in St. Austell, and on Friday the 3rd at Mevagissey.

[Journal, 1762] Sat. 4.-After preaching in Grampound I rode on to Truro. I almost expected there would be some disturbance,[ Tyerman (vol. ii. p. 449, quoting The Christian Miscellany, 1865, p. 284), seems to assume that Wesley's expectation of a disturbance in Truro arose from his recollection of an extraordinary episode that occurred some years before. But more probably he remembered that his old friend the vicar of Truro, Mr. Walker, was no longer there to quell the mob.] as it was market-day, and I stood in the street at a small distance from the market. But all was quiet. Indeed, both persecution and popular tumult seem to be forgotten in Cornwall.

[Journal, 1762] Sun. 5.-As I was enforcing, in the same place, those solemn words, ' God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,' a poor man began to make some tumult; but many cried out,' Constables, take him away.' They did so, and the hurry was over. At one I preached in the main street at Redruth, where rich and poor were equally attentive. The wind was so high at five that I could not stand in the usual place at Gwennap. But at a small distance was a hollow capable of containing many thousand people.1 I stood on one side of this amphitheatre toward the top, with the people beneath and on all sides, and enlarged on those words in the Gospel for the day (Luke x. 23, 24), ' Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see, and... hear the things that ye hear.'

[Journal, 1762] Mon. 6.-I preached at Penryn; Tuesday the 7th at Porkellis, about one o'clock. Thence I rode on to Mullion, near the Lizard Point. A man who was a sinner gladly received us, for he knew God had received him-having been deeply convinced of sin the last time I preached near Helston, and not long after filled with peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.

[Journal, 1762] A flame was kindled almost as soon as I began to speak, which increased more and more all the time I was preaching, as well as during the meeting of the society. How tender are the hearts of this people! Such is the advantage of true Christian simplicity!

[Journal, 1762] Wed. 8.-The congregation at St. John's, near Helston, was thrice as large as when I was there before. The next day I preached at Crowan at noon, and at Penhale (in Breage) in the evening.

[Journal, 1762] Fri. 10.-I preached on St. Hilary Downs to a congregation gathered from all parts. Abundance of them were athirst for God; and He did not deceive their hope. The cry of the mourners went up before Him, and He sent down an answer of peace.

[Journal, 1762] Sat. 11.-I preached at one on the cliff, near Penzance,[ At the east end of the town, overlooking the Mount's Bay.] and in the evening at Newlyn.

[Journal, 1762] Sun. 12.-At eight God was in the midst, and many hearts were broken in pieces. Between one and two I preached at Sancreed, where I never was before. Abundance of strangers came from every side; and I believe not many went empty away. Hence we rode to St. Just, where I spent two comfortable nights, the congregations being very large, evening and morning.

[Journal, 1762] Tues. 14.-I preached in Lelant about one, and, in the evening, near the quay at St. Ives. Two or three pretty butterflies came, and looked, and smiled, and went away; but all the rest of the numerous congregation behaved with the utmost seriousness.

[Journal, 1762] Wed. 15.-We had our Quarterly Meeting. The next day I appointed the children to meet. I expected twenty, but I suppose we had fourscore; all of them wanting, many desiring, instruction.

[Journal, 1762] The more I converse with the believers in Cornwall, the more I am convinced that they have sustained great loss for want of hearing the doctrine of Christian Perfection clearly and strongly enforced. I see, wherever this is not done, the believers grow dead and cold. Nor can this be prevented but by keeping up in them an hourly expectation of being perfected in love. I say an hourly expectation; for to expect it at death, or some time hence, is much the same as not expecting it at all.[ On Sept. 15 he wrote trom St. Ives to Miss Furly (Woiks, vol. xii. p. 207);and to the Rev. Samuel Furly (Works, vol. xii. p. 365, and Tyerman, li. p. 452).]

[Journal, 1762] Fri. 17.-At one I preached in Illogan; at six near Redruth, at a gentleman's house,[ Probably Trewergte, Mr. Pearse Jenkm's home. ] in a large court, shaded with trees. It was so calm that hardly a leaf moved.

[Journal, 1762] Sat. 18.-I preached once more in the street at Redruth, and in St. Agnes in the evening. I preached again at eight in the morning, and afterwards heard an excellent sermon at church, preached by the rector, Mr. Walker, elder brother to the late Mr. Walker of Truro.[ See above, p. 406, ] He likewise gave notice of his design to preach in the afternoon a funeral sermon for Mr. Phelps, his late curate, a man eminently humble, serious, and zealous for God. He was snatched away by a fever three weeks since, as was his predecessor, Mr. Vowler,[ See above, p. 234.] three or four years before: another upright, zealous servant of God, and indefatigable in his labor. How strange a providence is this! Who can account for it Did the God of love take them away that they might not, out of zeal for Him, continue to oppose their fellow laborers in the gospel

[Journal, 1762] Mr. Walker gave him his due praise in a strong and pathetic sermon, well wrote and well pronounced; concluding with, ' God grant me (and I believe you will all join in the petition), like him to live, like him to die.'

[Journal, 1762] Just as the service was ended it began to rain; the wind also was exceeding high. This created some difficulty. No house could contain the people, neither could I preach, as before, on the top of the hill. I therefore made a halt at the bottom. The congregation gathered round me in a few minutes. We were tolerably sheltered from the wind, and the rain ceased till I had done. I particularly advised all that feared God to confirm their love to each other, and to provoke each other, not to doubtful disputations, but to love and to good works.

[Journal, 1762] The night came on soon after we were on horseback, and we had eight miles to ride. In about half an hour it was so dark I could not see my hand, and it rained incessantly. However, a little after eight, God brought us safe to Cubert. I preached at the church town the next day, and on Tuesday the 2ist rode on to Port Isaac. Here the stewards of the eastern circuit met. What a change is wrought in one year's time! That detestable practice of cheating the King is no more found in our societies. And since that accursed thing has been put away, the work of God has everywhere increased. This society, in particular, is more than doubled; and they are all alive to God.

[Journal, 1762] Fri. 24.-About two I preached at Trewalder, and found God was there also; but more abundantly at Camelford in the evening, as well as at five on Saturday morning. In the afternoon, the rain intermitting, I preached in the market-place; and it was a solemn season.

[Journal, 1762] Sun. 26.-After preaching at eight I left Camelford, now one of the liveliest places in Cornwall. About noon I preached at Trewint. It was fifteen years since I preached there before.[ See above, vol. iii. p. 194.]

[Journal, 1762] Hence I rode to Launceston, to a people as dead as those at Camelford were once. Yet how soon may these also be quickened, by the voice that raiseth the dead!

[Journal, 1762] Mon. 27.-I rode to Week St. Mary. It was a kind of fairday, and the people were come far and near for wrestling and other diversions; but they found a better way of employing their time, for young and old flocked to church from all quarters. The next day I preached at Mill House; on Wednesday at Cullompton, and on Thursday the soth in the market-house at Tiverton.

[Journal, 1762] About midnight I was waked by loud thunder, which continued about a quarter of an hour at Tiverton. In other places, we were afterwards informed, it continued great part of the night. Yet, by comparing various accounts, I found the main shock was at the same time for near a hundred miles. So it seems there was a train of clouds for at least that space, which, by an electrical touch, were all discharged at once.

[Journal, 1762] OCT. 1,Fri.-I preached at Taunton [For a graphic description of a former visit, see above, vol. iii. p. 95.] and Shepton Mallet, and on Saturday the 2nd rode on to Bristol. In the two following weeks I visited as many as I could of the societies in the country, as well as regulated those of Bristol and Kingswood.[ On Oct. 9 he wrote to ' A Member of the Society' ( Works, vol. xii. p. 278), and on the 1301 to the Rev. Samuel Furly (Works, vol. xii. p. 241).]

[Journal, 1762] Sat. 16.-Being informed that James Oddie,[ Oddie travelled as an itinerant for nineteen years, principally in Yorkshire, and was long and honourably connected with Yarm and Keighley. Although he retired from the itinerancy in 1771 and engaged in trade, he continued to preach and lead a class till 1788. He died in 1790 (see Laycock's Methodism in the Great Haworlh Round, pp. 172-4, 360-5, which shows reasons for questioning the judgement of Atmore's Memorial, p. 300). A letter from him to Wesley is in the Arm. Mag. 1780, p. 335, and two of his sermons in the Meth. Mag. 1799.] coming to Bristol, was stopped at Newport by a pleuritic fever, I went to him directly. He recovered from that hour, and in two or three days followed me to Bristol.

[Journal, 1762] The next week I went to many of the societies in Somersetshire.

[Journal, 1762] Mon. 25.-I preached at one in the shell of the new house at Shepton Mallet.[ See Meth. Ma*. 1827, p. 284.] In digging the foundation they found a quarry of stone which was more than sufficient for the house. Thence

[Journal, 1762] I rode to Wincanton.[ See E.M.P. vol. v. p. 124; Tuck's Methodism in France, p. 33.] The rain prevented my preaching abroad, so I willingly accepted the offer of a large meetinghouse, where I preached to a crowded audience with much satisfaction; and again at seven in the morning.

[Journal, 1762] Abundance of rain fell in the night, so that in the morning we were blocked up, the river which runs by the side of the town not being fordable. At length we made a shift to lead our horses over the foot-bridge. I preached at Coleford about noon, and at Bristol in the evening.

[Journal, 1762] Thur. 28.-One who had adorned the gospel in life and in death having desired that I should preach her funeral sermon, I went with a few friends to the house and sang before the body to the room. I did this the rather to show my approbation of that solemn custom and to encourage others to follow it. As we walked our company swiftly increased, so that we had a very numerous congregation at the room. And who can tell but some of these may bless God for it to all eternity

[Journal, 1762] Many years ago my brother frequently said: ' Your day of Pentecost is not fully come, but I doubt not it will, and you will then hear of persons sanctified as frequently as you do now of persons justified.' Any unprejudiced reader may observe that it was now fully come. And accordingly we did hear of persons sanctified, in London, and most other parts of England, and in Dublin, and many other parts of Ireland, as frequently as of persons justified, although instances of the latter were far more frequent than they had been for twenty years before. That many of these did not retain the gift of God is no proof that it was not given them. That many do retain it to this day is matter of praise and thanksgiving. And many of them are gone to Him whom they loved, praising Him with their latest breath; just in the spirit of Ann Steed, the first witness in Bristol of the great salvation, who, being worn out with sickness and racking pain, after she had commended to God all that were round her, lifted up her eyes, cried aloud,' Glory! Hallelujah!' and died.