
FROM FEBRUARY 16, 1755, TO JUNE 16, 1758

VOL. IV

The question as to the relationship of Methodism to the Church of England, always present in Wesley's mind, was rapidly passing into a more acute stage. Whatever may have teen the case at a later period, in 1755 the two brothers were of one mind. They both with equal earnestness deprecated the tendency towards Dissent which so often revealed itself among the preachers. John and Charles Wesley at this time differed only as to future possibilities. John, with keener vision than Charles, saw that in a more or less remote future the Methodists might drift, or be ' thrust out.' Against suck a contingency it behooved him to prepare. Meantime, both by example and argument he sought to check the drift, and to minimize the practical difficulties of a situation which was becoming more and more painful.

The purpose of this note is not to discuss a many-sided question, but to emphasize the Leeds Conference of 1755 as a point of departure in an extremely important discussion, and to draw attention to those original sources of information which, when they shall have been rearranged in order of date, will more fully illuminate the Churchmanship of John Wesley and the attitude of the early Methodists towards all the Churches of the Reformation.

In a collection of Charles Wesley MSS. now in the Conference Office there has recently been found a small volume which contains a much longer version of ' Reasons Against a Separation from the Church of'England'1'(Works, vol. x11i. p. 22$. The date is probably a late error). From internal evidence we may assume that this manuscript version is a copy by Charles Wesley's amanuensis of the original draft written by John Wesley in 1755 in connection with the Leeds Conference. This draft may be the ' manuscript' referred to by fackson (Life of C. W., vol. 11., p. 84. See also below, p. 115). Several copies of this clearly reasoned and popularly worded document were made at the time. The one in Charles Wesley's note-book is entitled,' Ought we to separate from the Church of England' Another copy was sent to the Rev. Samuel Walker of Truro, and a third to the Rev. Thomas Adams of Wintringham. In the same handwriting is a copy of John Wesley's Minutes on the Leeds Conference, including his closing admonition to the preachers; and copies, partly in Charles Wesley's handwriting, of the correspondence between Wesley, Walker, and Adams. There are also several letters in shorthand by Charles Wesley; also shorthand Minutes of the Conference of August 26-28.

THE JOURNAL

From February 16, 1755, to June 16, 1758


[Journal, 1755] 1755. FEB. I6.[ The Sermon Register shows that, during the interval between the last date in Part IX. (Oct. 28, 1754) and the first in Part X. (Feb. 16, 1755), he preached as under :Sun. Nov. 3, 1754, West Street and Snowsfields; Mon. n, Wapping; Sun. 17, Snowsfields; Mon. 18, Foundery. Sun. Dec. I, Spitalfields Sat. 7, Snowsfields; Mon. 9, N.W. [New Wells); Sat. I, Snowsfields; Sun. 22, Spitalfields; Mon. 23, Foundery; Thur. 26, Spitalfields; Tues. 31, Foundery. Wed. Jan. I, 1755, Spitalfields; Fri. 3, Foundery; Sat.4,Snowsfields; Sun.5,West Street and Foundery; Sun. 19, Snowsfields. Sat. Feb. 8, Snowsfields; Sun. 9, West Street and Foundery; Mon. 10, We. [It might be ' Wells' i.e. New Wells or Westminster, not West Street, which is always ' C' or ' Ch' or ' The Chapel']; Tues. n, Westminster]; Mon. 17, Foundery; Thur. 20, Foundery; Sun. 23, Spitalfields; Fri. 28, West Street.]-Having heard a confused account from a place near Camelford, in Cornwall, I wrote to a friend near it, and received the following answer :

[Journal, 1755] According to your desire, I have inquired into the particulars of the late affair at Delabole Quarry. The rock is about thirty yards thick; but the most valuable part of the stone lies undermost.

[Journal, 1755] There were nine partners who shared the advantage of this part of the Quarry. Being greedy of gain, they brought out as much of the under part as possible; and the rather because the time for which they had hired it was within a month of expiring.

[Journal, 1755] On Monday, Dec. 2, William Lane, John Lane, William Kellow, and five more of the partners met in the morning and sent one of their numbers for Theophilus Kellow to come to work. He came, but was so uneasy he could not stay, but quickly returned home. William Kellow was sent for in haste, and went to look after his mare, which had cast her foal. The other seven continued laboring till twelve. All the workmen usually dine together; but these wrought on, when the rest withdrew, till in a moment they were covered with rocks of all sizes, falling about ten yards, some of which were thought to be three tons weight. William Lane had, some years since, known the love of God. He was sitting, cleaving stones, when the rock calved [' Calved,' for ' caved in,' is still dialect English in many parts, North Lincolnshire among the rest. See Murray's Dictionary, and Notts and Queries, 4th series, vol. x11. pp. 116 275.] in upon him, with a concave surface, which just made room for his body ; only one edge of it light upon him, and broke one of his thigh-bones. When they dug away the stones he was earnestly praying to God, and confessing his unfaithfulness. As soon as he looked up he began exhorting all around instantly to make their peace with God. His bone being set, he soon recovered both his bodily strength and the peace and love which he had lost. Another, who sat close by his side, was covered over and killed at once. Close to him John Lane (son of William) was standing: he was thrown upon his face, he knew not how, and a sharp-edged stone pitched between his thighs ; on which a huge rock fell, and was suspended by it, so as to shadow him all over. The other five were entirely dashed in pieces. Doth not God save those that trust in Him

[Journal, 1755] APRIL I, Tues.[ The Sermon Register gives a few dates in March as follows: March 16, West Street; March 30, 22, 24 and 29, Bristol; March 21, Freshford; and March 25 and 30, Kingswood. ]-I rode from Bristol to a village named Kingswood, [Cf. above, p. 80.]

[Journal, 1755] near Wotton-under-Edge. The church was exceeding full, and the congregation was serious and wellbehaved ; and I had since the satisfaction of being informed that many of them are much changed, at least in their outward behavior.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 2.-With some difficulty we reached Stanley. There has been lately a great awakening in this country. I never saw such a congregation here before, notwithstanding the wind and rain ; and all present seemed to receive the word with gladness and readiness of mind. There are a solid, serious people in these parts, who stand their ground against all opposition. The warmest opposers are the Jacobites, who do not love us, because we love King George. But they profit nothing ; for more and more people ' fear God, and honor the King.'

[Journal, 1755] We rode on Thursday in the afternoon, through heavy rain and almost impassable roads, to Evesham ; and on Friday the 4th to Birmingham, a barren, dry, uncomfortable place. Most of the seed which has been sown for so many years the ' wild boars' have ' rooted up'; the fierce, unclean, brutish, blasphemous Antinomians have utterly destroyed it. And the mystic foxes have taken true pains to spoil what remained, with their new gospel. Yet it seems God has a blessing for this place still; so many still attend the preaching, and He is eminently present with the small number that is left in the society.

[Journal, 1755] April. 1756, In the Midlands

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 5.-I preached at Wednesbury, and at eight on Sunday morning. But the great congregation assembled in the afternoon, as soon as the service of the church was over, with which we take care never to interfere. A solemn awe seemed to run all through the company in the evening, when I met the society. We have indeed preached the gospel here ' with much contention,' but the success overpays the labor.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 7.-I was advised to take the Derbyshire road to Manchester. We baited at a house six miles beyond Lichfield.[ Alrewas seems to fulfill all the conditions. It is en route to Barton-under Needwood and Hayfield.] Observing a woman sitting in the kitchen, I asked, ' Are you not well' and found she had just been taken ill (being on her journey), with all the symptoms of an approaching pleurisy. She was glad to hear of an easy, cheap, and (almost) infallible remedy-a handful of nettles, boiled a few minutes, and applied warm to the side. While I was speaking to her an elderly man, pretty well dressed, came in. Upon inquiry, he told us he was traveling, as he could, towards his home near Hounslow, in hopes of agreeing with his creditors, to whom he had surrendered his all. But how to get on he knew not, as he had no money, and had caught a tertian ague. I hope a wise Providence directed this wanderer also, that he might have a remedy for both his maladies.

[Journal, 1755] Soon after we took horse we overtook a poor man creeping forward on two crutches. I asked whither he was going. He said toward Nottingham, where his wife lived. But both his legs had been broke while he was on shipboard, and he had now spent all his money. This man likewise appeared exceeding thankful, and ready to acknowledge the hand of God.

[Journal, 1755] In the afternoon we came to Barton Forge, where a gentleman of Birmingham had set up a large iron-work, and fixed five or six families, with a serious man over them, who lost near all he had in the great riot at Wednesbury. Most of them are seeking to save their souls. I preached in the evening, not to them only, but to many gathered from all parts, and exhorted them to love and help one another.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 8.-I had designed to go straight on to Hayfield ; but one from Ashbourne [Thomas Hanby, afterwards a preacher, tells an interesting story of the beginnings of Methodism at or near Ashbourne, in Thomas Thompson's tollhouse, where Miss Beresford was converted, and at Mr. Kurd's, a gentleman farmer's. Ashbourne is near the head of Dovedale. See Meth. .AV. Jan. 29, 1903 ; cf. Meth. Mag. 1805, p. 97; also pp. 600 and 606.] pressed me much to call there, which accordingly I did at seven in the morning, and preached to a deeply serious congregation. Seventeen or eighteen then desired to join in a society, to whom I spoke severally, and was well pleased to find that near half of them knew the pardoning love of God. One of the first I spoke to was Miss [Judith] Beresford-a sweet, but short-lived flower! [See fully below, p. 204; also Wesley's letter to H. A. Roe (Works, vol. x11i. P7S-).]

[Journal, 1755] Through much hail, rain, and wind we got to Mr. Baddiley's,[ Mr. Baddiley is described as 'a sort of second Grimshaw.' See Works, vol, x11i. p. 209. Tyerman quotes a manuscript letter from Baddiley to Wesley, in which he tells a tragic story of a child who, protesting against the defiant dancing in his father's alehouse, lost his life (vol. 11. p. 195, 196). In a letter, dated ' Chipley, Oct. 22, 1748,' John Bennet tells Wesley of Mr. Baddiley's conversion : ' The minister of Hayfield, a church town within two miles of my father's, is lately converted, and preaches the pure gospel of Jesus Christ. The town is up in arms against him already, breathing out slaughter. Not withstanding he is as bold as a lion.' After reading the first volume of Wesley's sermons, weighing their ' orthodoxy by the standard of Primitive Christianity," he writes warmly approving, and John Bennet copies his letter (Meth. Ret. Winter No. 1902, p. 30).] at Hayfield, about five in the afternoon. His favorite daughter died some hours before we came, such a child as is scarce heard of in a century. All the family informed me of many remarkable circumstances, which else would have seemed incredible. She spoke exceeding plain, yet very seldom ; and then only a few words. She was scarce ever seen to laugh, or heard to utter a light or trifling word. She could not bear any that did, nor any one who behaved in a light or unserious manner. If any such offered to kiss or touch her, she would turn away, and say,' I don't like you." If her brother or sisters spoke angrily to each other, or behaved triflingly, she either sharply reproved (when that seemed needful) or tenderly entreated them to give over. If she had spoke too sharply to any, she would humble herself to them, and not rest till they had forgiven her. After her health declined she was particularly

[Journal, 1755] pleased with hearing that hymn sung, ' Abba, Father,' and would be frequently singing that line herself: Abba, Father, hear my cry!

[Journal, 1755] April 1755, Manchester and Liverpool

[Journal, 1755] On Monday, April 7, without any struggle, she fell asleep, having lived two years and six months.[ These two lines omitted in 1st ed.]

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 9.-In the evening I preached at Manchester.[ He wrote to Blackwell respecting his proof-sheets which he wished to send to Mr. Belchier (Works, vol. x11. p. 182). Mr. Perronet also was helping him with proof-reading. Tyerman says these were the proofs of the Notes on. the New Testament.] The mob was tolerably quiet as long as I was speaking, but immediately after raged horribly. This, I find, has been their manner for some time. No wonder, since the good Justices encourage them.[ 1st ed. gives ' the Justice encourages."]

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 10.-I rode to Hayfield again, to bury Mr. Baddiley's child. Abundance of people were gathered together, and I found uncommon liberty in preaching. Who would have looked for such a congregation as this in the Peak of Derbyshire

[Journal, 1755] I returned to Manchester the next day, and had a quiet congregation both that evening and the following.

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 13.-I met the society at five, and showed them wherein I feared they had grieved the Spirit of God, and provoked Him to deliver them to be thus outraged by ' the beasts of the people.' I then rode to Hayfield once more, where Mr. B[Baddiley] read prayers, and preached a solemn and affecting sermon relative to the late providence. In the afternoon I again found great liberty of spirit in applying those awful words,' What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul'

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 14.-I rode by Manchester (where I preached about twelve) to Warrington.[ See W.H.S. vol. v11i. pp. 57 and 81 for articles on Wesley's visits to Warrington.]

[Journal, 1755] At six in the morning, Tuesday the 15th, I preached to a large and serious congregation, and then went on to Liverpool,[ When Wesley was a boy the population of Liverpool was about 8,000. At the time of this visit it was 18,500. Like Bristol, it was largely indebted for its initial prosperity to the slave-trade.] one of the neatest, best-built towns I have seen in England. I think it is full twice as large as Chester;most of the streets are quite straight. Two-thirds of the town, we are informed, have been added within these forty years. If it continue to increase in the same proportion, in forty years more it will nearly equal Bristol.[ For early Methodism in Liverpool, see W. H.S. vol. i. p. 104] The people in general are the most mild and courteous I ever saw in a seaport town ; as indeed appears by their friendly behavior, not only to the Jews and Papists who live among them, but even to the Methodists (so called). The preaching-house is a little larger than that at Newcastle. It was thoroughly filled at seven in the evening, and the hearts of the whole congregation seemed to be moved before the Lord, and before the presence of His power.[ For the first society-room in Cable Street, and for Pitt Street Chapel, &c see Tyerman's Wesley, vol. 11. p. 197.]

[Journal, 1755] Every morning, as well as evening, abundance of people gladly attended the preaching. Many of them, I learned, were dear lovers of controversy; but I had better work. I pressed upon them all ' repentance toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.'

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 20.-I explained, after the evening preaching, the rules of the society, and strongly exhorted the members to adorn their profession by all holiness of conversation.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 21.-I rode to Bolton. Being now among those who were no ' strangers to the covenant of promise,' I had no need to lay the foundation again, but exhorted them to ' rejoice evermore.' Their number is a little reduced since I was here before; and no wonder, while the sons of strife are on every

[Journal, 1755] side-some for Mr. Bennet, and some for Mr. Wh------.[ The reference is probably to Whitefield, or possibly Wheatley. ] The

[Journal, 1755] little flock, notwithstanding, hold on their way, looking straight to the prize of their high calling.

[Journal, 1755] April 1755, In Yorkshire

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 24.-We rode in less than four hours the eight miles (so called) to New Hall Hey.[ He lodged with Mr. Robert Cunliffe (Afelh. in Rossendalc, p. 84). ] Just as I began to preach, the sun broke out, and shone exceeding hot on the side of my head. I found, if it continued, I should not be able to speak long, and lifted up my heart to God. In a minute or two it was covered with clouds, which continued till the service was over. Let any who please call this chance; I call it an answer to prayer.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 25.-About ten I preached near Todmorden.[ At Mankinholes (see Meth. Rec. April 18, 1912). The 'delightful vale' of the next paragraph is the Halifax Road Valley.] The people stood, row above row, on the side of the mountain. They were rough enough in outward appearance; but their hearts were as melting wax.

[Journal, 1755] One can hardly conceive anything more delightful than the vale through which we rode from hence. The river ran through the green meadows on the right; the fruitful hills and woods rose on either hand. Yet here and there a rock hung over, the little holes of which put me in mind of those beautiful lines:

[Journal, 1755] Te, Domine, intonsi monies, te saxa loquentur Summa Deum, dum montis amat juga pendulus hircus, Saxorumque colit latebrosa cuniculus antra! [' Thee, O Lord, the leafy mountains, Thee, the highest rocks, speak [the idea suggested is that of rustling mountain woods] as God, whilst the poised wild goat loves the mountain ridges, and the coney hides in the coverts of the cliffs- the caverns.' This is from a paraphrase of Psalm civ. by Dr. John Burton, Wesley's friend (see above, vol. I. p. 28), who introduced him to Oglethorpe. Intonsi monies is a reminiscence of Virgil's Eel. v. 63. The lines are repeated below, April 1786, where he attributes them to Dr. Burton. Cf. W.H.S. vol. v. p. 29.]

[Journal, 1755] At three in the afternoon I preached at Heptonstall, on the brow of the mountain. The rain began almost as soon as I began to speak. I prayed that, if God saw best, it might be stayed till I had delivered His word. It was so, and then began again. But we had only a short stage to Ewood.[ Then in possession of Mr. Grimshaw's son (J. U. Walker's Methodism in Halifax, p. 93).]

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 26.-I preached at seven to a large and serious congregation, and again at four in the afternoon. When I began, in a meadow near the house, the wind was so high I could hardly speak. But the winds too are in God's hand ; in a few minutes that inconvenience ceased, and we found the Spirit of God breathing in the midst of us, so that great was our rejoicing in the Lord.

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 27.-A little before I took horse I looked into a room as I walked by, and saw a good old man bleeding almost to death. I desired him immediately to snuff vinegar up his nose, and apply it to his neck, face, and temples. It was done, and the blood entirely stopped in less than two minutes.

[Journal, 1755] The rain began about five, and did not intermit till we came to Haworth; notwithstanding which a multitude of people were gathered together at ten. In the afternoon I was obliged to go out of the church, abundance of people not being able to get in. The rain ceased from the moment I came out till I had finished my discourse. How many proofs must we have that there is no petition too little, any more than too great, for God to grant

[Journal, 1755] May 1755, The Twelfth Conference

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 28.-I preached at Keighley, on Tuesday[On April 29 he wrote to Blackwell {Works, vol. x11. p. 182), and preached at Birstall.] at Bradford, which is now as quiet as Birstall. Such a change has God wrought in the hearts of the people since John Nelson was in the dungeon here. My brother met me at Birstall in the afternoon.[ Wesley, in a letter to his wife, refers to this meeting, adding ' I pity his poor wife, if now upon the road. There she Is likely to stick till the warm weather comes. The roads are almost impassable for wheels' (C. Wesley's Journal, vol. 11. p. 201).]

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 30.-We began reading together A Gentleman's Reasons for his Dissent from the Church of England.[ Written by Micaiah Towgood in the form of three letters to John White, B. D., Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge, and vicar of Ospringe, near Faversham, who wrote a defence of the Established Church. Towgood's book was published in 1746. See Green's Bibliography, p. 107 ; also below, p. 247.] It is an elaborate and lively tract, and contains the strength of the cause; but it did not yield us one proof that it is lawful for us (much less our duty) to separate from it.

[Journal, 1755] May 1, Thur.-I finished the Gentleman's Reasons (who is a dissenting minister at Exeter). In how different a spirit does this man write from honest Richard Baxter! The one dipping, as it were, his pen in tears, the other in vinegar and gall. Surely one page of that loving, serious Christian weighs more than volumes of this bitter, sarcastic jester.[ On May 2 he preached at Halifax, and on Monday the 5th at Leeds.]

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 4.- I preached at one, and again at five, to some thousands at the foot of the hill. I believe this hollow would contain sixty thousand people, standing one above another ; and a clear, strong voice might command them all. Although, if they stood upon a plain, I doubt whether any human voice could be distinctly heard by half the number.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 6.-Our Conference began at Leeds.[ The Twelfth Conference, the Minutes of which are said to be ' in the handwriting of John Jones,' apparently from notes taken by John Wesley (Octavo Minutes, vol. I. p. 708). This was the largest Conference yet held. Sixtythree preachers were present-twelve ' half itinerants,' fifteen ' our chief local preachers." Wesley's address delivered at the close of the Conference has been preserved-a most trenchant pastoral. Tyerman gives a long account of the discussion and correspondence respecting separation from the Church, with many of Charles Wesley's letters, vol. 11. pp. 200-11 ; see also Charles Wesley's letter to his wife (Journal, vol. 11. No. xxxiv.); John Wesley to Charles (Works, vol. x11. pp. Il6-i8),"and below, June 6, 1755. During this visit to Leeds Wesley and Mr. Crook, perpetual curate of Hunslet, exchanged visits. The latter had preached two sermons in the Leeds parish church which Wesley strongly approved. They were afterwards published. He was attacked, bitterly and with misrepresentation of facts, by Sedgewick, master of the Grammar School, in The Leeds Intelligencer. In a spirited reply he incidentally gives information of interest (see W.H.S. vol. 11. pp. 115-18). The Conference was held in the ' Boggard House,' Wesley living for the week in the Preachers' House in ' Boggard Close.' See also Henry Moore's Life of Wesley, vol. 11. pp. 194, 195. The Sermon Register gives an appointment at Manchester also on May 6 (!) and at Birstall on the loth.]

[Journal, 1755] The point on which we desired all the preachers to speak their minds at large was,' Whether we ought to separate from the Church' Whatever was advanced on one side or the other was seriously and calmly considered ; and on the third day we were all fully agreed in that general conclusion-that (whether it was lawful or not) it was no ways expedient.[ On May 10 he wrote to Samuel Furly (Christian Advocate, 1907, p. 487).]

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 12.-We rode (my wife and I) to Northallerton.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 13.-I rode on to Newcastle. I did not find things here in the order I expected. Many were on the point of leaving the Church, which some had done already; and, as they supposed, on my authority! Oh how much discord is caused by one jarring string! How much trouble by one man who does not walk by the same rule and agree in the same judgement with his brethren!

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 18 (being Whit Sunday).-I preached about eight at Gateshead Fell, and returned before the service at St. Andrew's began. At the sacrament many found an uncommon blessing, and felt God has not yet left the Church.

[Journal, 1755] In the following week I spake to the members of the society severally, and found far fewer than I expected prejudiced against the Church; I think not above forty in all. And I trust the plague is now stayed.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 21.-I preached at Nafferton, near Horsley, about thirteen miles from Newcastle. We rode chiefly on the new western road, which lies on the old Roman wall. Some part of this is still to be seen, as are the remains of most of the towers, which were built a mile distant from each other, quite from sea to sea. But where are the men of renown who built them, and who once made all the land tremble Crumbled into dust! Gone hence, to be no more seen, till the earth shall give up her dead!

[Journal, 1755] June 1755, A Strange Phenomenon

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 22.-Mr. Wardrobe,[ Whitehead (Life of Wesley, vol. I. p. 285 .) gives an account of this devoted minister, whom Wesley so greatly admired. See a letter of his in Arm. Mag. 1778, p. 375, inviting Wesley to Hexham in 1746. For his death see below, p. 164.]

[Journal, 1755] minister of Bathgate, in Scotland, preached at the Orphan House in the evening, to the no small amazement and displeasure of some of his zealous countrymen.

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 24.-I preached at Sheephill. The cold drove us into the house ; which being much crowded, was as hot as an oven. Riding afterwards in the keen north wind, it seized upon my breast immediately. However, I made a shift to preach at Chester [Chester-le-Street. It is unfortunate]; and then went on to Sunderland.

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 25.-I preached at eight, though not without pain, not having recovered my voice. We had a useful sermon at church. As soon as the sacrament was over I preached in the High Street (it being Trinity Sunday), upon ' There are three that bear record in heaven'; and my voice was so restored that I could command the whole congregation, though it was exceeding large.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 26.-I rode to Morpeth, and preached in the marketplace to a small but quiet congregation. In the evening I preached in the new room at Alnwick; but I could scarce be heard, rny voice being very weak. In the morning it was stronger; so I preached with more ease at five, and then returned to Newcastle.[ On Monday, May 26, he preached before leaving Sunderland. During May he preached, on a day not specified, at Seacroft in Yorkshire.]

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 29.-I had the pleasure of seeing Mr. Gillies,[ Cf. above, p. 62.] from Glasgow. He preached for me in the evening, to the still greater astonishment of the warm men, who ' could never have thought it of him!' Shall we not have more and more cause to say:

[Journal, 1755] Names, and sects, and parties fall;

[Journal, 1755] Thou, O Christ, art all in all

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 30.-I walked to the Infirmary. It is finely situated on the top of the hill, and is the best ordered of any place of the kind I have seen in England. Nor did I ever see so much seriousness in a hospital before. None were laughing or talking lightly ; many were reading the Bible; and when I talked to and prayed with one, the whole ward listened with

[Journal, 1755] deep attention.

[Journal, 1755] June 2, Mon.-I left Newcastle, and came to Durham, just as Jacob Rowell had done preaching, or rather, attempting to preach ; for the mob was so noisy that he was constrained to break off. I reached Osmotherley in the evening, and found a large congregation waiting. I preached immediately, God renewing my strength and comforting my heart.[ The Osmotherley society book records, ' Laid out for Mr. John Wesley, wife and daughter, Mr. Shent, and Mr. Downes, 5*.']

[Journal, 1755] Here I inquired, of eye and ear witnesses, concerning what lately occurred in the neighbourhood.[ See W.M. Mag. 1843, pp. 206-8. Wesley contributed this account to the London Mag., Gentleman's Mag., The Public Advertiser, and Scots Mag.]

[Journal, 1755] On Tuesday, March 25 last, being the week before Easter, many persons observed a great noise near a ridge of mountains in Yorkshire, called Black Hamilton. It was observed chiefly in the south-west side of the mountain, about a mile from the course where the Hamilton races are run ; near a ridge of rocks, commonly called Whiston Cliffs, or Whiston-White-Mare ; two miles from Sutton, about five from Thirsk.

[Journal, 1755] The same noise was heard on Wednesday by all who went that way. On Thursday, about seven in the morning, Edward Abbot, weaver, and Adam Bosomworth, bleacher, both of Sutton, riding under Whiston Cliffs, heard a roaring (so they termed it), like many cannons, or loud and rolling thunder. It seemed to come from the cliffs, looking up to which they saw a large body of stone, four or five yards broad, split and fly off from the very top of the rocks. They thought it strange, but rode on. Between ten and eleven a larger piece of the rock, about fifteen yards thick, thirty high, and between sixty and seventy broad, was torn off and thrown into the valley.

[Journal, 1755] About seven in the evening, one who was riding by observed the ground to shake exceedingly, and soon after several large stones or rocks, of some tons weight each, rose out of the ground. Others were thrown on one side, others turned upside down, and many rolled over and over. Being a little surprised, and not very curious, he hasted on his way.

[Journal, 1755] On Friday and Saturday the ground continued to shake and the rocks to roll over one another. The earth also clave asunder in very many places, and continued so to do till Sunday mofning.

[Journal, 1755] Being at Osmotherley, seven miles from the cliffs, on Monday, June 2, and finding Edward Abbot there, I desired him, the next morning, to show me the way thither. I walked, crept, and climbed, round and over great part of the ruins. I could not perceive, by any sign, that there was ever any cavity in the rock at all; but one part of the solid stone is cleft from the rest, in a perpendicular line, and smooth, as if cut with instruments. Nor is it barely thrown down, but split into many hundred pieces, some of which lie four or five hundred yards from the main rock.

[Journal, 1755] The ground nearest the cliff is not raised, but sunk considerably beneath the level; but at some distance it is raised in a ridge of eight or ten yards high, twelve or fifteen broad, and near a hundred long. Adjoining to this lies an oval piece of ground, thirty or forty yards in diameter, which has been removed, whole as it is, from beneath the cliff, without the least fissure, with all its load of rocks, some of which were as large as the hull of a small ship. At a little distance is a second piece of ground, forty or fifty yards across, which has been also transplanted entire, with rocks of various sizes upon it, and a tree growing out of one of them. By the removal of one or both of these, I suppose, the hollow near the cliff was made.

[Journal, 1755] All round them lay stones and rocks, great and small; some on the surface of the earth, some half sunk into it, some almost covered, in a variety of positions. Between these the ground was cleft asunder in a thousand places: some of the apertures were nearly closed again, some gaping as at first. Between thirty and forty acres of land, as is commonly supposed (though some reckon above sixty), are in this condition.

[Journal, 1755] On the skirts of these I observed, in abundance of places, the green turf (for it was pasture land), as it were pared off, two or three inches thick, and wrapped round like sheets of lead. A little farther it was not cleft or broken at all, but raised in ridges five or six foot long, exactly resembling the graves in a churchyard. Of these there is a vast number.

[Journal, 1755] That part of the cliff from which the rest is torn lies so high and is now of so bright a colour that it is plainly visible to all the country round, even at the distance of several miles. We saw it distinctly not only from the street in Thirsk, but for five or six miles, as we rode towards York. So we did likewise in the Great North Road, between Sandhutton and Northallerton.

[Journal, 1755] But how may we account for this phenomenon Was it effected by a merely natural cause If so, that cause must either have been fire, water, or air. It could not be fire ; for then some mark of it must have appeared, either at the time, or after it. But no such mark does appear, nor ever did; not so much as the least smoke, either when the first or second rock was removed, or in the whole space between Tuesday and Sunday.

[Journal, 1755] It could not be water ; for no water issued out when the one or the other rock was torn off, nor had there been any rains some time before. It was, in that part of the country, a remarkably dry season. Neither was there any cavity in that part of the rock wherein a sufficient quantity of water might have lodged. On the contrary, it was one single, solid mass, which was evenly and smoothly cleft in

[Journal, 1755] sunder.

[Journal, 1755] There remains no other natural cause assignable, but imprisoned air. I say imprisoned; for, as to the fashionable opinion that the exterior air is the grand agent in earthquakes, it is so senseless, unmechanical, unphilosophical a dream as deserves not to be named but to be exploded. But it is hard to conceive how even imprisoned air could produce such an effect. It might, indeed, shake, tear, raise, or sink the earth ; but how could it cleave a solid rock Here was not room for a quantity of it sufficient to do anything of this nature; at least, unless it had been suddenly and violently expanded by fire, which was not the case. Could a small quantity of air, without that violent expansion, have torn so large a body of rock from the rest to which it adhered in one solid mass Could it have shivered this into pieces, and scattered several of those pieces some hundred yards round Could it have transported those promontories of earth, with their incumbent load, and set them down, unbroken, unchanged, at a distance Truly I am not so great a volunteer in faith as to be able to believe this. He that supposes this must suppose air to be not only a very strong (which we allow) but a very wise agent; while it bore its charge with so great caution as not to hurt or dislocate any part of it.

[Journal, 1755] What, then, could be the cause What, indeed, but God, who arose to shake terribly the earth; who purposely chose such a place, where there is so great a concourse of nobility and gentry every year; and wrought in such a manner that many might see it and fear; that all who travel one of the most frequented roads in England might see it, almost whether they would or no, for many miles together.[ Whiston Cliff was a noted place for training and matching racehorses. An anonymous writer in The Gentleman's Mag., professedly after inquiry, denied the facts in toto. Wesley replied March 8, 175^1 reaffirming the facts as ' punctually true, having been an eye-witness of every particular of it.' John Langhorne, then a private tutor near Thirsk, afterwards translator of Plutarch's Lives, wrote fully confirming Wesley's statements. (Tyerman's Life, vol. 11. p. 213; W.M. Mag. 1843, p. 206; also Works, vol. xi., in Thoughts on the Earthquake at Lisbon.)] It must likewise for many years, maugre all the art of man, be a visible monument of His power, all that ground being now so encumbered with rocks and stones that it cannot be either ploughed or grazed. Nor will it serve any use but to tell all that see it, ' Who can stand before this great God'

[Journal, 1755] June 17550, From York to Sheffield

[Journal, 1755] Hence we rode to Thirsk, where I met the little society, and then went on to York. The people had been waiting for some time, so I began preaching without delay, and felt no want of strength, though the room [This was the room in Pump Yard, Newgate. It held 120 persons, and was registered for public worship (Methodism in York, pp. 80, 81).] was like an oven through the multitude of people.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 6.-I read Dr. Sharp's[Archdeacon of Northumberland. See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 108.]

[Journal, 1755] elaborate tracts on the Rubrics and Canons. He justly observes, with regard to all these: (I) that our governors have power to dispense with our observance of them; (2) that a tacit dispensation is of the same force with an explicit dispensation ; (3) that their continued connivance at what they cannot but know is a tacit dispensation. I think this is true ; but, if it be, he has himself answered his own charge against the Methodists (so called). For, suppose the Canons did forbid field-preaching, as expressly as playing at cards and frequenting taverns, yet we have the very same plea for the former as any clergyman has for the latter. All our governors, the king, the archbishop, and bishops, connive at the one as well as the other.

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 7.-One of the residentiaries sent for Mr. Williamson, who had invited me to preach in his church, and told him, ' Sir, I abhor persecution, but if you let Mr. Wesley preach it will be the worse for you.' He desired it, nevertheless; but I declined.[ Charles Wesley preached there twice in October 1756.]

[Journal, 1755] Perhaps there is a providence in this also. God will not suffer my little remaining strength to be spent on those who will not hear me but in an honorable way.

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 8.-We were at the Minster in the morning, and at our parish church in the afternoon. The same gentleman preached at both ; but though I saw him at the church, I did not know I had ever seen him before. In the morning he was all life and motion, in the afternoon he was as quiet as a post. At five in the evening the rain constrained me to preach in the ' oven' again. The patience of the congregation surprised me. They seemed not to feel the extreme heat, nor to be offended at the close application of those words,' Thou art not far from the kingdom of God.'[See Arm. Mag. 1779, p. 319 : letter from Rev. John Baddiley, rector of Hayfield, Derbyshire, to J. W. re the Separation debates at ' your last Conference in Leeds.' On p. 368, John Wesley to Walker of Truro, dated Bristol, Sept. 24, 1 Difficulties with regard to the Church.' On p. 371, Thos. Adams (Wintringham, Oct. 10,1755):' On leaving the Church'; reply to this (Lond. Oct. 31,1755) P-373VOL. IV

[Journal, 1755] On p. 641, letter from Walker to Wesley, 'Truro, Aug. 16, 1756": 'Advices concerning the Church.' Wesley's reply, 'Kingswood, Sept. 3, 1756,' p. 644.]

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 9.-I took my leave of the richest society, number for number, which we have in England. I hope this place will not prove (as Cork has for some time done) the Capua [For same allusion see below, p. 332.] of our preachers. When I came to Epworth the congregation was waiting. So I went immediately to the Cross, and great was our glorying in the Lord.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 10.-I met the stewards of the Lincolnshire societies, who gave us an agreeable account of the work of God in

[Journal, 1755] every place.

[Journal, 1755] Wed.11.-I preached in a meadow at Misterton to a larger congregation than ever met there before.

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 12.-At eight I preached at Clay worth, and at Rotherham in the evening. Here likewise was such a number of people assembled as was never before seen in that town. Is not this one clear proof of the hand of God that, although the novelty of this preaching is over, yet the people flock to hear it in every place far more than when it was a new thing

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 13.-In the evening I preached at Sheffield.[ Sheffield was part of the Epworth Circuit until August 1757It included also Gainsborough, Grimsby, Barrow, Doncaster, Rotherham, ' and divers other circuits.'] In the morning I examined the members of the society, and was agreeably surprised to find that though none had visited them since I did it myself two years ago, yet they were rather increased than diminished in number, and many of them growing in grace.[ On Friday the 13th he preached again at Rotherham, and on the I4th at Barley Hall as well as Sheffield.]

[Journal, 1755] July 1755, In Norwich

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 16.-I preached in the evening at Nottingham,[ Harwood's History of Wtslcyan Methodism in Nottingham (pp. 8-43), describes the sequence of events which rooted Methodism here. Cf. ' Howe's Society,' p. 13, with 'John How, Nottingham' in Hutton's Memoirs, p. 231. ] and on Thursday afternoon reached London. From a deep sense of the amazing work which God has of late years wrought in England, I preached in the evening on those words (Ps. cxlv11. 20), ' He hath not dealt so with any nation'; no, not even with Scotland or New England. In both these God has indeed made bare His arm, yet not in so astonishing a manner as among us. This must appear to all who impartially consider (I) the numbers of persons on whom God has wrought; (2) the swiftness of His work in many, both convinced and truly converted in a few days ; (3) the depth of it in most of these, changing the heart as well as the whole conversation ; (4) the clearness of it, enabling them boldly to say,' Thou hast loved me; Thou hast given Thyself for me'; (5) the continuance of it. God has wrought in Scotland and New England, at several times, for some weeks or months together; but among us He has wrought for near eighteen years together, without any observable intermission.

[Journal, 1755] Above all, let it be remarked that a considerable number of the regular clergy were engaged in that great work in Scotland; and in New England above a hundred, perhaps as eminent as any in the whole province, not only for piety, but also for abilities, both natural and acquired ; whereas in England there were only two or three inconsiderable clergymen, with a few young, raw, unlettered men; and these opposed by wellnigh all the clergy, as well as laity, in the nation. He that remarks this must needs own, both that this is a work of God and that He hath not wrought so in any other nation.[ On Thursday, June 19, he preached at West Street. On the zoth he wrote from London to Charles Wesley ( Works, vol. x11. p. 116), still on the burning question of Separation. On Sunday the 22nd he again preached at West Street.]

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 23.-I was considering what could be the reasons why the hand of the Lord (who does nothing without a cause) is almost entirely stayed in Scotland, and in great measure in New England. It does not become us to judge peremptorily, but perhaps some of them may be these: (I) Many of them became ' wise in their own eyes'; they seemed to think they were the men, and there were none like them. And hence they refused God the liberty of sending by whom He would send, and required Him to work by men of learning, or not at all. (2) Many of them were bigots, immoderately attached either to their own opinions or mode of worship. Mr. Edwards himself was not clear of this. But the Scotch bigots were beyond all others, placing Arminianism (so called) on a level with Deism, and the Church of England with that of Rome. Hence they not only suffered in themselves and their brethren a bitter zeal, but applauded themselves therein, in showing the same spirit against all who differed from them as the Papists did against our forefathers. (3) With pride, bitterness, and bigotry, selfindulgence was joined ; self-denial was little taught and practiced. It is well if some of them did not despise, or even condemn, all self-denial in things indifferent, as in apparel or food, as nearly allied to Popery. No marvel, then, that the Spirit of God was grieved. Let us profit by their example.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 24.-Observing in that valuable book, Mr. Gillies's Historical Collections, [See above, p. 62, and W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 108.] the custom of Christian congregations in all ages to set apart seasons of solemn thanksgivings, I was amazed and ashamed that we had never done this, after all the blessings we had received, and many to whom I mentioned it gladly agreed to set apart a day for that purpose.[ On June 28 he wrote another letter confident in the preachers' loyalty to the Church, to Charles Wesley (Works, vol. x11. p. 118) ; also one (the first of six) to Mr. Richard Tompson, on the doctrineof Assurance. See Works, vol. x11. p. 466 ; Tyerman, vol 11. p. 214. On the same day (June 28) and on Sunday the 29th he preached at West Street.]

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 30.-I set out for Norwich, and came thither the next evening. As a large congregation was waiting, I could not but preach, though weary enough.[ At a place called the Foundery, near Orford Hill (Lorkin's Methodism in Norwich, p. 2).] The two following days I spoke to each member of the society; and on Friday, JULY 4, took

[Journal, 1755] horse again, though how I should ride five miles I knew not. But God so strengthened both man and beast that I reached Bury the same night, and London the next, far less tired than when I set out from Norwich.[ On July 4 he preached at Bury St. Edmunds, and on Saturday the 5th at Bishop Bonner's.]

[Journal, 1755] Monday the 7th was our first day of solemn thanksgiving for the numberless spiritual blessings we have received. And I believe it was a day which will not soon be forgotten.[ On Thursday the loth he preached at Bishop Bonner's, and on Sunday the 13th at Moorfields.]

[Journal, 1755] Thur, 17.-One spent the evening with us who is accounted both a sensible and a religious Mon. What a proof of the Fall! Even with all the advantages of a liberal education, this person, I will be bold to say, knows just as much of heart religion, of scriptural Christianity, the religion of love, as a child three years old of algebra. How much, then, may we suppose a Turk or heathen to know Hardly more ; perhaps just as much.[ On Monday the 2ist he preached at West Street and Wapping.]

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 22.-To oblige a friendly gentlewoman, I was a witness to her will, wherein she bequeathed part of her estate to charitable uses and part, during his natural life, to her dog Toby. I suppose, though she should die within the year, her legacy to Toby may stand good, but that to the poor is null and void by the statute of Mortmain![ So not very correctly, though commonly, called 9 Geo. 11. c. 36: ' No sums of money . . . shall be given . . . in trust for any charitable uses . . . unless by deed . . . twelve calendar months at least before the death of such donor ... to be enrolled within . . . six months after execution.'The term ' charitable uses' is applicable only to gifts for what are called public charities, the objects of which are not particular individuals, but a class or the public in general.]

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 27 [On July 25 he wrote the second letter to Richard Tompson (Works, vol. x11, p. 467), noting 'concessions' in the Minutes with regard to ' assurance' and ' perfection.']

[Journal, 1755] -I buried the body of Ephraim Bedder,[ See above, p. 48] once a pattern to all that believed ; but, from the time he left off fasting and universal self-denial, in which none was more exemplary for some years, he sunk lower and lower, till he had neither the power nor the form of religion left. In the beginning of his illness he was in black despair. But much prayer was made for him. Toward the close of it it pleased God to restore to him the light of His countenance. So, Itrust, his backsliding only cost him his life, and he may yet live with God for ever.[ On Saturday, Aug. 2, he preached at West Street.]

[Journal, 1755] July 1765., A Letter from Virginia

[Journal, 1755] I was much affected about this time by a letter sent from a gentleman in Virginia.[ Rev. Samuel Davies, of Hanover (in Virginia), See below, for other letters, pp. 149, 194.] Part of it runs thus :

[Journal, 1755] The poor Negro slaves here never heard of Jesus, or His religion, till they arrived at the land of their slavery in America, whom their masters generally neglect, as though immortality was not the privilege of their souls in common with their own. These poor Africans are the principal objects of my compassion, and, I think, the most proper subject of your charity.

[Journal, 1755] The inhabitants of Virginia are computed to be about three hundred thousand, and the one half of them are supposed to be negroes. The number of these who attend on my ministry at particular times is uncertain, but I think there are about three hundred who give a stated attendance. And never have I been so much struck with the appearance of an assembly as when I have glanced my eye on one part of the house, adorned (so it has appeared to me) with so many black countenances, eagerly attentive to every word they heard, and some of them covered with tears. A considerable number of them, about a hundred, have been baptized, after they had been fully instructed in the great truths of religion, and had evidenced their sense of them by a life of the strictest virtue. As they are not sufficiently polished to dissemble with a good grace, they express the sensations of their hearts so much in the language of simple nature, and with such genuine indications of artless [1st ed. ' earth-less.'] sincerity, that it is impossible to suspect their professions, especially when attended with a suitable behavior.

[Journal, 1755] Mr. Todd, minister of the next congregation, has near the same number under his care, and several of them also, he informs me, discover the same seriousness. Indeed, there are multitudes of them in various parts who are eagerly desirous of instruction. They have generally very little help to read; and yet, to my agreeable surprise, sundry of them, by dint of application in their very few leisure hours, have made such a progress that they are able to read their Bible, or a plain author, very intelligibly. But few of their masters will be at the expense of furnishing them with books. I have supplied them to the utmost of my ability. They are exceedingly delighted with Watts's Songs, and I cannot but observe that the negroes, above all of the human species I ever knew, have the nicest ear for music. They have a kind of ecstatic delight in psalmody; nor are there any books they so soon learn, or take so much pleasure in, as those used in that heavenly part of divine worship.

[Journal, 1755] Aug. 3, Sun.-I dined with one who lived for many years with one of the most celebrated beauties in Europe. She was also proud, vain, and nice to a very uncommon degree. But see the end! After a painful and nauseous disease, she rotted away above ground, and was so offensive for many days before she died that scarce any could bear to stay in the room.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 4.-Hearing my old friend Mr. H------s was now a

[Journal, 1755] beggar, and forsaken of all, I called (after a separation of sixteen years) at his lodgings to offer him any service in my power. I was pleasingly surprised to find him reading the Bible! But still I am afraid all is not right, for the hand of God seems to be upon him still, and his mind is so hurried he can settle to nothing. Oh what a pattern of holiness and stability of mind was this very man till he was stolen away by the men whose ' words are smoother than oil'! But were they not to him very swords [On Monday, Aug. 4, he preached at West Street, and on the 5th at Deptford. ]

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 6.-I mentioned to the congregation another means of increasing serious religion, which had been frequently practised by our forefathers and attended with eminent blessing, namely, the joining in a covenant to serve God with all our heart [1st ed. ' with all our soul' only.] and with all our soul. I explained this for several mornings following, and on Friday many of us kept a fast unto the Lord, beseeching Him to give us wisdom and strength to promise unto the Lord our God and keep it.[ On Thursday, Aug. 7, he preached at Bishop Bonner's, and on Sunday the 10th in Moorfields.]

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 11.-I explained once more the nature of such an engagement, and the manner of doing it acceptably to God. At six in the evening we met for that purpose at the French church in Spitalfields. After I had recited the tenor of the covenant proposed, in the words of that blessed man, Richard Alleine, all the people stood up, in testimony of assent, to the number of about eighteen hundred persons. Such a night I scarce ever saw before. Surely the fruit of it shall remain for ever.

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 16.-I buried the remains of a rough, honest, friendly man, Captain Edward Stotesbury.[ Charles Wesley, Thursday, June 7, 1750, wrote : ' I carried Sally to see our old friends at Newington Green. It is remarkable that the first time Mrs. Stotesbury ever saw her she said within herself, " That person is to be my minister's wife." ' Is this the unnamed familyat Newington that provided a quiet retreat for Wesley when he had literary work on hand Charles Wesley wrote an elegy on Mrs. Stotesbury when she died, March 17, 1759 : ' Friendly, faithful soul, adieu' (C.Wesley'sJournal,vol.11. p. 352).] But the lion was become a lamb before God took him to Himself.

[Journal, 1755] 1. Bonner's Hall, 'Near Hackney' (see p. 101)

[Journal, 1755] 2. Zoar Chapel, Southwark (see p. 140)

[Journal, 1755] Aug. 1785., In Cornwall

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 17.-I took leave of the congregation in Moorfields by applying those awful words,' It is appointed for men once to die,' and early in the morning set out for Cornwall. In the evening I preached to a sleepy congregation at Reading on ' It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God,' and to much such another on Tuesday evening at Salisbury on ' Harden not your hearts.'

[Journal, 1755] On Wednesday the 20th, at noon, I preached at Shaftesbury to a much more lively people. In the afternoon both my fellow traveller and I were fairly worn out. We betook ourselves to prayer, and received strength. Nor did we faint any more till, on Friday the 22nd, we reached Plymouth Dock. And I found myself far less weary then than on Monday, when I came to Colebrook.

[Journal, 1755] Having spent two days comfortably, and I hope usefully, on Monday the 2 5th I rode over the mountains, close by the sea, to Looe, a town near half as large as Islington, which sends four Members to the Parliament! And each county in North Wales sends one! At Fowey a little company met us, and conducted us to Luxulyan. Between six and seven I preached in what was once the courtyard of a rich and honourable man ; but he and all his family are in the dust, and his very memory is almost perished. The congregation was large and deeply serious ; but it was still larger on Tuesday evening, and several seemed to be cut to the heart. On Wednesday they flocked from all parts. And with what eagerness did they receive the word! Surely many of these last will be first.

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 28.-I preached at St. Mewan. I do not remember ever to have seen the yard in which I stood quite full before, but it would not now contain the congregation: many were obliged to stand without the gate. At five in the morning I preached at St. Austell1 to more than our room could contain. In the evening I was at St. Ewe. One or two felt the edge of God's sword and sank to the ground, and indeed it seemed as if God would suffer none to escape Him-as if he both heard and answered our prayer:

[Journal, 1755] Dart into all the melting flame

[Journal, 1755] Of love, and make the mountains flow.

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 30.-As I was riding through Truro one stopped my horse and insisted on my alighting. Presently two or three more of Mr. Walker's [Rev. Samuel Walker. ' Evangelical opinions, an awakening ministry, and great ministerial success.' See W.M. Mag. 1847, p. 1099, and Tyerman's Wtsby, vol, 11. p. 207.] society came in, and we seemed to have been acquainted with each other many years; but I was constrained to break from them. About five I found the congregation waiting in a broad, convenient part of the street in Redruth. I was extremely weary, and our friends were so glad to see me that none once thought of asking me to eat or drink ; but my weariness vanished when I began to speak. Surely God is in this place also.

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 31.-Understanding there were many present who did once run well, I preached at eight (the rain ceasing just in time) on ' How shall I give thee up, Ephraim' Many endeavoured, but in vain, to hide their tears. I was agreeably surprised at church to hear the prayers read, not only with deliberation, but with uncommon propriety. At one the congregation was nearly double to what it was in the morning, and all were still as night. Surely these are patient hearers. God grant they may be fruitful ones!

[Journal, 1755] At five I preached in Gwennap to several thousands, but not one of them light or inattentive. After I had done the storm arose, and the rain poured down till about four in the morning. Then the sky cleared, and many of them that feared God gladly assembled before Him.[ The following brief and painfully graphic letter, written on this date from Redruth, shows the kind of irritations which, coupled with jealousies, were straining to breaking-point the relations between two persons who ought never to have become husband and wife. To Mr. Blackwell, In Change Alley, London.

[Journal, 1755] REDRUTH, Aug. 31,1755.

[Journal, 1755] Dear Sir,

[Journal, 1755] In my last journey to the North [see Journal, May z], all my patience was put to the proof again and again, and all my endeavours to please, yet without success. In my present journey I leap as broke from chains. I am content with whatever entertainment I meet with, and my companions are always in good humour, 'because they are with me.' This must be the spirit of all who take journeys with me. If a dinner ill drest, a hard bed, a poor room, a shower of rain, or a dusty road will put them out of humour, it lays a burden upon me greater than all the rest put together. By the grace of God I never fret. I repine at nothing. I am discontented with nothing. And to hear persons at my ear fretting and murmuring at everything is like tearing the flesh off my bones,

[Journal, 1755] I see God sitting upon His throne and ruling all things well. Although, therefore, I can bear this also, to have His government of the world continually found fault with-for in blaming the things which He alone can alter we in effect blame Him-yet it is such a burden to me as I cannot bear without pain, and I bless God when it is removed. The doctrine of a particular providence is what exceeding few persons understand, at least not practically, so as to apply it to every circumstance of life. This I want, to see God acting in everything, and disposing all for His own glory and His creatures' good. I hope it is your continual prayer that you may see Him, and love Him, and glorify Him with all you are and all you have. Peace be with you all!

[Journal, 1755] Your affectionate Servant,

[Journal, 1755] J. Wesley]

[Journal, 1755] SEPT. I, Mon.-I preached at Penryn to abundantly more than the house could contain.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 2.-We went to Falmouth.[ Our own room' at Falmouth, on Smithick Hill. The society removed later to Porhan Street. In 1791 a new chapel was built. The present chapel (1912) is on the same site.] The town is not now what it was ten years since. All is quiet from one end to the other. I had thoughts of preaching on the hill near the church, but the violent wind made it impracticable, so I was obliged to stay in our own room. The people could hear in the yard likewise, and the adjoining houses, and all were deeply attentive.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 3.-At four Mrs. M.[ See above, vol. in. p. 190. Mrs. M. is believed to have been Mrs. Maddern, the woman in Falmouth who received him from the mob into her house.] came into my room, all in tears, and told me she had seen, as it were, our Lord standing by her, calling her by her name, and had ever since been filled with joy unspeakable. Soon after came her sister, in almost the same condition, and afterwards her niece, who likewise quickly melted into tears and refused to be comforted. Which of these will endure to the end Now, at least, God is among them.

[Journal, 1755] After preaching again to a congregation who now appeared ready to devour every word, I walked up to Pendennis Castle, finely situated on the high point of land which runs out between the bay and the harbour, and commanding both. It might easily be made exceeding strong; but our wooden castles are sufficient.

[Journal, 1755] In the afternoon we rode to Helston, once turbulent enough, but now quiet as Penryn. I preached at six on a rising ground about a musket-shot from the town. Two drunken men strove to interrupt; but one soon walked away, the other leaned on his horse's neck and fell fast asleep.

[Journal, 1755] What has done much good here is the example of W-----T------. He was utterly without God in the world when his father died and left him a little estate, encumbered with huge debt. Seven or eight years ago he found peace with God. He afterwards sold his estate, paid all his debts, and with what he had left furnished a little shop. Herein God has blessed him in an uncommon manner. Meantime all his behavior is of a piece, so that more and more of his neighbours say, ' Well, this is a work of God!'

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 4.-In the evening heavy rain began just as I began to give out the hymn, but it ceased before I named my text. I spoke very plain, and it seemed to sink into many hearts, as they showed by attending at five in the morning, when we had another happy and solemn hour.

[Journal, 1755] About noon, Friday Vnz 5th, I called on W. Rowe, in Breage, in my way to Newlyn. ' Twelve years ago,' he said, ' I was going over Gulval Downs, and I saw many people together, and I asked what was the matter, and they told me a man was going to preach. And I said, " To be sure it is some mazed Mon." But when I saw you I said, " Nay, this is no mazed Mon." And you preached on God's raising the dry bones, and from that time I could never rest till God was pleased to breathe on me and raise my dead soul.'

[Journal, 1755] I had given no notice of preaching here, but, seeing the poor people flock from every side, I could not send them empty away. So I preached at a small distance from the house, and besought them to consider our ' great High-Priest, who is passed through into the heavens.' And none opened his mouth,

[Journal, 1755] for the lions of Breage too are now changed into lambs. That they were so fierce ten years ago is no wonder, since their wretched minister told them from the pulpit (seven years before I resigned my fellowship) that 'John Wesley was expelled the College for a base child, and had been quite mazed ever since; that all the Methodists, at their private societies, put out the lights," &c., with abundance more of the same kind. But a year or two since it was observed he grew thoughtful and melancholy, and, about nine months ago, he went into his own necessary house-and hanged himself.

[Journal, 1755] When we came to Newlyn we were informed that a strong, healthy man was, the morning before, found dead in his bed. Many were startled, so I endeavoured to deepen the impression by preaching on those words, ' There is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou

[Journal, 1755] goest.'

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 6.-In the evening I preached at St. Just. Except at Gwennap, I have seen no such congregation in Cornwall. The sun (nor could we contrive it otherwise) shone full in my face when I began the hymn ; but just as I ended it a cloud arose, which covered it till I had done preaching. Is anything too small for the providence of Him by whom our very hairs are numbered

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 7.-Last year a strange letter, written at Penzance, was inserted in the public papers.[ See Gentleman's Mag., 1754, p. 482.]

[Journal, 1755] To-day I spoke to the two persons who occasioned that letter. They are of St. Just parish, sensible men, and no Methodists. The name of one is James Tregear, of the other Thomas Sackerly. I received the account from James two or three hours before Thomas came, but there was no material difference. In July was twelvemonth, they both said, as they were walking from St. Just church-town toward Sancreed, Thomas, happening to look up, cried out,' James, look, look! What is that in the sky' The first appearance, as James expressed it, was three large columns of horsemen, swiftly pressing on, as in a fight, from south-west to north-east, a broad streak of sky being between each column. Sometimes they seemed to run thick together, then to thin their ranks. Afterwards they saw a large fleet of three-mast ships in full sail toward the Lizard Point. This continued above a quarter of an hour; then, all disappearing, they went on their way. The meaning of this, if it was real (which I do not affirm), time only can show.

[Journal, 1755] I preached at eight in the morning and five in the afternoon,[ At Penzance.] and then hastened to St. Ives ; but we did not reach it till between nine and ten, so I delayed visiting Mr. K.[ We can hardly doubt that this is John Knill, whose 'Pyramid,' and a legacy providing for annual dancing around it, are so well known in St. Ives. He was horn in 1733, and would at this time be twenty-two. He was articled to Robert Kitchen, of Penzance, solicitor, and possibly had not, in 1755, left this office for London. He returned to St. Ives as agent for the Earl of Buckinghamshire, and died in 1811. Nearly every prominent man in St. Ives came into the vortex of the Methodist movement. K[nill']s madness opened Wesley's way into his uncle's, the mayor's, family. See letter to Blackwell, Works, vol. x11. p. 184. See especially J. Hobson Matthews's History of the parishes of St. Ives, Lelant, Towednack, and Zennor.] till the morning. He is a young attorney who for some time past frequently attended the preaching. On Saturday morning he fell raving mad. I never saw him till this morning. He sung, and swore, and screamed, and cursed, and blasphemed as if possessed by legion; but as soon as I came in he called me by my name and began to speak. I sat down on the bed, and he was still. Soon after he fell into tears and prayer. We prayed with him, and left him calm for the present.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 9.-I desired as many of our brethren as could to observe Wednesday the loth as a day of fasting and prayer. Just as we were praying for him (we were afterwards informed) he left off raving, and broke out,' Lord, how long Wilt Thou hide Thy face for ever All my bones are broken. Thy wrath lieth heavy upon me : I am in the lowest darkness, and in the deep. But the Lord will hear: He will rebuke thee, thou unclean spirit: He will deliver me out of thy hands.' Many such expressions he uttered for about half an hour, and then raved again.[ On Wednesday the loth Wesley preached at Lelant.]

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 11.-He was more outrageous than ever, but while we were praying for him in the evening he sunk down into a sound sleep, which continued for ten hours; nor was he furious any more, although the time of deliverance was not come.[ On Sept. 12 he wrote to Blackwell (Works,\o\. x11.p. i83),and to Christopher Hopper (Orphan House, p. 103). The Blackwell letter is especially interesting for its information about three notable persons, namely: Michael Fenwick; Mrs. Wesley, into whose hands a packet intended for Charles Perronet accidentally fell-' it contained a few lines which I had writ to Mrs. Lefevre, in answer to a letter,' &c. ; and ' a. young gentleman, nephew to the present mayor,' who was the Mr. K[nill] above-mentioned.]

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 13.-I preached once more at St. Just, on the first stone of their new society-house. [The second chapel, 40 ft. by 28 ft. {W.M.Mas. 1833, p. 874.)]

[Journal, 1755] In the evening, as we rode to Camborne, John Pearce of Redruth was mentioning a remarkable incident. While he lived at Helston, as their class was meeting one evening, one of them cried, with an uncommon tone, ' We will not stay here, we will go to' such a house, which was in a quite different part of the town. They all rose immediately and went, though neither they nor she knew why. Presently, after they were gone, a spark fell into a barrel of gunpowder which was in the next room, and blew up the house. So did God preserve those who trusted in Him, and prevent the blasphemy of the multitude.

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 14.-I preached about eight, at [Carn Brea], to a very numerous congregation ; and I believe God spoke to the hearts of many-of backsliders in particular. Soon after ten we went to Redruth church. A young gentlewoman in the next pew, who had been laughing and talking just before, while the Confession was reading seemed very uneasy, then screamed out several times, dropped down, and was carried out of church. Mr. Collins [See above, vol. l11. p. 191.] read prayers admirably well, and preached an excellent sermon on ' Christ also suffered, leaving us an example, that ye should follow His steps.'

[Journal, 1755] At one I preached on faith, hope, and love. I was surprised at the behavior of the whole multitude. At length God seems to be moving on all their hearts. About five I preached at St. Agnes, where all received the truth in love, except two or three, who soon walked away. Thence I rode on to Cubert. At noon I was much tired; but I was now as fresh as in the morning.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 15.-We walked an hour near the sea-shore, among those amazing caverns, which are full as surprising as Poole's Hole, or (any other in the Peak of Derbyshire. Some part of the rock in these natural vaults glitters as bright and ruddy as gold [Pope's arbour was adorned with these Cornish stones.]; part is a fine sky-blue; part green; part enamelled, exactly like mother-of-pearl; and a great part, especially near the Holy Well[About one and a half miles northwest of the parish church. A full account of this famous well is given in the History of Cornwall. Borlase also mentions the spar. Southey celebrates another Cornish Holy Well, that of St. Keyne's.] (which bubbles up on the top of a rock, and is famous for curing either scorbutic or scrofulous disorders), is crusted over, wherever the water runs, with a hard, white coat, like alabaster.

[Journal, 1755] At six in the evening I preached at Port Isaac. The next day I rode to Camelford, and preached in the market-place about six, on 'Ye must be born again.' Some were much afraid there would be disturbance; but the whole congregation was quiet and attentive.

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 18.-Just as we came in at Launceston the heavy rain began. Between five and six I preached in a gentleman's dining-room, capable of containing some hundreds of people. At five in the morning I preached in the Town Hall, and soon after took my leave of Cornwall.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 19.-In the evening I reached North Molton ; but, being wet and tired, and the people not having notice, I did not preach till the next morning. A few, I found, stand steadfast here also, though a neighbouring gentleman has threatened them much unless they will leave this way, has turned many out of their work or farms, and headed the mob in person.[ See Charles Wesley's letter (Journal, vol. 11. p. 221) : ' Mr Robarts was the

[Journal, 1755] first that planted the gospel in this place.']

[Journal, 1755] On Saturday evening I preached at Tiverton to a wellestablished people.

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 21.-I rode to Cullompton,[ The ride from Tiverton; church service ; preaching, probably out of doors, at five indoors; meeting the society; writing a long, plain, practical letter which seems to have saved a faulty preacher, John Trembath (Works, vol. x11. p. 251)-compare letter written five years later-this was a fair day's work for a convalescent.] where the minister preached an excellent practical sermon. At one I preached on the parable of the Sower, and about five in the markethouse at Tiverton. The congregation was larger than for some years, yet all behaved as though they really desired to save their souls.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 22.-It rained the greater part of the day, which lessened the congregation at Charlton.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 23.-We walked up to Glastonbury Tower,[ On the top of Glastonbury Tor, 500 feet high.] which a gentleman is now repairing. It is the steeple of a church, the foundation of which is still discernible. On the west side of the tower there are niches for images, one of which, as big as the life, is still entire.[ St. Michael holding in his hands a pair of scales.] The hill on which it stands is extremely steep, and of an uncommon height; so that it commands the country on all sides, as well as the Bristol Channel. I was weary enough when we came to Bristol,[ Sept. 24, Bristol, letter to Rev. Mr. Walker (Works, vol. x11i. p. 193), on the question of separation, clearly stating the arguments for it urged in the Leeds Conference, his own difficulty in answering, and the dilemma as to permitting or appointing lay preachers. As to the doctrine and liturgy of the Established Church, and also the unlawfulness of separation, he has no doubt. As he puts it to Mr. Adams two months later: ' We will not go out: if we are thrust out, well.' The series of letters-four to Mr. Walker and one to Mr. Adams-is worth careful study.] but I preached till all my complaints were gone, and I had now a little leisure to sit still, and finish [Wesley began his Notes on the New Testament Jan. 6, 1754, and finished his

[Journal, 1755] task soon after Sept. 23,1755. The volume was published in London as a quarto of 759 pages, price eighteen shillings. Five editions were issued during Wesley's life, with corrections and additions. The Dr. Heylyn (not the more celebrated Peter Heylyn) to whose Theological Lectures he acknowledges indebtedness, was the man whom Wesley heard in St. Mary-le-Strand on Whit Sunday, 1738, and whom he assisted at the Holy Communion. See above, vol. I. p. 463-4.] the Notes on the New Testament

[Journal, 1755] Oct. 1755, In the West

[Journal, 1755] OCT. 3, Fri.-I rode over to Pill, a place famous from generation to generation, even as Kingswood itself, for stupid, brutal, abandoned wickedness. But what is all the power of the world and the devil, when the day of God's power is come Many of the inhabitants now seem desirous of turning from the power of Satan to God.[ On Saturday the 4th he preached in Bristol.]

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 5.-I preached on the south-west side of Bristol.[ Bedminster. He afterwards specifies The Green and the Paddock as open-air preaching-places.] I suppose a considerable part of the congregation had hardly ever heard a sermon in the open air before ; but they were all (rich and poor) serious and attentive. No rudeness is now at Bristol.

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 9.[ On Oct. 8 he wrote to Christopher Hopper (Orphan House, p. 104) : also to Paul Greenwood (W.H.S. vol. v11. p. 20).]-I preached on the Green, near Pill, to a large and serious congregation. It rained most of the time; but none went away, although there were many genteel hearers.[ On Friday the loth he preached in Bristol.]

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 13.-I preached, about noon, at Shepton Mallet, and in the evening at Coleford, where the congregation is so increased that they must enlarge the house.[ See above, vol. 11i. p. 161.]

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 14.-About one I preached near Bradford, and again in the evening.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 15.-I preached at Bath. Even here a few are joined together, and hope they shall be scattered no more.[ Oct. 16, Bristol, is the date of the PS. to the Introd. to Primitive Physick (Works, vol. xiv. p. 316).]

[Journal, 1755] I dined with some serious persons in a large, stately house standing on the brow of a delightful hill.[ Certainly Prior Park, not Comhe

[Journal, 1755] Grove of Sept. 17-19, 1764. In Hunt's LifeofWarburton, prefixed to Works, vol. I. p. 50, of Prior Park Hunt says : ' In so agreeable, or rather splendid a retreat Warburton enjoyed health, affluence, and leisure; the best company when he could partake of it.'] In this paradise they live in ease, in honour, and in elegant abundance. And this they call retiring from the world! What would Gregory Lopez have called it

[Journal, 1755] In the evening the society met at Bristol. I had desired again and again that no person would come who had not calmly and deliberately resolved to give himself up to God. But I believe not ten of them were wanting, and we now solemnly and of set purpose, by our own free act and deed, jointly agreed to take the Lord for our God. I think it will not soon be forgotten ; I hope not to all eternity.[ On Friday the 17th he preached at Kingswood.]

[Journal, 1755] [Sun. 19.-I preached once more in Stokes Croft, to a deeply serious congregation.][ Insertion from 1st ed. Why omitted in later editions is not known.]

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 20.-I left Bristol, and, taking several societies in the way, I on Thursday the 23rd preached at Reading. Several soldiers were there, and many more the next night, when I set before them ' the terrors of the Lord.[ On Tuesday the 2ist he preached at Bray, on Wednesday the 22nd at Salisbury and Westcombe, and on Friday the 24th at Bearfield.] And I scarce ever saw so much impression made on this dull, senseless people.

[Journal, 1755] Nov. 1755, London and Essex

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 25.- I reached London, notwithstanding all the forebodings of my friends, in at least as good health as I left it.

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 26.-I entered upon my London duty, reading prayers, preaching, and giving the sacrament at Snowsfields in the morning; preaching and giving the sacrament at noon in West Street Chapel; meeting the leaders at three; burying a corpse at four; and preaching at five in the afternoon. Afterwards I met the society, and concluded the day with a general love feast.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 27.-We set out for Leigh, in Essex [See Meth. Rec. April 21, 1898.]; but, being hindered a little in the morning, the night came on, without either moon or stars, when we were about two miles short of Rayleigh. The ruts were so deep and uneven that the horses could scarce stand, and the chaise was continually in danger of overturning ; so that my companions thought it best to walk to the town, though the road was both wet and dirty. Leaving them at Rayleigh, I took horse again. It was so thoroughly dark that we could not see our horses' heads; however, by the help of Him to whom the night shines as the day, we hit every turning ; and, without going a quarter of a mile out of our way, before nine came to Leigh.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 29.-1 returned to London.[ And preached at Bishop Bonner"s.] In my scraps of time, on this and two or three other days, I read over (what I had often heard much commended) Lord Anson's Voyage[A Voyagt Round the World, 1740-4.VOL. IV Published in 1748. The 'historian' was Benjamin Robins, F.R.S.] What pity he had not a better historian!-one who had eyes to see and courage to own the hand of God.[ On Oct. 31 he wrote a letter to Rev. Thomas Adams {Works, vol. x11i. p. 207) defining the Methodist position in relation to the Church of England. On Nov. 3 he preached at Wapping.]

[Journal, 1755] Nov. 5, Wed.-Mr. Whitefield called upon me. Disputings are now no more ; we love one another, and join hand in hand to promote the cause of our common Master.

[Journal, 1755] In the afternoon I buried the remains of Samuel Larwood,[ See above, p. 23.] who died of a fever on Sunday morning, deeply convinced of his unfaithfulness, and yet hoping to find mercy. He had lately taken and repaired a building in Southwark, called by the venerable men who built it, Zoar.[ Zoar Street preserves the name. The chapel stood on the north side, near the west end, and the site is now tovered by a block of model dwellings. It was originally a Presbyterian meeting house, and, tradition affirms, was preached in by John Bunyan. Old and New London, vol. vi. p. 40, says Zoar became first a brewery, then a factory. See W.H.S. vol. v11. p. HO; also above, p. 127. ] His executor offering it to me on the evening of Friday the 7th, that solemn day which we observed 'with fasting and prayer for our King.and country, I preached there to a large and quiet congregation ; but most of them appeared wild enough : and such were we, till grace made the difference.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 10.-I preached at the Wells [And at West Street. For the Wells see above, p. 93.]; and I did not wonder that God gave an uncommon blessing to those who then assembled in His name, considering the difficulties they had broke through. The frost was very severe, accompanied with such a fog as perhaps the oldest man there never saw before. The lamps could not be seen across the street, and hardly the ground, by those who had lights in their hands. Many lost their way when they were just at their own doors. And it was almost as hard to breathe as to see. How easy it is for God to punish a sinful nation, even without employing an arm of flesh!

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 17.-As we were walking towards Wapping the rain 'poured down with such violence that we were obliged to take .shelter till it abated. We then held on to Gravel Lane, in many parts of which the waters were like a river. However, we got on pretty well till the rain put out the candle in our lantern. We then were obliged to wade through all, till we came to the chapel-yard. Just as we entered it a little streak of lightning appeared in the south-west. There was likewise a small clap of thunder, and a vehement burst of rain, which rushed so plentifully through our shattered tiles that the vestry was all in a float. Soon after I began reading prayers the lightning flamed all round it, and the thunder rolled just over our heads. When it grew louder and louder, perceiving many of the strangers to be much affrighted, I broke off the prayers, after the Collect, ' Lighten our darkness, we beseech Thee,

[Journal, 1755] O Lord,' and began applying ' The Lord sits above the water-flood ; the Lord remains a King for ever.' Presently the lightning, thunder, and rain ceased, and we had a remarkably calm evening.

[Journal, 1755] It was observed that exactly at this hour they were acting Macbeth in Drury Lane, and just as the mock-thunder began the Lord began to thunder out of heaven. For a while it put them to a stand ; but they soon took courage, and went on. Otherwise it might have been suspected that the fear of God had crept into the very theatre!

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 18.-We had a solemn watch-night at Zoar.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 26.-Being much importuned thereto, I wrote Serious Thoughts on the Earthquake at Lisbondirected, not as I designed at first, to the small vulgar, but the great-to the learned, rich, and honourable heathens, commonly called Christians.

[Journal, 1755] Dec. 1755, In London

[Journal, 1755] Dec. 2, Tues.-I received a remarkable letter,[ The earthquake took place on Nov. I, 1755. A large part of the city was destroyed, and over 30,000 lives were lost. The Serious Thoughts soon ran into six editions. See Works, vol. xi. pp. 1-13 ; Green's Bibliog. No. 171.] part of which I have here subjoined:

[Journal, 1755] It may seem strange, sir, that I, whom you have no personal knowledge of, should write with the freedom I am now going to take. But, I trust you desire as much to instruct as I to be instructed. I have long labored under a disease which comes the nearest to that which is named scepticism. I rejoice at one time in the belief that the religion of my country is true; but how transient my joy! While my busy imagination ranges through nature, books, and men, I often drop into that horrible pit of Deism, and in vain bemoan my fall. The two main springs which alternately move my soul to these opposite opinions are, first, Can it be, that the great God of the boundless universe, containing many thousand better worlds than this, should become incarnate here, and die on a piece of wood There I lose my belief of Christianity.

[Journal, 1755] But on the other hand I think, Well, let me examine the fitness of things which Deism boasts of. And certain it is I discern nothing but beauty and wisdom in the inanimate parts of the creation. But how is the animate side of nature It shocks me with powerful cruelty and bleeding innocence. I cannot call the earth (as Fontenelle does) 'a great rolling globe covered over with fools,' but rather a great rolling globe covered over with slaughter-houses, where few beings can escape but those of the butcher kind-the lion, wolf, or tiger. And as to man himself, he is undoubtedly the supreme lord, nay, the uncontrollable tyrant, of this globe. Yet survey him in a state of Deism, and I must pronounce him a very poor creature; he is then a kind of Jack Ketch, an executioner-general. He may, nay, he must, destroy, for his own subsistence multitudes of beings that have done him no wrong. He has none of that heavenly power to restore life; and can he be fond of the permission to take it away One who, like me, is subject to the tender passions, will never be proud of this.

[Journal, 1755] No dying brute I view in anguish here,

[Journal, 1755] But from my melting eye descends a tear.

[Journal, 1755] The very beasts are entitled to my compassion; but who can express the anxieties I feel for the afflictions sustained by virtuous men, and my abhorrence of the cruel Yet in Deism I can discern no reward for the one or punishment for the other. On this view of things the Castihan King might well say he could have directed God to amend His creation.

[Journal, 1755] I think, upon the whole, the God of wisdom would not have made a world so much in want of a Redeemer as this and not give it one; therefore at present I am again a Christian. Oh that the Son of God would confirm me His! As yet my soul is like a weather-beaten bird that hovers over the great ocean, tired and afraid of dropping. Death and eternity are ready to receive it; the pleasant land is out of sight, hid by fogs and mists, and the way unknown to gain the happy groves.

[Journal, 1755] I was formerly apt to mention my skepticism, both to clergymen and laymen, with a view of lessening the evil, but they rather increased it. Few clergymen cared to discourse on the subject, and if they did they generally expected that a few weak reasons should eradicate at once strong and deep-rooted prejudices; and most laymen discovered an utter ignorance of the religion they pretended to believe, and looked upon me as if I had the plague for owning I did not believe it. What method could I take I long avoided speaking of religion to any but its Great Author, who, I hope, has at last led me to one that is capable of removing my spiritual darkness. May the Giver of all goodness reward you in that day when (according to the prophet Daniel) ' the wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever '![ On Sunday, Dec. 7, he preached at West Street.]

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 12.-As I was returning from Zoar I came as well as usual to Moorfields ; but there my strength entirely failed, and such a faintness and weariness seized me that it was with difficulty I got home. I could not but think how happy it would be (suppose we were ready for the Bridegroom) to sink down and steal away at once, without any of the hurry and pomp of dying! Yet it is happier still to glorify God in our death as well as our life.

[Journal, 1755] About this time I received a serious, sensible letter, the substance of which was as follows [This was reprinted in the Arm. Mag. 1795P.155]:

[Journal, 1755] Scarce any nation passes a century without some remarkable fluctuation. How should it be otherwise For how can that be perpetually stable wherein man, full of instability, is principally concerned It is certain, therefore, that all the quiet in a nation is ordered by divine wisdom, as all the confusions and convulsions are permitted by divine justice. Let us view the present state of Great Britain in this light, resting assured that all which befalls us is intended to promote our good in this world and that which is to come.

[Journal, 1755] This land is ripe for judgments. How few are there herein who even intend to please God in all they do! And all besides are subjects of divine wrath. For all who live without any regard to God are willful sinners against God, and every hour liable to the stroke of His offended

[Journal, 1755] justice.

[Journal, 1755] And what shall these do when visited by the sword, the plague, the famine, or the furious elements Oh that they would turn to God through the Savior of sinners! Surely then they would find mercy! Yea, and probably see the salvation of God, even in the land of the living.

[Journal, 1755] But what shall the Christians do in the time of public calamities Be still, look up, and follow Providence. Be still, O my soul! in the midst of tumults and the distress of nations. Take no comfort in anything but in the consciousness of divine love. Listen to His voice, and quietly wait to see the hand of God over all. If you are uncertain what to do, look up and expect wisdom from above. If you fear, look up for courage and faith to act well on all occasions. If the sword is at your throat, look up for submission to the wise and gracious will of God. Look up for power to pray without ceasing, and in everything to give thanks. Follow Providence. Do not run before, but after, the hand that leads the simple-hearted, with a steady attention and a determinate purpose to do what is pleasing to Him.

[Journal, 1755] But what shall the Christians do if the storm come-if our country be actually invaded The general answer must be the same : ' Be still; look up; follow Providence.' A particular answer is hard to give yet. Only so far one may say : (I) We must take great care of our spirits. If we sink into the world's fears or joys we shall lose our hold on God. The spirit of the Christians and the spirit of the world are entirely different. They can never agree in what appertains to the work of God, either in His dispensations of grace or justice. (2) Every one should deeply consider what he is called to. Some may think it would be a sin to defend themselves. Happy are they if they can refrain from judging or condemning those that are of a different persuasion. Certain it is some have fought and died in a just cause with a conscience void of offence. To some, therefore, it may be matter of duty to repel the common enemy. (3) They who believe they are called to this should proceed in all things in a Christian spirit. They should, if possible, join in one body. They should endeavour to avoid trifling company and conversation. They should learn the exercise with prayers and hymns. But who of us is sufficient for these things

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 14.-The minds of many people being deeply affected with a prospect of public calamities, I explained those comfortable words in the First Lesson (Isa. xxvi. 20): ' Come, My people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee. Hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast [Stone's End, near the Marshalsea in the Borough. In Paterson's Road Map miles are counted from this point on the Dover Road. See W.H.S. vol. y11. p. 71.]

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 16.-I set out for Lewisham, appointing one to meet me with my horse at the Stone's End.1 But he mistook his way, and so left me to walk on, in my boots and great-coat. When I came within a quarter of a mile of Lewisham Bridge a coach drove swiftly by me. I wondered why the coachman stopped, till he called, and desired me to come up to him. The reason then appeared-the low grounds were quite covered with water, so that I could not have attempted to reach the bridge without hazarding my life.[ On Friday, the 19th he preached at West Street.]

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 23-[ On Thursday the 25th he preached at West Street.]-I was in the robe-chamber adjoining to the House of Lords when the King put on his robes.[ George 11 was then seventy-two years of age-the last King of England to lead an army into battle (Dettingen, 1743). He reigned th11ty-three years; was also Elector of Hanover: died in 1760.] His brow was much furrowed with age, and quite clouded with care. And is this all the world can give even to a king All the grandeur it can afford A blanket of ermine round his shoulders, so heavy and cumbersome he can scarce move under it! A huge heap of borrowed hair, with a few plates of gold and glittering stones upon his head! Alas, what a bauble is human greatness! And even this will not endure. Cover the head with ever so much hair and gold, yet-

[Journal, 1755] Scit te Proserpina canum; Personam capiti detrahet illa tuo.[ ' Proserpine knows you to be whitehaired ; she will snip off the mask from your head' (Martial, Epigr. 11i. 43). W.H.S. vol. v. p. 30.]

[Journal, 1755] Jan. 1756., Public Affairs

[Journal, 1755] 1756, Jan. I.-We had a large congregation at four in the morning.[ At the Foundery ; also, later in the day, at West Street.] How much are men divided in their expectations concerning the ensuing year! Will it bring a large harvest of temporal calamities, or of spiritual blessings Perhaps of both-of temporal afflictions preparatory to spiritual blessings.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 5.-This week I wrote An Address to the Clergy which, considering the state of public affairs, I judged would be more seasonable and more easily borne at this time than at any other.[ Jan. 6 is the date at the end of A Letter to the Reverend W. Law. At the beginning is the date 'Dec. 15, 1755' (Green's Bibliography, No. 174, and Works, vol. ix. p. 466). He also wrote to Joseph Cownley on the loth (vol. x11. p. 224). On the 9th he preached at Zoar.]

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 14.-Mr. Walsh wrote to me as follows:

[Journal, 1755] REV. AND VERY DEAR SlR,

[Journal, 1755] In Mr. Booker's letter are many palpable falsehoods.[ The reference is probably to one of the Two Letters Concerning the Methodists, published in 1752, a rare publication, the originals of which are in Trinity College Library, Dublin. His roughness notwithstanding, there is evidence to show that Booker admired both the scholarship and character of Walsh. See above, P-39] But what exasperated him so he does not tell. It was my opposing his Arian principles, my telling him I had the same arguments to prove the Divinity of Christ as to prove the Godhead of the Father. (I) The Father is called God, "X ; so is the Son, Isa. ix. 6. (2) The Father is called DVita ; so is the Son, Hos. I. 7. (3) The Father is called mrp; so is the Son, Jer. xx11i. 6. (4) The Father is said to be from everlasting ; so the Son is called iy UK, Isa. ix. 6. Not the everlasting Father, but the Father or Author of eternity. (5) The Father is said to create all things ; so is the Son, John I. and Col. I. (6) The Father is said to be almighty ; so is the Son. (7) The Father is omnipresent; so is the Son, Matt, xv11i. 20. (8) The Father is omniscient ; so is the Son, Rev. 11. 23. (9) The Father forgives sins; so does the Son, Mark 11. 5-11. (10) The Father is Judge of all ; so is the Son.

[Journal, 1755] But still he disputed whether any man should pray to Christ. I gave these reasons for it : (I) All men are bound to honour the Son as they honour the Father. But we are to honour the Father by praying to Him, therefore we should so honour the Son. (2) God commands, ' Let all the angels of God worship Him.' This is done, Rev. v. 12, 13. And it is certain praise and thanksgiving are superior rather than inferior to prayer. (3) St. Paul prayed to Him, 2 Cor. x11. 8, 9. (4) St. Stephen prayed to Him, Acts v11. 59. (The word God is not in the original.) (5) All believers in the apostolic age prayed to Him, I Cor. I. 2. For what is to call upon His name but to pray to Him

[Journal, 1755] When he could not answer these reasons he called them cant, and said, ' Much learning has made thee mad.' What he calls ' contempt ' was confronting him with Scripture and reason in defence of the Godhead of Christ. I acknowledge I have been an opposer of Arianism ever since I knew what it was, but especially since my late illness, during which I had such glorious evidences of the eternal power and Godhead of my great Redeemer. I bless God I love Mr. Bfooker], as well as all mankind ; but it grieves me to see people led in the high road to hell instead of heaven, especially at a time which calls upon all to awake and prepare to meet their God.[ On Thursday the I5th he preached at Bishop Bonner's Hall (see above, p. loi).]

[Journal, 1755] Saturday the 17th, and in the pare hours of the following days, I read over Mr. Pike's Philosophia Sacra, [Samuel Pike (1717 ()-1773). Philosophia Sacra ; or, the Principles of Natural Philosophy Extracted from Divine Revelation. London, 1753. 8vo. See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 108 ; below, p. 190.] a treatise admirably well wrote by an ingenious man, who says all that can be said for Mr. Hutchinson's hypothesis.[ John Hutchinson, born in 1674, was steward to the Duke of Somerset. His Prinnpia were an attempt to set aside the Newtonian doctrine of gravitation.] But it is only an hypothesis still; much supposition and little proof

[Journal, 1755] Feb. 1756, In Kent and London

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 26.-I rode to Canterbury, and preached in the evening to such a congregation as I never saw there before, in which were abundance of the soldiers, and not a few of their officers.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 28.-I preached about noon at Dover [For early preaching-places in Dover (and the Cliff) see Meth Rec. Aug. 16, 1906.] to a very serious but small congregation. We afterwards walked up to the Castle, on the top of a mountain. It is an amazingly fine situation, and from hence we had a clear view of that vast piece of the cliff which a few days ago divided from the rest and fell down upon the beach.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 30.-In returning to London I read the life of the late Czar, Peter the Great. Undoubtedly he was a soldier, a general, and a statesman, scarce inferior to any. But why was he called a Christian What has Christianity to do either with deep dissimulation or savage cruelty [From Feb. I he was in London (see Sermon Register), and on Feb. 5 he wrote his third letter to R. Tompson ( Works, vol. x11. p. 469). He also wrote to Dr. Dodd (Woiks, vol. xi. p 448).]

[Journal, 1755] Feb. 6, Fri.-The fast-day was a glorious day, such as London has scarce seen since the Restoration.[ Humiliation was turned into national rejoicing, for the threatened invasion by the French was averted.] Every church in the city was more than full, and a solemn seriousness sat on every face. Surely God hears the prayer, and there will yet be a lengthening of our tranquility.

[Journal, 1755] Even the Jews observed this day with a peculiar solemnity. The form of prayer which was used in their synagogue began : ' Come, and let us return unto the Lord, for He hath torn and He will heal us,' and concluded with those remarkable words :

[Journal, 1755] "Incline the heart of our Sovereign Lord King George, as well as the hearts of his lords and counsellors, to use us kindly, and all our brethren, the children of Israel, that in his days and in our days we may see the restoration of Judah, and that Israel may dwell in safety, and the Redeemer may come to Zion. May it be Thy will! And we all say, Amen." [On Tuesday the I71h he preached at Deptford. On Feb. i8th the fourth letter to R. Tompson was written (Works, vol. x11. p. 472.)]

[Journal, 1755] FEB. 14-19, 1756

[Journal, 1755] ". to recover, though slowly, from that hour."

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 19.-Daniel Car, whom I never saw before, but heard from others that he had been for some time remarkably serious -a prentice to one Mr. Rogers, a tailor, on Stepney Causeway- gave me the account following :

[Journal, 1755] About the beginning of last month there were strange noises in our house, which were heard by many. Jan. 10, about a quarter past ten at night, I went up into a two-pair-of-stairs room and sat down to read my Bible, when I heard a knocking under my feet, as if it was in the room below. I took the candle in my left hand, and the book in my right, and went down immediately. As soon as I went into the room the candle went out, and I saw a man standing in the middle of the chamber, in light-coloured cloths and a green velvet waistcoat, with a lighted torch in his hand. I said, ' In the name of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who are you, and what do you want' He said, 'I am the spirit of Richard Sims, who died here in the year 1702. I have a nephew at Kingston-upon-Thames, Thomas Roberts, an apothecary; you must go and warn him and his sister from me that they immediately turn to God, for he will die on the 26th of next month, and she will die on the 3oth.' I said, ' I can't go, for my time is not my own.' He answered, ' Can you write' I said ' Yes.' ' Then,' said he, 'you must write to them. Go and fetch pen, ink, and paper, and I will tell you what to write.' I went and fetched a pen and ink, with a sheet of paper. When I came in again the table, which used to stand near the window, was removed to the feet of the bed. So I sat down, and he stood before the table, and told me, word by word, what to write. I wrote a whole sheet of paper on all four sides, describing the torment of hell in such words as I had never heard in my life, enough to make one's blood run cold. When I had done he said, ' I will give them a mark that it comes from me.' So he struck the burning end of his torch on the paper, and it turned that part of it into the colour of half-burnt tinder. He then said, 'What book is that' I answered, ' The Bible.' He said, ' Open it, and read where your eye falls.' I did so, and read, John v. 28, 29 : ' The hour is coming in which all that are in the graves shall hear His voice, and shall come

[Journal, 1755] forth; they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation.' At that word he gave such a groan and shriek as I never heard and . . .][ The above is a fragment of another version of the Journal in the handwriting of Wesley. This narrative, and also another given below, pp. 250-3, were discovered among Wesley letters in the Colman Collection. They have not hitherto been published, so far as we have been able to ascertain.]

[Journal, 1755] March 1756., Canterbury: London: Bristol

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 23.-I paid another visit to Canterbury, but came in too late to preach.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 24.-Abundance of soldiers and many officers came to the preaching. And surely the fear and the love of God will prepare them either for death or victory.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 25.-I dined with Colonel------,[ Probably Colonel Gallatin, who was stationed at Canterbury.] who said : ' No men fight like those who fear God ; I had rather command five hundred such than any regiment in his Majesty's army.'

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 26.-I had so severe a cold that I could hardly speak to be heard. However, I preached morning and evening, as I could, and the next day returned to London.[ On Friday the 27th he preached at Zoar, and on Sunday the 2gth in London.]

[Journal, 1755] March 1, Mon.-I set out for Bristol. Some time after I received the copy of another letter, dated March 2, from the Rev. Mr. Davies in Virginia, [Of Hanover, Virginia. For his first letter to Wesley see above, p. 125, and for his third letter below, p. 194. In Anderson's History of the Colonial Church, vol. 11i. p. 133, is an account of this able, zealous, and eloquent Presbyterian minister.] part of which I have subjoined:

[Journal, 1755] When the books arrived I gave public notice after sermon, and desired such negroes as could read, and such white people as would make good use of them and were not able to buy, to come to my house. For some time after the poor slaves, whenever they could get an hour's leisure, hurried away to me, and received them with all the genuine indications of passionate gratitude. All the books were very acceptable, but none more so than the Psalms and Hymns, which enabled them to gratify their peculiar taste for psalmody. Sundry of them lodged all night in my kitchen, and sometimes, when I have awaked at two or three in the morning, a torrent of sacred psalmody has poured into my chamber. In this exercise some of them spend the whole night.

[Journal, 1755] The good effects of this charity are already apparent. It convinces the heathen that, however careless about religion the generality of the white people are, yet there are some who think it a matter of importance. It has excited some of their masters to emulation, and they are ashamed that strangers on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean should be at such pains to teach their domestics, while themselves are negligent about it. Such of the negroes as can read already are evidently improving in knowledge. It has excited others to learn to read, for as I give books to none but such as can read, they consider them as a reward for their industry. And I am told that, in almost every house in my congregation, and in many other places, they spend every leisure hour in endeavoring to learn. Many do this from a sincere desire to know the will of God, and if some should do it from the meaner principle of vanity or curiosity, yet I cannot but rejoice that it renders them the more capable of receiving instruction. To all this I may add that the very distributing these books gives me an opportunity of speaking seriously, and with particular application, to many who would not otherwise come in my way.

[Journal, 1755] There are thousands of Negroes in this colony who still continue in the grossest ignorance, and are as rank pagans now as they were in the wilds of Africa. Not a few of these are within the bounds of my congregation. But all are not of this character. Upon some my ministry of late has been successful. Two Sundays ago I had the pleasure of seeing forty of their black faces at the Lord's Table, several of whom give unusual evidence of their sincerity in religion. Last Sunday I baptized seven or eight, who had been catechized for some time. Indeed, many of them appear determined to press into the kingdom, and, I am persuaded, will find an abundant entrance when many of the children of the kingdom are shut out.

[Journal, 1755] I have distributed some of the books among the poor white people, with a charge to circulate them among such of their neighbors as would seriously read them, that they might be as extensively serviceable as possible, and some of them have since discovered to me what solemn impressions they received in reading them.

[Journal, 1755] I sent a few of each sort to my friend Mr. Wright, minister of Cumberland, about ninety miles hence, where there are not a few negroes thoughtful about Christianity, and sundry real converts, and he informs me they have met with a very agreeable and promising reception. He takes much pains in instructing them, and has set up two or three schools among them, where they attend on Sundays before and after sermon, for they have no other leisure time.

[Journal, 1755] March 1756., Political Unrest

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 3.-I found Bristol all in a flame,[ And, indeed, the whole country. War with France; Ireland ripe (so many believed) for rebellion ; the American colonies in danger ; a Franco-Papal invasion threatened,-such were the conditions under which Wesley intervened in two unlooked-for ways. First he tried in the only way then open to him to influence an election ; and, secondly, he volunteered to raise a company of soldiers for service at home, that is to say, for home defence. What happened in Bristol he describes in a letter to Blackwell (W.M. Mag. 1848, p. 777), where also will be found the letter to the Hon. James West, in which he offers, if acceptable to his Majesty, to raise ' a company of at least two hundred volunteers to be supported by contributions among themselves, and to be ready, in case of invasion, to act for a year, if needed so long, at his Majesty's pleasure, only within------miles of London.'

[Journal, 1755] If his offer is accepted, he asks for a loan of arms from the Tower and sergeants to train the corps of Methodist "territorials." Such a company was actually raised early in the next century, was billeted within a stone's-throw of the New Room in Bristol, and held prayer-meetings at

[Journal, 1755] which, as in John Wesley's days, soldiers were converted and received into the Methodist society. See Tyerman's Life of Wesley, vol. 11. pp. 234, 235. Mr. West, to whom Wesley wrote, was member for St. Albans and joint Secretary to the Treasury. For the letter see Unpublished Letters, British Museum Autographs, 32,685, p. 64, endorsed ' March 2, 1756, Mr. Westley.' See also Charles Wesley's satirical reference to his brother's soldiers (Journal, vol. 11. p. 200).] voters and non-voters being ready to tear each other in pieces. I had not recovered my voice so as either to preach or speak to the whole society, but I desired those members who were freemen to meet me by themselves, whom I mildly and lovingly informed how they ought to act in this hour of temptation ; and I believe the far greater part of them received and profited by the advice.[ On Sunday, March 7, he preached at Bristol and Kingswood; and on the 8th wrote to ' Mr. Urban' of the Gentleman's Magazine, declaring that he had been an eyewitness of every particular of the Whiston Cliff phenomena.]

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 11.-I rode to Pill and preached to a large and attentive congregation. A great part of them were sea-faring men. In the middle of my discourse a press-gang landed from a manof-war and came up to the place, but, after they had listened awhile, they went quietly by and molested nobody.[ From Kingswood, March 12, he wrote to Dr. Dodd, discussing Christian Perfection. Four days later, March 16, he wrote his fifth letter to Richard Tompson. ( Works, vol. x11. p. 473.)]

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 15.-I rode to the Old Passage, but, finding we could not pass, we went on to Purton, which we reached about four in the afternoon ; but we were no nearer still, for the boatmen lived on the other side, and the wind was so high we could not possibly make them hear. However, we determined to wait a while, and in a quarter of an hour they came of their own accord. We reached Coleford [This was the Forest-of-Dean Coleford.] before seven, and found a plain, loving people, who received the word of God with all gladness.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 16.-Examining the little society, I found them grievously harassed by disputations. Anabaptists were on one side and Quakers on the other; and hereby five or six persons have been confused. But the rest cleave so much the closer together. Nor does it appear that there is now one trifler, much less a disorderly walker, among them.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 17.-I learned the particulars of that surprising storm which was here the year before last. It began near Cheltenham on June 14, 1754, and passed on over Coleford in a line about three miles broad. It was rain mixed with hail. The hail broke all the windows it had access to, stripped all the trees both of fruit and leaves, and destroyed every green thing. Many of the stones were as large as hen-eggs; some were fourteen or fifteen inches round. The rain occasioned such a torrent of water in the street as bore away man and beast. A mile or two farther it joined with the waters of a mill-dam, which it broke down, and carried away several houses. How frequent would accidents of this kind be if chance, not God, governed the world

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 18.-We rode through hard rain to Brecknock,[ Or Biecon, the county town of Breck Tyerman's Life of Wesley, vol. 11i. nockshire. pp. 35, 36 ; also Meth. Rec. Winter No., ] and came just at the hour appointed for preaching. The town hall, in which I was desired to preach, is a large and commodious place, and the whole congregation (one poor gentleman excepted) behaved with seriousness and decency.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 19.-I rode over to Howell Harris at Trevecca,[ For Trevecca at a later date see 1896, p. 83.] though not knowing how to get any farther ; but he helped us out of our difficulties, offering to send one with us who would show us the way and bring our horses back. So I then determined to go on to Holyhead after spending a day or two at Brecknock.

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 20.-It being the day appointed for the Justices and Commissioners to meet, the town was extremely full, and curiosity (if no better motive) brought most of the gentlemen to the preaching. Such another opportunity could not have been of speaking to all the rich and great of the county; and they all appeared to be serious and attentive. Perhaps one or two may lay it to heart.

[Journal, 1755] March 1756, In Wales

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 21.-I delayed preaching till nine for the sake of the tender and delicate ones. At two we had near the whole town, and God reserved the great blessing for the last. Afterward we rode to Trevecca. But our guide was ill, so in the morning we set out without him.

[Journal, 1755] Before I talked with him myself I wondered H[owell] Harris did not go out and preach as usual. But he now informed me he preached till he could preach no longer, his constitution being entirely broken. While he was thus confined, he was pressed in spirit to build a large house, though he knew not why or for whom. But as soon as it was built, men, women, and children, without his seeking, came to it from all parts of Wales, and, except in the case of the Orphan House at Halle, I never heard of so many signal interpositions of divine Providence.[ The foundation stone was laid in April 1752. At the end of 1755 there was a settled family of about a hundred persons that boarded, worked, and slept in the house, and ten families lived out on farms in the neighbourhood.]

[Journal, 1755] See Welsh Calvinistic Methodism, by Rev.William Williams, pp. 115-21.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 22.-It continued fair till we came to Builth,[ He preached both at Builth and Trevecca] where I preached to the usual congregation. Mr. Phillips [The Rev. Mr. Phillips, the always friendly rector of Maesmynys. ] then guided us to Rhayader, about fourteen English miles. It snowed hard behind us, and on both sides, but not at all where we were.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 23.-When we took horse there was nothing to be seen but a waste of white ; the snow covered both hills and vales. As we could see no path, it was not without much difficulty, as well as danger, that we went on. But between seven and eight the sun broke out and the snow began to melt, so we thought all our difficulty was over, till, about nine, the snow fell faster than ever. In an hour it changed into hail, which, as we rode over the mountains, drove violently in our face. About twelve this turned into hard rain, followed by an impetuous wind. However, we pushed on through all, and before sunset came to Dolgelly.

[Journal, 1755] Here we found everything we wanted except sleep, of which we were deprived by a company of drunken, roaring sea-captains, who kept possession of the room beneath us till between two and three in the morning, so that we did not take horse till after six ; and then we could make no great speed, the frost being exceeding sharp, and much ice in the road. Hence we were not able to reach Tan-y-bwlch till between eleven and twelve. An honest Welshman here gave us to know (though he spoke no English) that he was just going over the sands. So we hastened on with him, and by that means came in good time to Carnarvon.

[Journal, 1755] Here we passed a quiet and comfortable night, and took horse about six in the morning. Supposing, after we had rode near an hour, that a little house on the other side was the ferryhouse, we went down to the water and called amain, but we could not procure any answer. In the meantime it began to rain hard, though the wind was extremely high. Finding none would come over, we went to a little church which stood near for shelter. We had waited about an hour when a woman and girl came into the churchyard, whom I did not mind, supposing they could speak no English. They were following a sheep, which ran close to us. I then asked, ' Is not this Moel-y-don Ferry' The girl answered, ' Moel-y-don Ferry! No. The Ferry is two miles further.' So we might have called long enough.[ See above, vol. 11i. p. 311.]

[Journal, 1755] When we came to Moel-y-don the wind fell, the sky cleared up, the boat came over without delay, and soon landed us in Anglesey. On our way to Holyhead one met and informed us the packet sailed the night before. I said,' Perhaps it may carry me for all that.' So we pushed on, and came thither in the afternoon. The packet did sail the night before, and got more than half-sea over ; but, the wind turning against them and blowing hard, they were glad to get back this afternoon.

[Journal, 1755] I scarce ever remember so violent a storm as blew all the night long. The wind continued contrary the next day.

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 28.-About nine in the morning I spent some time with a few serious people, and gave notice of preaching at four in the afternoon, as soon as the evening service was ended. It began soon after three. Ten minutes before four Mr. D. began catechizing the children in Welsh. I stayed till after five. As there was no sign of his concluding, I then went home, and found the people waiting, to whom I expounded those solemn words, ' Watch and pray always, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things which are coming upon the earth."

[Journal, 1755] April 1756, In Dublin

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 29.-We left the harbor about twelve, having six or seven officers and abundance of passengers on board. The wind was full west, and there was great probability of a stormy night. So it was judged best to put back ; but one gentleman making a motion to try a little longer, in a short time brought all over to his opinion. So they agreed to go out and 'look for a wind.'

[Journal, 1755] The wind continued westerly all the night. Nevertheless, in the morning we were within two leagues of Ireland! Between nine and ten I landed at Howth, and walked on for Dublin. The congregation in the evening was such as I never saw here before. I hope this also is a token for good.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 31.-In conversing with many, I was surprised to find that all Ireland is in perfect safety.[ See Crookshank, Hist, of Methodism in Ireland, vol. I. p. 107. Wesley had not been in Ireland since the autumn of 1752. He came now-though, to his great surprise, the Irish did not seem to be aware of it-in a time of political unrest and grave national peril. In 1755 the French ambassador had been recalled from London, and the English ambassador from Paris. Formidable naval preparations were made at Brest. Without formal declaration, England and France were practically at war in the New World and in India. In 1756 began the Seven Years War, when England joined Frederick of Prussia against France, Austria, Saxony, and Russia. The reins of government in England were in hands inadequate to the strain. The hearts of English statesmen began to fail.

[Journal, 1755] The situation was eventually saved, after great losses, by the accession to power of William Pitt. Although Wesley only occasionally alludes to public affairs in his Journal, and neveV dwells at length on them, it is impossible to understand his allusions or to appreciate the difficulties of the situation or the importance of the influence Methodism was increasingly wielding over the national character unless we vividly remember what was happening outside the ring-fence of the Methodist societies. Unconsciously, but very really, as modern historians clearly see, John Wesley was in alliance with William Pitt to save the nation.] None here has any more apprehension of an invasion than of being swallowed up in the sea, every one being absolutely assured that the French dare not attempt any such thing.

[Journal, 1755] April 1, Thur.-I bought one or two books at Mr. Smith's [Mr. L. Smith, bookseller, who in 1728 resided at the ' Philosophers' Heads,' Blind Quay.] on the Blind Quay. I wanted change for a guinea, but he could not give it, so I borrowed some silver of my companion. The next evening a young gentleman came from Mr. Smith's to tell

[Journal, 1755] me I had left a guinea on his counter. Such an instance of honesty I have rarely met with, either in Bristol or London.

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 3.[ It is suggested th*t this may be an error for Sunday the 4th. See W.H.S. vol. v. p 70]-I went to the college chapel, at which about forty persons were present. [Dr. James Knight] preached a plain, practical sermon, after which the sacrament was administered. I never saw so much decency at any chapel in Oxford, no, not even at Lincoln College. Scarce any person stirred or coughed or spit from the beginning to the end of the service.

[Journal, 1755] In the evening our house was crowded above and below, yet many were obliged to stand without. The whole congregation appeared staid and solid. Do even the people of Dublin know the day of their visitation

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 5.-Inquiring for one whom I saw three or four days ago in the height of a violent pleurisy, I found he was perfectly recovered and returned into the country. A brimstone-plaster in a few minutes took away both the pain and the fever. Oh why will physicians play with the lives of their patients Do not others (as well as old Dr. Cockburn) [Charles Wesley's old school-fellow. See index to Charles Wesley's Journal. ] know that 'no end is answered by bleeding in a pleurisy which may not be much better answered without it'" [Cf. below, p 196.]

[Journal, 1755] To-night the sleepers here began to open their eyes, it being rumoured that an express was come to the Lord-Lieutenant to inform him the French were hastening their preparation, being determined to land in Ireland. And so they will if God gives them leave ; but He has the reins in His own hand.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 6.- One was informing me of an eminent instance of the power of faith. ' Many years ago,' said she, ' I fell and sprained my ankle so that I never expected it would be quite well. Seven years since last September I was coming home from the preaching in a very dark night, and, stumbling over a piece of wood, fell with the whole weight of my body upon my lame foot. I thought, " O Lord, I shall not be able to hear Thy word again for many weeks! " Immediately a voice went through my heart, " Name the name of Christ, and thou shalt stand." I leaped up and stretched out my foot and said, " Lord

[Journal, 1755] Jesus Christ, I name Thy name; let me stand!" And my pain ceased, and I stood up, and my foot was as strong as ever.'

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 9.-I spent an hour with Dr. F------, a sensible, agreeable man. He said : ' Six weeks ago the -----informed the Lord Lieutenant that he had express orders from his Majesty to put this kingdom in a posture of defense against the intended invasion, and he was empowered to raise what men he pleased. And nothing has ever been done since ; so that we conclude the whole to be a grimace, a mere trick of State.'[On Saturday, April 10, he preached at Dublin.]

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 11.-I met about a hundred children, who are catechized publicly twice a week. Thomas Walsh began this some months ago, and the fruit of it appears already. What a pity that all our preachers in every place have not the zeal and wisdom to follow his example!

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 13.- I breakfasted with one of the most lovely old men I ever saw: John Garret, [See Charles Wesley's Journal, Oct 7, 1748. Gharrett van Hessen, 1695, came to Ireland in 1707; he died in 1765. Friends' Historical Society, vol in p. 2

[Journal, 1755] See also WHS. vol 11 p. 129, and Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, vol. I. p. 123.] a Dutchman by birth, and a speaker among the Quakers. Thence we went to a poor dying backslider. When we came in he was crying to God out of the deep; but before we left him his heaviness was gone, and he desired nothing but to be with Christ.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 14.- I looked over a celebrated book, The Fable of the Bees Till now I imagined there had never appeared in the world such a book as the works of Machiavelli. But de Mandeville goes far beyond it. The Italian only recommends a few vices, as useful to some particular men and on some particular occasions. But the Englishman loves and cordially recommends vice of every kind; not only as useful now and then, but as absolutely necessary at all times for all communities! Surely Voltaire would hardly have said so much ; and even Mr. Sandeman could not have said more.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 16 (being Good Friday)-Near four hundred of the society met, to follow the example of their brethren in England, and renew their covenant with God. It was a solemn hour. Many mourned before God, and many were comforted.[ On April 19 he wrote to Blackwell. He reports 'no fortifying of sea-ports ; no military preparations ; but all is in absolute peace and safety - talk of invasion said to be a trick to get money.' {Works, vol. x11. p. 184.)]

[Journal, 1755] April 1756, In Ireland

[Journal, 1755] In the following week all our preachers met.[ The second Irish Conference, at which Mark Davis was received.] I never before found such unanimity among them. They appeared now to be not only of one heart, but likewise of one mind and judgement.

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 25.-One of the Germans stumbled in while I was expounding,' Is Christ the minister of sin' For a time she seemed greatly diverted ; but the application spoiled her mirth. She soon hung down her head, and felt the difference between the chaff and the wheat.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 26.-I set out for Cork, purposing to see as many societies as I could in my way. In the afternoon I came to Edenderry, where the little society have built a commodious preaching-house. I had designed to preach abroad ; but the keen north wind drove us into the house. The congregation (though they had no previous notice) filled it from end to end; but some of them found it too hot, and hurried out while I applied ' Ye must be born again.'

[Journal, 1755] About this time I received the following letter :

[Journal, 1755] REVEREND SIR,

[Journal, 1755] I once, through the influence of those about me, was ready ' to join the common cry against you, not knowing what I did; but since, by hearing your discourses, with some of Mr. Walsh's, and by reading your Sermons and Appeals, I have learned a better lesson. I have learned that true Christianity consists, not in a set of opinions, or of forms and ceremonies, but in holiness of heart and life-in a thorough imitation of our divine Master. And this I take to be the doctrine of the Church of England; nor do I apprehend you differ from her at all in doctrine. And I am grieved to know you have too much cause to differ from many of her present clergy. Why then should I cavil at you for feeding those sheep that are starved by their own shepherds for endeavoring to recover them from that stupid lethargy and open wickedness which involve the generality of mankind This is your happiness : would to God it could be mine! I have often had a strong desire for it; and would now gladly dedicate my life to it, if my poor abilities and mean education, together with the twenty-third Article of our Church, did not crush the thought. However, as I do not see you vary from the doctrine of the Church, I should not scruple to join with you. My chief motives (beside that strong desire) are: First, I reflect, there is scarce a situation in life, at least in the trading world, without its attendant frauds or vices, which are now scarce separable from it. Secondly, I am at present of no use in society ; so that, on account of any advantage that now accrues from me to the public, I need not scruple giving myself to my darling employment. Thirdly, I am convinced a man may instruct and reform himself by instructing and reforming others. But may I attempt this otherwise than by the ordinary method of admitting laborers into the 'Lord's vineyard Your thoughts on this subject would be received as a singular favour ; for which I shall impatiently wait, who am,

[Journal, 1755] Reverend Sir,

[Journal, 1755] Your affectionate and ready servant.

[Journal, 1755] April. 1756, In Ireland

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 28.-I rode to Tullamore, where one of the society, Edward Willis, gave me a very surprising account of himself. He said :

[Journal, 1755] When I was about twenty years old I went to Waterford for business. After a few weeks I resolved to leave it, and packed up my things in order to set out the next morning. This was Sunday; but my landlord pressed me much not to go till the next day. In the afternoon we walked out together, and went into the river. After a while, leaving him near the shore, I struck out into the deep. I soon heard a cry, and, turning, saw him rising and sinking in the channel of the river. I swam back with all speed, and, seeing him sink again, dived down after him. When I was near the bottom, he clasped his arm round my neck, and held me so fast that I could not rise. Seeing death before me, all my sins came into my mind, and I faintly called for mercy. In a while my senses went away, and I thought I was in a place full of light and glory, with abundance of people. While I was thus, he who held me died, and I floated up to' the top of the water. I then immediately came to myself, and swam to the shore, where several stood who had seen us sink, and said they never knew such a deliverance before; for I had been under water full twenty minutes. It made me more serious for two or three months. Then I returned to all my sins.

[Journal, 1755] But in the midst of all, I had a voice following me everywhere, ' When an able minister of the gospel comes, it will be well with thee!' Some years after I entered into the army; our troop lay at Philipstown. when Mr. W. came.[ Probably'W.'should be Wesley (see above, vol. 11i. p. 339), and 'J. W.' is a misprint for T. W., i.e. T. Walsh.] I was much affected by his preaching, but not so as to leave my sins. The voice followed me still; and when Mr. J. W. came, before I saw him, I had an unspeakable conviction that he was the man I looked for; and soon after I found peace with God, and it was well with me indeed.'

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 29.-I preached on one side of the market-place to a numerous congregation. I was afterwards invited by some of the officers to spend an hour with them at the barracks. It at least freed them from prejudice against the present work of God, if it answered no further end.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 30.-I was pressed to turn aside to Athlone, a gentlewoman of Barbados,[ See below, p. 292. ] who was obliged to return thither shortly, having a great desire to see me. So I went to Athlone, and spent one or two hours in close conversation with her and her husband. We had a comfortable meeting in the evening, and most of the gentry in the town were present; but who can warn them to flee from the wrath to come They are ' increased in goods, and need nothing.'

[Journal, 1755] MAY I, Sat.-I rode to Birr [Parsonstown.] through rain, hail, and snow such as is usual on the first of January. I had designed to preach abroad, but the wind was too sharp to be borne either by me or the people.

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 2.-We rode to Mountmellick. About five I preached in the market-place. I was on the point of concluding, when a violent storm came. Till then the bottles of heaven were stayed.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 4.-We rode to Portarlington, where, on Wednesday the 5th, at the desire of several who could not attend the early preaching, I preached in the assembly-room at ten, on ' Ye must be born again.' Many of the best in the town (so called) were present, and seemed not a little amazed. Many more came in the evening, among whom I found an unusual liberty of spirit. For the present most of them seemed much affected. But how soon will the thorns grow up

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 6.-I rode to Kilkenny. One of the Dragoons [The soldiers then in Ireland were mostly English Protestants. They were rarely, if ever, hostile, but sympathized with Wesley when furious mobs attacked him or his people.] who were quartered here soon found us out. A few, both of the army and of the town, are joined,[ i.e. united in the membership of the society.] and constantly meet together. I preached in the barracks, in one of the officers' rooms. Still, in Ireland, the first call is to the soldiery.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 7.-We rode to Waterford, "where, after preaching, I earnestly exhorted the society to ' love as brethren.' On the same subject I preached in the morning, and spent great part of the day in striving to remove misunderstandings and offences. It was not lost labor. Six-and-twenty were left in the morning ; before night seven-and-fifty were joined together.

[Journal, 1755] Thomas Walsh preached at five, but, the room being too small, they were obliged to go into the yard. In the evening we had high and low, rich and poor, both in the yard and adjoining gardens. There seemed now to be a general call to this city, so I thought it best the next morning, Monday the l0th, to leave Mr. Walsh there, while I went forward to Clonmel, the pleasantest town, beyond all comparison, which I have yet seen in Ireland. It has four broad, straight streets of well-built houses, which cross each other in the centre of the town. Close to the walls, on the south side, runs a broad, clear river. Beyond this rises a green and fruitful mountain, and hangs over the town. The vale runs many miles both east and west, and is well cultivated throughout.

[Journal, 1755] I preached at five in a large loft, capable of containing five or six hundred people ; but it was not full, many being afraid of its falling, as another did some years before, by which several of the hearers were much hurt, and one so bruised that she died in a few days.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 11.-I was at a loss where to preach, the person who owned the loft refusing to let me preach there or even in the yard below. And the commanding officer, being asked for the use of the barrack-yard, answered it was not a proper place. ' Not,' said he, ' that I have any objection to Mr. Wesley. I will hear him if he preaches under the gallows.' It remained to preach in the street; and by this means the congregation was more than doubled. Both the officers and soldiers gave great attention till a poor man, special drunk, came marching down the street, attended by a Popish mob, with a club in one hand and a large cleaver in the other, grievously cursing and blaspheming, and swearing he would cut off the preacher's head. It was with difficulty that I restrained the troopers, especially them that were not of the society. When he came nearer the mayor stepped out of the congregation and strove by good words to make him quiet, but he could not prevail; on which he went into his house and returned with his white wand. At the same time he sent for two constables, who presently came with their staves. He charged them not to strike the man unless he struck first; but this he did immediately, as soon as they came within his reach, and wounded one of them in the wrist. On this the other knocked him down, which he did three times before he would submit. The mayor then walked before, the constables on either hand, and conducted him to the jail.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 12.-In the evening I preached in the new house [In Hammond's Marsh. Like the houses at Dublin, Bristol, and Newcastle, it had rooms overhead.] at Cork, very near as large as that in Dublin,[ In Whitefriar Street.] and far better finished in every respect, though at four hundred pounds less expense.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 17.-Walking up the Red House Walk (which runs between two rows of meadows, with the river winding through them, and a chain of fruitful hills on the right hand and on the left), I saw the plain reason why strangers usually complain of the unwholesomeness of the water in Cork. Many women were filling vessels with river water (which is that commonly used in the city for tea and most other purposes) when the tide was at the height. Now, although this is not salt, yet it cannot but affect both the stomach and bowels of tender persons.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 19.-I preached in the evening on ' Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the Greeks foolishness.' While I was speaking, a gentleman in the gallery cried out with a loud voice, and swore to it,' I am of the Church ; I stand up for the Church ; I will shed my blood for the Church.' But,

[Journal, 1755] finding none to contradict him, he sat down, and I finished my discourse.

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 20.-One came in a great consternation to inform us, Captain F. (the gentleman who spoke) was raising a mob against the evening. This report spread up and down, and greatly increased the evening congregation. But no mob appeared, nor was there any disturbance, but such a blessing as we have seldom found : I suppose, in answer to the prayers of many who had been earnestly crying unto God.[ During this visit Wesley met John Trembath. He had married again, and had profited spiritually from Wesley's faithful dealing and through trials. He became a local preacher in Cork. See above, vol. 3. pp. 216, 313 and 330, and Crookshank, vol. I. p. 109.]

[Journal, 1755] On Sunday last I was desired by one to call on her dying father, though she said he was speechless and senseless. But as soon as I spoke, he appeared sensible; while we prayed, he recovered his speech. The next day he was able to walk abroad, but continued deeply serious. On Friday the 2ist his illness returned, and he lay down and died in peace.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 24.-I preached in the market-place at Kinsale.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 25.-I walked to the Fort. It commands the entrance of the harbour, and has three tier of guns, one over the other. It is built upon the firm rock; is of a large extent, and the upper part of a great height from the water. But all is out of repair ; many of the cannon are dismounted; most of them unfit for service ; so that many think a second-rate man-of-war might take it in a few hours' time.

[Journal, 1755] At one I preached in the Exchange. Abundance of soldiers, and the colonel, with several officers, were present; so that I conceived some hopes that the seed sown even at Kinsale will not all be lost.

[Journal, 1755] At five I preached in the market-house at Inishannon to a very large and well-behaved congregation, and then went on to Bandon.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 28.-I rode out with Mrs. Jones,[ See above, vol. 3. p. 470.] as I did every day, to save her life if possible. From the hill we had a fair view of Castle Bernard, with the park adjoining ; in which, a few years ago, Judge Bernard [Died in 1721 ; great-grandfather of Francis, first Earl of Bandon.] used to take such delight. Indeed, it is a beautiful place in every respect. The house is one of the most elegant I have seen in the kingdom, both as to the structure and the situation ; standing on the side of a fruitful hill, and having a full command of the vale, the river, and the opposite mountain. The ground near the house is laid out with the finest taste, in gardens of every kind ; with a wilderness, canals, fish-ponds, waterworks, and rows of trees in various forms. The park includes part of each hill, with the river between, running through the meadow and lawns, which are tufted over with trees of every kind, and every now and then a thicket or grove. The Judge finished his plan, called the land after his name, and dropped into the dust!

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 30.-I returned to Cork. About that time I received a letter from Mr. Gillies, part of which follows :

[Journal, 1755] The Lord hath been pleased to inflict a heavy stroke upon us by calling home His faithful servant Mr. Wardrobe.[ See above, p. 116.] Concerning his death a Christian friend writes thus:

[Journal, 1755] ' May 7, four in the morning.-I am just come from witnessing the last sighs of one dear to you, to me, and to all that knew him. Mr. Wardrobe died last night. He was seized on Sabbath last, just as he was going to the kirk, with a most violent colic, which terminated in a mortification of his bowels. The circumstances of his death are worthy to be recorded. With what pleasure he received the message, and went off in all the triumph of a conqueror; crying out, " My warfare is accomplished : I have fought the good fight; my victory is completed. Crowns of grace shall adorn this head (taking off his cap), and palms be put into these hands. Yet a little while, and I shall sing for ever. I know that my Redeemer liveth." When he was within a few moments of his last he gave me his hand, and a little after said, " Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace; for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation." Were I to repeat half what he spoke I should write you three hours. It shall suffice at this time to say that, as he lived the life, so he died the death, of a Christian. We weep not for him ; we weep for ourselves. I wish we may know how to improve this awful judgement so as to be also ready, not knowing when our Lord cometh.'

[Journal, 1755] Mr. Adams, minister of Falkirk, writes thus:

[Journal, 1755] On Friday night, about ten, I witnessed Mr. Wardrobe's (of Bathgate) entrance into the joy of his Lord. But, ah, who can help mourning the loss to the Church of Christ His amiable character gave him a distinguished weight and influence, which his Lord had given him to value only for its subserviency to His honour and glory. He was suddenly taken ill on the last Lord's Day, and from the first moment believed it was for death. I went to see him on Thursday evening, and heard some of the liveliest expressions of triumphant faith, zeal for the glory of Christ and the salvation of souls, mixed with the most amiable humility and modesty. ' Yet a little while,' said he, ' and this mortal shall put on immortality. Mortality shall be swallowed up of life; this vile body fashioned like to His glorious body. Oh for the victory! I shall get the victory. I know in whom I have believed." Then, with a remarkably audible voice, lifting up his hands, he cried out, ' Oh for a draught of the well of the water of life, that I may begin the song before I go off to the Church triumphant! I go forth in Thy name, making mention of Thy righteousness, even Thine only. I die at the feet of mercy.' Then, stretching out his arms, he put his hand upon his head, and with the most serene and steady, majestic eye I ever saw, looking upward, he said, ' Crowns of grace, crowns of grace, and palms in their hands! O Lord God of truth, into Thy hands I commend my spirit!' After an unexpected revival, he said, ' Oh, I fear His tarrying, lest the prospect become more dark. I sometimes fear He may spare me to live, and be less faithful than He has helped me to be hitherto.' He says to me, ' You that are ministers, bear a proper testimony against the professors of this age, who have a form of godliness without the power.' Observing some of his people about his bed, he said, ' May I have some seals among you! Oh where will the ungodly and sinners of Bathgate appear Labor all to be in Christ.' Then he stretched out his hand to several, and said, ' Farewell, farewell, farewell! And now, O Lord, what wait I for My hope is m Thee!' Once or twice he said, ' Let me be laid across the bed to expire, where I have sometimes prayed, and sometimes meditated with pleasure.' He expressed his grateful sense of the assiduous care which Mr. Wardrobe, of Cult, had taken of him; and on his replying, ' Too much could not be done for so valuable a life,' he said, ' Oh speak not so, or you will provoke God! Glory be to God that I have ever had any regard paid me for Christ's sake!' I am greatly sunk under the event. O help me, by your prayers, to get the proper submission and improvement![ Tuesday, June I, Wesley preached at Cork.]

[Journal, 1755] JUNE 3, Thur.-I received a remarkable letter from a clergyman with whom I had been a day or two before. Part of it ran thus :

[Journal, 1755] I had the following account from the gentlewoman herself, a person of piety and veracity. She is now the wife of Mr. J------B------, silversmith, in Cork :

[Journal, 1755] ' About thirty years ago I was addressed, by way of marriage, by Mr. Richard Mercier, then a volunteer in the army. The young gentleman was quartered at that time in Charleville, where my father lived, who approved of his addresses, and directed me to look upon him as my future husband. When the regiment left the town he promised to return in two months and marry me. From Charleville he went to Dublin, thence to his father's, and from thence to England, where, his father having bought him a cornetcy of horse, he purchased many ornaments for the wedding, and, returning to Ireland, let us know that he would be at our house in Charleville in a few days. On this the family was busied to prepare for his reception and the ensuing marriage, when one night, my sister Molly and I being asleep in our bed, I was awakened by the sudden opening of the side-curtain, and, starting up, saw Mr. Mercier standing by the bed-side. He was wrapped up in a loose sheet, and had a napkin folded like a night-cap on his head. He looked at me very earnestly, and, lifting up the napkin, which much shaded his face, showed me the left side of his head, all bloody and covered with his brains. The room meantime was quite light. My terror was excessive, which was still increased by his stooping over the bed and embracing me in his arms. My cries alarmed the whole family, who came crowding into the room. Upon their entrance he gently withdrew his arms, and ascended as it were through the ceiling. I continued for some time in strong fits. When I could speak I told them what I had seen. One of them a day or two after, going to the postmaster for letters, found him reading the newspapers, in which was an account that Cornet Mercier, going into Christ Church belfry in Dublin just after the bells had been ringing, and standing under the bells, one of them, which was turned bottom upwards, suddenly turning again, struck one side of his head and killed him on the spot. On further inquiry we found he was struck on the left side of his head.'

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 6.-I gave my last exhortation to the society in Cork, and, setting out early on Monday the 7th, in the evening came to Limerick.

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 12.- The account which one of our sisters gave of Ann Beauchamp was as follows:

[Journal, 1755] Aug. 18, 1753.-I went to see Ann Beauchamp,1 who had been ill for about a week. I asked her in what state she found her soul.

[Journal, 1755] 1. The great-aunt of the late John Beauchamp, of London.

[Journal, 1755] She answered, ' I am quite happy. I know that my Redeemer liveth, and has taken away all my sins. And my heart is comforted with the presence of God: I long to die, that I may be with Him.' I asked, ' But are you resigned either to live or die, as He shall see fit' She answered, ' I cannot say I am willing to live : it would go hard with me to live now. Pray that the Lord may perfect His work of sanctification in my soul.'

[Journal, 1755] Being asked if she could freely part with all her friends, she said, ' Yes. And, as to my children, I have cast them upon the Lord. I know He will take care of them, and I give them freely up to Him without one anxious thought.' She then prayed for her friends and acquaintances one by one, and afterwards, fervently and with tears, for each person in her band; then for Mr. John Wesley, desiring she might be found at his feet in the day of the Lord.

[Journal, 1755] Soon after she called her mother, desired forgiveness for anything wherein she had ignorantly offended her, and exhorted her not to grieve, adding, ' God will comfort you, and give you strength to bear your trial. It is your loss, but it is my everlasting gain, and I am going but a little before you.' She then prayed over her, and, kissing her, took her leave. In the same manner she took leave of all about her, exhorting, praying for, and kissing them one by one. Afterwards she called for, and took her leave of, her servants.

[Journal, 1755] Seeing one of her neighbors in the room, she called her, and said, ' O Mary, you are old in years and old in sin. The Lord has borne long with you, and you know not the day or the hour when He will call you. I am young, and He is calling me away, and what should I do without an interest in Christ Was my work now to do, it would never be done. But, blessed be God, it is not. I know the Lord hath washed me from my sins in His own blood, and is preparing me for Himself. Oh, fly from the wrath to come, and never rest till you rest in the wounds of Jesus! I am almost spent, but had I strength I could exhort you all till morning.'

[Journal, 1755] To another she said,' Martha, Martha! thou art careful and troubled about many things; but one thing is needful, and this one thing you have neglected. Oh, seek God, and He will supply all your wants. It is time for you to begin ; your glass is almost run, and what will all your toil profit when you come to be as I am now Find time for this, whatever goes undone. My neighbours used to wonder how I could find time, and think me foolish for spending it so; but now I know it was not foolishness. Soon I shall receive an exceeding great reward.

[Journal, 1755] ' Perhaps some of you will say you was never called. Then remember, I call you now. I exhort every one of you to " seek the Lord while He may be found." Think not to make excuses in that day.

[Journal, 1755] God will have His witnesses, and I shall appear as a witness against you. If you repent not, these my dying words will rise up in judgement against you.'

[Journal, 1755] To her------she said, ' I forgive you all that you have done against

[Journal, 1755] me, and I have prayed the Lord to forgive you. Return to Him now, and He will receive you, for He desires not the death of a sinner. I am a witness of this, for He has forgiven all my sins. Oh, I want strength to sing His praise! But I am going where I shall sing His praise for ever.'

[Journal, 1755] Then, calling for her husband, she said, ' My dear, God has given you many calls, even in dreams; and when we will not hear His call it is often His way to make us feel His rod by removing our darling from us. I was your darling, and, seeing you refused the many calls of God, He is now taking me away from you, if by any means He may bring you to Himself.' She then prayed for and took her leave of him.

[Journal, 1755] The next day, when I came in and asked, ' How do you find yourself now' she answered, ' Blessed be God, very well. I know that my Redeemer lives : He is dear to me, and I am dear to Him. I know He is preparing me for Himself, and I shall soon be with Him.'

[Journal, 1755] She then prayed earnestly for entire sanctification, till, a friend coming in, she said, 'The Lord has brought you and all my dear friends to my remembrance; I have not forgotten you in my prayers. You must come and pray my last prayer. When you see me near my deliverance, go all to prayer, and continue therein till my spirit is gone. Let there be no crying over me, but all of you sing praises and rejoice over me.'

[Journal, 1755] She never once complained of her pain, but behaved from the beginning with that patience, sweetness, and love to all that bespoke a soul which knew herself just entering into the joy of her Lord. Thus she died the next morning, August the 20th, after crying out as in ecstasy-

[Journal, 1755] Bold I approach the eternal throne,

[Journal, 1755] And claim the crown through Christ my own.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 16.-I rode over to Newmarket and preached to an earnest congregation of poor people. In the morning, at the request of some of the neighbouring gentry, I deferred preaching till ten o'clock. Many of them were then present, and seemed not a little astonished ; perhaps they may remember it-a week.

[Journal, 1755] In the afternoon I rode to Ballingarrane, a town of Palatines,[ For the Palatines see Crookshank's Methodism \in Ireland, vol. I. p. 56; also below, pp. 275 and 397.]

[Journal, 1755] who came over in Queen Anne's time. They retain much of the temper and manners of their own country, having no resemblance of those among whom they live. I found much life among this plain, artless, serious people. The whole town came together in the evening, and praised God for the consolation. Many of those who are not outwardly joined with us walk in the light of God's countenance ; yea, and have divided themselves into classes, in imitation of our brethren, with whom they live in perfect harmony.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 18.-In examining the society I was obliged to pause several times. The words of the plain, honest people came with so much weight as frequently to stop me for a while, and raise a general cry among the hearers.

[Journal, 1755] I rode back through Adare, once a strong and flourishing town, well-walled and full of people, now without walls and almost without inhabitants-only a few poor huts remain. At a small distance from these are the ample ruins of three or four convents, delightfully situated by the river, which runs through a most fruitful vale.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 21.-I talked with one who was in deep distress. She had been represented to me as in despair ; but I soon found her disorder (natural or preternatural) had nothing to do with religion. She was greatly troubled, but knew not why ; not for her sins-they scarce came into her mind. I know not that prayer will avail for her till she is troubled in quite another manner-till she cries out, from her inmost soul,' God be merciful to me, a sinner!'

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 22.-I called on Mrs. F., whom I saw some years since in despair of quite another kind. Between nine and ten years ago her daughter married without her consent; this was followed by other distressing circumstances, in the midst of which she cried out,' God has forsaken me.' She was immediately seized with violent pain ; she could not see the sun, or the light, only a dim twilight; she could not taste her meat or drink, any more than the white of an egg; she had a constant impulse to kill herself, which she believed she must do, and attempted several times. After having continued thus three years and a half, she resolved to endure it no longer ; accordingly, she procured a knife to cut her throat, and did cut through the skin, but could get no farther ; it seemed to her as if the flesh were iron. She threw down the knife, burst into tears, fell upon her knees, and began (what she had not done all the time) to pour out her soul before God. Fear and sorrow fled away. She rejoiced in God ; she saw the light of the sun ; her natural taste returned ; and she has been ever since in health of body and peace of mind.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 23.-I took my leave of Limerick, and rode to SixMile-Bridge. There I left T[homas] Walsh to preach in Irish, and went on to Rathlaheen.

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 24.-I went on to Ennis, a town consisting almost wholly of Papists, except a few Protestant gentlemen. One of these (the chief person in the town) had invited me to his house, and walked with me to the court-house, where I preached to a huge, wild, unawakened multitude, Protestants and Papists, many of whom would have been rude enough if they durst.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 25.-Mr. Walsh preached at six, first in Irish and then in English. The Papist priest had contrived to have his service just at the same hour; and his man came again and again with his bell, but not one in ten of his people would stir. At eight I preached to a far more serious congregation; and the word seemed to sink into their hearts.

[Journal, 1755] We took horse about ten, and rode through the fruitful and pleasant county of Galway. After having heard so much of the barrenness of this county I was surprised, in riding almost the whole length of it, from south-east to north-west, to find only four or five miles of rocky ground, like the west of Cornwall ; all the rest exceeded most that I have seen in Ireland. We came to Galway pretty well tired, and would willingly have rested at the inn where we alighted from our horses ; but the landlord informed us he had no room, both his house and stables were full. Two regiments of soldiers, passing through the town, had taken up all the inns. However, we procured a private lodging, which was full as agreeable

[Journal, 1755] The town is old, and not ill-built, most of the houses being of stone, and several stories high. It is encompassed with an old, bad wall, and is in no posture of defence, either toward the land or toward the sea. Such is the supine negligence of both English and Irish!

[Journal, 1755] Five or six persons, who seemed to fear God, came to us at our lodgings. We spent a little time with them in prayer, and early in the morning set out for Castlebar.

[Journal, 1755] This day, likewise, I was agreeably surprised at the pleasantness and fruitfulness of the country. About noon two or three friends met us and begged us to turn aside to Hollymount, a town twelve miles from Castlebar, where the minister [The Rev. James Clark, rector ot Hollymount (Tyerman's Life, vol. 11. PP' 373~SFr Hollymount see Life and Letters of Mrs. Delany). Wesley's letters to him are worth reading (Werks, vol. x11i. pp. 210-16). They define 'schism,' 'heresy,' and Wesley's views of the relation of Methodism to the Anglican Church, of the religious lawfulness of May-preaching," and of the relative importance of ecclesiastical proVOL. IV

[Journal, 1755] priety, doctrinal orthodoxy, and morality of life. In a tender, but perfectly frank fashion, he reproves his correspondent for sins of drunkenness, swearing, and temper, to which he seems to have been more or less addicted. Cf. below, pp. 173 and 268; see also Green's AntiMethodist Publications, pp. 75, 76.] readily consented to my preaching in the church. Many Papists as well as Protestants were there, and my heart was much enlarged toward them. Through a delightful mixture of vales and gently rising hills, we then rode on to Castlebar.

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 27.-The rector [Rev. Mr. Ellison.] having left word that I should have the use of the church, I preached there morning and afternoon, to such a congregation as (they said) was never there before ; and surely the word of God had free course ; I saw not one light or inattentive hearer. Mr. Walsh afterward preached in the sessions-house, to another large and serious congregation. And, Tuesday the 29th, being St. Peter's Day, I read prayers and preached to as large a congregation as on Sunday. In the afternoon I rode over to Newport, eleven miles from Castlebar. About thirty years ago, a little company of Protestants settled here, by a river-side, on the very extremity of the land, and built a small town. It has a fruitful hill on each side, and a large bay to the west, full of small fertile islands, containing from one to several thousand acres. Of these they compute above three hundred, and near a hundred are inhabited; but by Papists alone, there not being so much as a single Protestant among them! I went directly to the rector's,[ Rev. James Hern.] who had before given me an invitation. Between seven and eight I preached to (I suppose) more than all the Protestants in the town.

[Journal, 1755] Deep attention sat on every face. Perhaps God touched ( some hearts.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 30.-At eleven Mr. H[ern] read prayers, and I preached on Gal. vi. 14. The church stands at a distance from the town, and it rained hard ; but that could not stop the congregation. In the afternoon I returned to Castlebar.

[Journal, 1755] JULY I, Thur.-There is just such a work here as was some years since at Athlone. The whole town is pleased, but few are convinced. The stream runs very wide, but very shallow.[ On July 3 he wrote the first of the letters to the Rev. James Clark (see above, p. 171)-]

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 4.-I read prayers and preached at Ballyhean, Mr. E[llison]'s other church. The congregation at Castlebar in the afternoon was larger than ever before. In the morning, Monday the 5th, the greater half of them were present, and we had a solemn parting. In the afternoon we came to Hollymount, some years since one of the pleasantest places in Ireland. Dr. Vesey, then Archbishop of Tuam, fixed on this spot, nine miles from his see, built a neat, commodious house on a little eminence, laid out fruit and flower gardens round it, brought a river to run through them, and encompassed the whole with walks and groves of stately trees. When he had finished his plan, round a stone pillar, which stands in a basin surrounded by a small green plat of ground, he placed the following inscription :

[Journal, 1755] Linquenda tellus, et domus, et placens Uxor, [cum numerosa et speciosa prole,

[Journal, 1755] Chara charae matris sobole:]

[Journal, 1755] Neque harum quas colis arborum

[Journal, 1755] Te praeter invisam cupressum

[Journal, 1755] Ulla brevem dommum sequetur! [Horace, Odes, 11. 14, 21-4. Thomas Jackson's translation in the third edition of the Works is as follows : 'You must leave behind you these grounds, this house, and your charming wife [with your numerous and handsome progeny, the endearing offspring of their beloved mother!]. And of all those trees which you are planting, none, except the loathed cypress, will follow you, their short-lived owner, to the tomb." Mr. Lawrence Ford's comment on this fairly illustrates Wesley's irregular methods of using classical quotations, which, like his quotations from the text of Holy Scripture, are often, perhaps always, either from memory or from his notebooks. Mr. Ford says : ' Is the interpolated " Cum numerosa et speciosa prole Chara charae matris sobole " a quotation from some Latin author, or Wesley's own The foot-note renders the whole fairly well. The true reading in Horace's third line is the plural, "invisas cupressos," which Wesley has given both below (Oct. 13, 1779) and in Sermon xxv11. (8th on the Sermon on the Mount), Works, vol. v. p. 371. ol. v. p. 30.)

[Journal, 1755] I was just going to preach in the churchyard, when Mr. Clark] sent his son with the key of the church. Almost half the congregation were Papists, whom all the threats of their priest could not keep away. Not expecting to see any of them again, I spake very plain once for all.

[Journal, 1755] In the morning we rode through Tuam, a neat little town, scarce half so large as Islington ; nor is the cathedral half so large as Islington church. The old church at Kilconnell, two miles from Aughrim, is abundantly larger. If one may judge by the vast ruins that remain (over all which we walked in the afternoon), it was a far more stately pile of building than any that is now standing in Ire and. Adjoining to it are the ruins of a large monastery ; many of the cells and apartments are pretty entire. At the west end of the church lie abundance of skulls, piled one upon another, with innumerable bones round about, scattered as dung upon the earth. O sin, what hast thou done!

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 7.-I preached at Aughrim morning and evening, and then rode over to Castlebar. Mr. M. has now lost both his brother and his two daughters, two of the most agreeable women in the kingdom, caught away in the full bloom of youth and beauty-if they can be termed lost who all committed their souls unto Him they loved, in the full triumph of faith.

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 8.-A coach-full of us, with several horsemen, and others on foot, went to Ahascragh in the morning. The rest of the congregation were mostly Papists ; but all heard with earnest attention. I preached in the evening at Athlone, where, on Friday the gth, we had a solemn watch-night.

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 11.-We had a blessed opportunity in the evening on the Connaught side of the river. Almost all the Protestants in the town were present, with abundance of Papists. And many of them acknowledged the doctrine of Christ crucified to be ' the power of God and the wisdom of God.'

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 12.-After preaching at Abbeyderg about noon I went on to Longford. Many supposed the mob would be too violent there to allow me a peaceable hearing. I began at five in the yard of the old barrack. A huge crowd soon flocked in, but most of the Papists stood at the gate, or just without the wall. They were all still as night; nor did I hear an uncivil word while we afterwards walked from one end of the town to the other.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 13.-A large congregation was present at five, and stood unmoved, notwithstanding some heavy showers. At noon I preached at Cleggill; at five in the barrack-yard again, where the concourse of people was greater than before. Mr. P[iers], the minister of a neighbouring parish,[ Killashee, of which the Rev. Fletcher Piers was rector (Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, vol. I. p. 149 ; Arm. Mag. 1797, p. 408).] and another clergyman who came with him, received the truth in love. Mrs. P[iers] (his wife) found rest to her soul.

[Journal, 1755] But how is it that almost in every place, even where there is no lasting fruit, there is so great an impression made at first upon a considerable number of people The fact is this: Everywhere the work of God rises higher and higher till it comes to a point. Here it seems for a short time to be at a stay. And then it gradually sinks again.

[Journal, 1755] All this may easily be accounted for. At first curiosity brings many hearers ; at the same time God draws many by His preventing grace to hear His word, and comforts them in hearing. One then tells another. By this means, on the one hand, curiosity spreads and increases, and, on the other, drawings of God's Spirit touch more hearts, and many of them more powerfully than before. He now offers grace to all that hear, most of whom are in some measure affected, and more or less moved, with approbation of what they hear, desire to please God, and good-will to His messenger. These principles, variously combined and increasing, raise the general work to its highest point. But it cannot stand here, for in the nature of things curiosity must soon decline. Again, the drawings of God are not followed, and thereby the Spirit of God is grieved. The consequence is, He strives with this and this man no more, and so His drawings end. Thus both the natural and supernatural power declining, most of the hearers will be less and less affected. Add to this that, in the process of the work,' it must be that offences will come.' Some of the hearers, if not preachers also, will act contrary to their profession. Either their follies or faults will be told from one to another, and lose nothing in the telling. Men once curious to hear will now draw back ; men once drawn, having stifled their good desires, will disapprove what they approved before, and feel dislike instead of good-will to the preacher. Others, who were more or less convinced, will be afraid or ashamed to acknowledge that conviction. And all these will catch at 511 stories (true or false) in order to justify their change. When by this means all who do not savingly believe have quenched the Spirit of God the little flock goes on from faith to faith ; the rest sleep on and take their rest. And thus the number of hearers in every place may be expected first to increase, and then decrease.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 14.-At noon I preached at Coolalough,[ See above, p. 39] where the preachers and stewards met.

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 15.-In the evening I preached at Tullamore, in Barrack Street, and many who never -had so much curiosity as to walk a hundred yards to hear the preaching vouchsafed to hear it at their own doors. In the middle of the sermon came a quartermaster, very drunk, and rushed in among the people. In a short time he slipped off his hat and gave all the attention of which he was capable. So did many of the soldiers and many officers. Oh let some lay it to heart!

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 16.-We walked down to Lord Tullamore's [Or, more correctly, Baron Moore of Tullamore, who in 1758 was created Earl of Charleville,] (that was his title then), an old mile from the town. His gardens are extremely pleasant. They contain groves, little meadows, kitchen gardens, plats of flowers, and little orchards, intermixed with fine canals and pieces of water. And will not all these make their owner happy Not if he has one unholy temper! Not unless he has in himself a fountain of water, springing up into everlasting life.

[Journal, 1755] About this time I received a letter without a name, part of which I have subjoined :

[Journal, 1755] Sir,

[Journal, 1755] Having observed your Christian condescension in those labors of love so truly calculated for the use of common people, I presume to beg your pen in behalf of the next class of God's creatures. And I would ask if nature, reason, and revelation do not all plead in favour even of the brute creation. Is it not unnatural and inhuman to put them to more pain than is necessary for the service of man Can reason consent to the making sport with the life or misery of any creature May not the great law of equity, doing as we would be done to, be extended even to them May we not suppose ourselves in their place, and thence determine what they may fairly expect from us Hath not the Supreme Being given injunctions against cruelty toward them and commanded that they should enjoy the rest of His day Did He not rebuke the prophet for smiting his beast without cause, and mention the ' much cattle' as one motive to the divine compassion in sparing the ' great city' The Scripture saith, ' A good man is merciful to his beast.' And can he be a good man that is not so, if goodness consists in imitating Him whose ' mercy is over all His works ' For ' He openeth His hand, and satisfieth the desire of every living thing.'

[Journal, 1755] If tenderness, mercy, and compassion to the brute creatures were impressed on the infant breast, and conducted into action according to its little power, would it not be confirmed in the human heart And might not this early prepossession be for ever established there, and through a happy bias extend its benevolence to the whole creation

[Journal, 1755] Does not experience show the sad effects of a contrary education While children, instead of being taught benevolence to irrationals, are suffered to torment first poor little insects and then every helpless creature that comes in their way, can it be expected that, being thus inured to cruelty and oppression even in their tender years, they should relent when they come to age and be susceptible of compassion even to rationals It cannot. For is pity shown to man only because he has reason If so, those would lose their claim to our compassion who stand in the greatest need of it, namely, children, idiots, and lunatics. But if pity is shown to all that are capable of pain, then may it justly be expected that we should sympathize with everything that has life.

[Journal, 1755] I am persuaded you are not insensible of the pain given to every Christian, every humane heart, by those savage diversions, bull-baiting, cock-fighting, horse-racing, and hunting. Can any of these irrational and unnatural sports appear otherwise than cruel, unless through early prejudice or entire want of consideration and reflection And if a man is void of these, does he deserve the name of man Or is he fit for society And, besides, how dreadful are the concomitant and the consequent vices of these savage routs! Yet such cowards are we grown that scarce any man has courage to draw his pen against them!

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 17.-I preached in Tyrrell's Pass at five, and T[homas] Walsh at eight. Hence we rode to Ballybeg, near Drumcree, where we found a little company of earnest people, most of them rejoicing in the love of God. To these were added a few from the county of Cavan. Joseph Charles going thither some time since on temporal business, occasionally spoke of the things of God. Many believed his report, and some found his words ' the power of God unto salvation.'

[Journal, 1755] July 1756, In Ulster

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 18.-A little before twelve (the usual hour in Ireland) the morning service began at Rosmead church, where Mr. Booker [Rev. Moore Booker. See above, P 39. He was drowned in the summer of 1759 when crossing from Parkgate to Ireland in the Chester packet, which foundered in a storm] preached a useful sermon. I preached at five to abundance of plain country people, and two coaches full of gentry. Oh how hard is it for these to enter into the kingdom

[Journal, 1755] of heaven!

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 19.-No sooner did we enter Ulster than we observed the difference. The ground was cultivated just as in England, and the cottages not only neat, but with doors, chimneys, and windows. Newry, the first town we came to (allowing for the size), is built much after the manner of Liverpool. I preached soon after seven to a large congregation, and to great part of them at five in the morning. Afterwards I spoke to the members of the society, consisting of Churchmen, Dissenters, and Papists that were. But there is no striving among them, unless to ' enter in at the strait gate.'

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 21.-In the morning there was such violent lightning, thunder, and rain that the very beasts ran out of the fields and the birds flew from their usual coverts to take shelter in the houses. But before we took horse the sky cleared up, and we had a pleasant ride to Terryhoogan, near Scarva. The road lay on the edge of a smooth canal, with fruitful, gently rising hills on either side. We were at a lone house, but the people found their way thither in the evening from all quarters. I preached in a meadow near the house, the congregation sitting on the grass. And surely they had ears to hear. God give them hearts to understand!

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 22.-We rode through heavy rain to Lisburn.[ Wesley was the guest of Mr. and Mrs. Hans Cumberland. See also Crook shank's Memorable Women, pp. 31-8] I preached in the market-house at seven. One man only gainsaid, but the bystanders used him so roughly that he was soon glad to hold his peace.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 23.-The rector, with his curate, called upon me, candidly proposed their objections, and spent about two hours in free, serious, friendly conversation. How much evil might be prevented or removed would other clergymen follow their example!

[Journal, 1755] I rode in the afternoon to Belfast, the largest town in Ulster.[ Its population at this time was 8,500, with 1,779 houses, mostly thatched.] Some think it contains near as many people as Limerick. It is far cleaner and pleasanter. At seven I preached in the market-house to as large a congregation as at Lisburn, and to near the same number in the morning. But some of them did not stay till I concluded. They went away in haste when I showed how ' Christ crucified' is ' to the Greeks foolishness.'

[Journal, 1755] Hence we rode along the shore to Carrickfergus, said to be the most ancient town in Ulster. The walls are still, as it were, standing, and the castle built upon a rock ; but it is little more than a heap of ruins, with eight or nine old, dismounted, rusty cannon. What it was in the reign of its founder, King Fergus, does not much concern us to know.

[Journal, 1755] I preached in the session-house at seven to most of the inhabitants of the town ; but Satan had prepared one of his instruments, when I had done, to catch the seed out of their hearts. A poor enthusiast began a dull, pointless harangue about hirelings and false prophets ; but the door-keeper crying out, ' I am going to lock the doors,' cut his discourse short.

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 25.- I preached at nine in the upper court-house, which was considerably larger than the other. James Relly [See Life of C. of Huntingdon, vol. 11. p. 371, where a remarkable account of James Relly is given. Converted under Whitefield, he ultimately became minister of a meeting-house in BartholomewClose, where he continued to preach till his death, April 25, 1778. He was buried at Maze Pond, Southwark-one of the eccentric figures of the Evangelical Revival. See also E.M.P. vol. v. p. 16.] began his bad work again as soon as I had done speaking, but I walked quietly away, as did also the congregation.

[Journal, 1755] At eleven I went to church, to the surprise of many, and heard a lively, useful sermon. After dinner one of our brethren asked if I was ready to go to meeting. I told him ' I never go to meeting." He seemed as much astonished as the old Scot at Newcastle, who left us because we were mere Church of England men. We are so, although we condemn none who have been brought up in another way.

[Journal, 1755] About five, even the larger court-house being too small to contain the congregation, I the more readily complied with the desire of the prisoners to preach in the street, near the prison door. I spoke plain and home as ever in my life on ' Ye must be born again.' Poor James was now resolved to speak, and got on a little eminence on purpose. And what could hinder

[Journal, 1755] him WhyVox faucibus haesit.[ The sound stuck fast in his throat.]

[Journal, 1755] He cawed and cawed, but could utter nothing, hardly three words together. This also hath God wrought. He hath stopped the mouth of the gainsayer, and preserved the weak from being offended.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 26.-Mr. Walsh met me at Belfast and informed me that the day before he was at Newtownards, intending to preach. But while he was at prayer, Mr. Mortimer [Lanktree's Narrative, p. 352.] came with a drunken mob, seized him by the throat, and dragged him along, till a stout man [Mr. Beers.] seized him, and constrained him to quit his hold. Mr. Walsh, having refreshed himself at a friend's house, began a second time; but in a quarter of an hour Mr. Mortimer, having rallied his mob, came again, on which Mr. Walsh gave him the ground, and walked away over the fields.[ In hurrying through the fields to the mountain Walsh received a wetting which laid the foundation of the disease that hastened his end (Crookshank's Mcthodisti in Ireland, vol. I p. 116).]

[Journal, 1755] In the evening I spoke very plain at Lisburn, both to the great vulgar and the small. But between Seceders, old selfconceited Presbyterians, New-Light men, Moravians, Cameronians, and formal Churchmen, it is a miracle of miracles if any here bring forth fruit to perfection.

[Journal, 1755] The country between Lisburn and Moira is much like Berkshire, having fruitful vales on each side of the road, and well-wooded hills running even with them, at a small distance. At seven I preached in the market-house at Lurgan. Many of the gentry were met at the room over it, it being the time of the assembly. The violins were just tuning, but they ceased till I had done, and the novelty at least drew and fixed the attention of the whole company.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 28.-I read Mr. Barton's ingenious Lectures on Lough Neagh [Published in Dublin ta 1751. See W.H.S, vol. iv. p. 108.] near Lurgan, which turns wood into stone, and cures the King's evil and most cutaneous distempers. Under part of this lake there is first a stratum of firm clay, and under that a stratum of trees four foot thick, all compacted into one mass doubtless by the pressure of the incumbent earth (perhaps water too), which it has probably sustained ever since the General Deluge.

[Journal, 1755] In the evening we had the largest congregation which I have seen since we left Cork. It was almost as large at five in the morning. Why should we despair of doing good at Lurgan also

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 29.-I preached at Newry, and the three following days.

[Journal, 1755] On Monday, AUG. 2, I returned to Rosmead.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 3.-We rode to Tullamore through heavy rain, which a strong wind drove full in our face. The only wild Irish whom I have seen yet, a knot of officers, were present at the preaching in the evening, and behaved tolerably well.

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 4.-I preached at Portarlington in the evening, and was going to take horse in the morning, when a gentleman came and said he was just setting out for Dublin, and would be glad of my company in his chariot. I accompanied him to Johnstown, where we dined, and then took horse and rode on to Dublin.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 6.-On this and the next day I finished my business in Ireland, so as to be ready to sail at an hour's warning.

[Journal, 1755] Sun. 8.-We were to sail, the wind being fair, but as we were going aboard it turned full east. I find it of great use to be in suspense ; it is an excellent means of breaking our will. May we be ready either to stay longer on this shore or to launch into eternity!

[Journal, 1755] I. THOMAS WALSH. Photo Lafayette

[Journal, 1755] 2 ST. NICHOLAS'S GRAVEYARD, CALLED ' THE CABBAGE GARDEN,' DUBLIN, IN WHICH WALSH IS BURIED.

[Journal, 1755] Aug. 1756, In North Wales

[Journal, 1755] On Tuesday evening I preached my farewell sermon. Mr. Walsh did the same in the morning. We then walked to the quay, but it was still a doubt whether we were to sail or no, Sir T. P. having sent word to the captain of the packet that if the wind was fair he would go over, and it being his custom (hominis magnificentiam) to keep the whole ship to himself; but, the wind coming to the east, he would not go, so about noon we went on board. In two or three hours we reached the mouth of the harbour. It then fell calm. We had five cabin passengers beside Mr. [Thomas] Walsh, [John] Haughton, [James] Morgan, and me. They were all civil and tolerably serious. The sailors likewise behaved uncommonly well.

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 12.-About eight we began singing on the quarterdeck, which soon drew all our fellow passengers, as well as the captain, with the greatest part of his men. I afterwards gave an exhortation. We then spent some time in prayer. They all kneeled down with us ; nor did their seriousness wear off all the day. About nine we landed at Holyhead, after a pleasant passage of twenty-three hours.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 13.-Having hired horses for Chester, we set out about seven. Before one we reached Bangor, the situation of which is delightful beyond expression. Here we saw a large and handsome cathedral, but no trace of the good old monks of Bangor, so many hundreds of whom fell a sacrifice at once to cruelty and revenge. The country from hence to Penmaenmawr is far pleasanter than any garden. Mountains of every shape and size, vales clothed with grass or corn, woods and smaller tufts of trees, were continually varying on the one hand, as was the sea prospect on the other. Penmaenmawr itself rises almost perpendicular to an enormous height from the sea. The road runs along the side of it, so far above the beach that 184

[Journal, 1755] one could not venture to look down but that there is a wall built all along, about four foot high. Meantime, the ragged cliff hangs over one's head, as if it would fall every moment.1 An hour after we had left this awful place we came to the ancient town of Conway. It is walled round, and the walls are in tolerably good repair. The castle is the noblest ruin I ever saw. It is four-square, and has four large round towers, one at each corner, the inside of which have been stately apartments. One side of the castle is a large church, the windows and arches of which have been curiously wrought. An arm of the sea runs round two sides of the hill on which the castle stands- once the delight of kings, now overgrown with thorns, and inhabited by doleful birds only.

[Journal, 1755] [Aug. 1756.], In North Wales

[Journal, 1755] About eight we reached Plas Bach, where, as soon as I named my name, William Roberts received us with all gladness. But neither he nor any of his family could speak one sentence of English; yet our guide helped us out pretty well. After supper we sung and went to prayers. Though they could not speak it, most of them understood English; and God spoke to their hearts.

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 14.-Several of the neighbours came early in the morning, and gladly received a few words of exhortation. We then rode on, through one of the pleasantest countries in the world, by Holywell to Chester. Here we had a comfortable meeting in the evening, as well as the next day, both in the room and in the Square.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 16.-The rain was suspended while I preached to a large and quiet congregation.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 17.-I rode to Bolton. Though I came unexpected, the house was well filled. After resting a day, on Thursday the 19th

[Journal, 1755] I went on to Manchester, and preached in the evening to a large congregation, without the least disturbance. The tumults here are now at an end, chiefly through the courage and activity of a single constable.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 20.-I rode to Chelmorton-in-the-Peak. Although the poor people had no previous notice, they supplied the want of it by sending quickly to the neighbouring villages. Between seven and eight the house was pretty well filled, and many of them were extremely thankful.

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 21.-We set out early, and, after spending an hour at Ashbourne, hastened on to Lichfield. But it was not without difficulty, the waters being out to a very uncommon degree in many places.[ See W.H.S. vol. v11.p.6.] About eight we reached Wednesbury, tired enough. There we stayed the next day.

[Journal, 1755] Mon. 23.-We rode forward to Redditch. It had rained all the way, so that Mr. Walsh was obliged to go to bed as soon as we came in. Having dried some of our clothes, Mr. Bruce and I took horse again about two ; having one with us who knew the by-roads, the common road being unpassable through the floods. About five we came to a broad water,[ Probably the Arrow, between Alcester and Wixford.] which our guide did not care to pass. Mr. Bruce, seeing a foot-bridge, walked over it, leading his horse by a long rein through the water; but in an instant the horse disappeared. However, he soon emerged and gained the bank. I rode through, at a small distance, very safely, and in the evening preached at Evesham.

[Journal, 1755] Tues. 24.-Finding we could not ride the usual way, we procured another guide, and rode by Andoversford [Andoversford, near Cheltenham, on the road to London, at cross roads, six miles.] to Stroud. Mr. Jones and my brother met us here.[ They met on their way to the Conference.]

[Journal, 1755] Wed. 25.-We rode on to Bristol.

[Journal, 1755] Thur. 26.-About fifty of us being met,[ The thirteenth Conference (Tyerman's Life, vol. 11. p. 240 ; Myles's Chronological History, p. 78).] the Rules of the Society were read over, and carefully considered one by one; but we did not find any that could be spared. So we all agreed to abide by them all, and to recommend them with our might.

[Journal, 1755] We then largely considered the necessity of keeping in the Church, and using the clergy with tenderness ; and there was no dissenting voice. God gave us all to be of one mind and of one judgement.

[Journal, 1755] Fri. 27.-The Rules of the Bands were read over and considered one by one ; which, after some verbal alterations, we all agreed to observe and enforce.

[Journal, 1755] Sat. 28.-The Rules of Kingswood School[See History of Kingswood School, pp. 41-6, Works, vol. x11i. p. 294.] were read and considered, one by one; and we were all convinced they were agreeable to Scripture and reason; in consequence of which it was agreed : (I) that a short account of the design and present, state of the School be read by every assistant in every society ; and (2) that a subscription for it be begun in every place, and (if need be) a collection made every year.

[Journal, 1755] My brother and I closed the Conference by a solemn declara' tion of our purpose never to separate from the Church ; and all our brethren concurred therein.[ An agreement in the same words as that of March 16,1752 (see above, pp. 8,9) was signed on the 3oth, with the additional names of Thomas Johnson, James Jones, Peter Jaco, William Kitchens, John Johnson, John Haughton (who afterwards left him, as did John Maddern and James Morris), Thomas Mitchell, William Roberts, Richard Lucas. (W.M. Mag. 1847, p. 869.) On the 31st he wrote to Robert Marsden

[Journal, 1755] at Sheffield (Works, vol. x11i. p. 66); on Sept. 3, from Kingswood, to Walker of Truro (vol. x11i. p. 197), and to Mr. Norton (vol. x11i. p. 218).]

[Journal, 1755] For a few days I was laid up with a flux ; but on Sunday, SEPT. 5, I crept out again, and preached at Kingswood in the morning and Stokes Croft [Stokes Croft at that time was residential, and planted with trees.] in the afternoon.