This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.
https://books.google.com
3.2/7
, 10%
/ ; 27
//
Michigan State
University
o
|
\o
soMETIME FELLOW of LINCOLN college, oxFord.
1872.
[ENTERED AT STATIONERs' HALL.]
HARMER & HARLEY, PRINTERs, 39-44, CowPER STREET, FINsBURY, E.C.
r-
----
Mon. SEPTEMBER 13.--My cold remaining, I was ill able to
speak. In the evening I was much worse, my palate and throat
being greatly inflamed. However, I preached as I could ; but
I could then go no farther. I could swallow neither liquids nor
solids, and the windpipe seemed nearly closed. I lay down at
myusual time, but the defluxion of rheum was so uninterrupted,
that I slept not a minute till near three in the morning. On
the following nine days I grew better. Friday, 17. I went to
Kingswood, and found several of the children still alive to God.
Sat. 18.--I gave them a short exhortation, which tired but
did not hurt me.
Sun. 19.--I thought myself able to speak to the congre
gation, which I did for half an hour; but afterwards I found a
pain in my left side and in my shoulder by turns, exactly as I
did at Canterbury twenty years before. In the morning I could
scarce lift my hand to my head; but, after being electrified, I
was much better; so that I preached with tolerable ease in the
evening; and the next evening read the letters, though my
voice was weak. From this time I slowly recovered my voice and
my strength, and on Sunday preached without any trouble.
Wed. 29.--After preaching at Pensford, I went to Publow,
and in the morning spent a little time with the lovely children.
Those of them who were lately affected, did not appear to have
lost anything of what they had received; and some of them
were clearly gaining ground, and advancing in the faiti, which
works by love. Sunday, October 3. I took a solemn leave of
the society at Bristol, now consisting of eight hundred members.
Mon. 4.--I went, by Shepton-Mallet, to Shaftesbury, and
on Tuesday to Salisbury. Wednesday, 6. Taking chaise at
two in the morning, in the evening I came well to London.
The rest of the week I made what inquiry I could into the
state of my accounts. Some confusion had arisen from the
4. REv. J. WESLEY’s [Nov. 1773.
sudden death of my book-keeper; but it was less than might
have been expected.
Monday, 11, and the following days, I took a little tour
through Bedfordshire and Northamptonshire. Between
Northampton and Towcester we met with a great natural
curiosity, the largest elm I ever saw ; it was twenty-eight
feet in circumference; six feet more than that which was
some years ago in Magdalen-College walks at Oxford.
Mon. 18.--I began my little journey through Oxfordshire
and Buckinghamshire. In the way I read over Sir Richard
Blackmore’s “Prince Arthur.” It is not a contemptible
poem, although by no means equal to his Poem on the Crea
tion, in which are many admirably fine strokes.
Mon. 25.--I went to Shoreham, and spent two days both
agreeably and profitably. The work of God, which broke out
here two or three years ago, is still continually increasing. I
preached near Bromley on Thursday, and on Friday, 29, had
the satisfaction of dining with an old friend. I hope she
meant all the kindness she professed. If she did not, it was
her own loss.
Mon. November 1.--I set out for Norfolk, and came to
Lynn while the congregation was waiting for me. Here was
once a prospect of doing much good; but it was almost va
nished away. Calvinism, breaking in upon them, had torn the
infant society in pieces. I did all I could to heal the breach,
both in public and private ; and, having recovered a few, I left
them all in peace, and went on to Norwich on Wednesday.
Fri. 5.--I preached at noon to the warm congregation at
Loddon, and in the evening to the cold one at Yarmouth. I
know there is nothing too hard for God; else I should gothither
no more. Monday, 8. I found the society at Lakenheath was
entirely vanished away. I joined them together once more,
and they seriously promised to keep together. If they do, I
shall endeavour to see them again; if not, I have better work.
Tues. 9.--I preached at Bury; and on Wednesday, at Col
chester, where I spent a day or two with much satisfaction,
among a poor, loving, simple-hearted people. I returned to
London on Friday, and was fully employed in visiting the
classes from that time to Saturday, 20.
In my late journey I read over Dr. Lee’s “Sophron.” He
is both a learned and a sensible man; yet I judge his book will
Dec. 1773.] JOUIRNA 1. 5
hardly come to a second impression, for these very obvious
reasons:-1. His language is generally rough and unpleasing;
frequently so obscure that one cannot pick out the meaning of
a sentence, without reading it twice or thrice over: 2. His
periods are intolerably long, beyond all sense and reason; one
period often containing ten or twenty, and sometimes thirty,
lines: 3. When he makes a pertinent remark he knows not
when to have done with it, but spins it out without any pity
to the reader: 4. Many of his remarks, like those of his
master, Mr. Hutchinson, are utterly strained and unnatural;
such as give pain to those who believe the Bible, and diversion
to thcse who do not.
Mon. 22.-I set out for Sussex, and found abundance of
people willing to hear the good word; at Rye in particular.
And they do many things gladly: But they will not part with
the accursed thing, smuggling. So I fear, with regard to
these, our labour will be in vain.
Monday, 29. I went to Gravesend; on Tuesday, to Chat
ham; and on Wednesday, to Sheerness; over that whimsical
ferry, where footmen and horses pay nothing, but every car
riage four shillings I was pleasing myself that I had seen
one fair day at Sheerness | But that pleasure was soon over.
We had rain enough in the evening. However, the House
was crowded sufficiently. I spoke exceeding plain to the
bigots on both sides. May God write it on their hearts |
Mon. DECEMBER 6.--I went to Canterbury in the stage
coach, and by the way read Lord Herbert's Life, written by
himself; the author of the first system of Deism that ever was
published in England. Was there ever so wild a knight
errant as this? Compared to him, Don Quixote was a sober
man. Who can wonder, that a man of such a complexion
should be an Infidel? I returned to London, Friday, 10,
with Captain Hinderson, of Chatham, who informed us,
“Being off the Kentish coast, on Wednesday morning last,
I found my ship had been so damaged by the storm, which
still continued, that she could not long keep above water; so
we got into the boat, twelve in all, though with little hope
of making the shore. A ship passing by, we made all the
signals we could ; but they took no notice. A second
passed near: We made signals and called; but they would
not stay for us. A third put out their boat, took us up,
and set us safe on shore.”
6 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Jan. 1774.
o
Fri. 17.--Meeting with a celebrated book, a volume of Cap
tain Cook's Voyages, I sat downto read it with huge expectation.
But how was I disappointed I observed, 1. Things absolutely
incredible: “A nation without any curiosity;” and, what is
stranger still, (I fear related with no good design,) “without
any sense of shame! Men and women coupling together in
the face of the sun, and in the sight of scores of people ! Men
whose skin, cheeks, and lips are white as milk.” Hume or Wol
taire might believe this; but I cannot. I observed, 2. Things
absolutely impossible. To instance in one, for a specimen.
A native of Otaheite is said to understand the language of an
island eleven hundred degrees [query, miles] distant from
it in latitude; besides I know not how many hundreds in
longitude ' So that I cannot but rank this narrative with
that of Robinson Crusoe ; and account Tupia to be, in several
respects, akin to his man Friday.
Saturday, 25, and on the following days, we had many
happy opportunities of celebrating the solemn Feast-days,
according to the design of their institution. We concluded
the year with a Fast-day, closed with a solemn watch-night.
Tues. JANUARY 4, 1774.--Three or four years ago, a stum
bling horse threw me forward on the pommel of the saddle. I
felt a good deal of pain; but it soon went off, and I thought of
it no more. Some months after I observed, testiculum alterum
altero duplo majorem esse. I consulted a Physician: He told
me it was a common case, and did not imply any disease at all.
In May twelvemonth it was grown near as large as a hen’s egg.
Being then at Edinburgh, Dr. Hamilton insisted on my having
the advice of Drs. Gregory and Munro. They immediately
saw it was a Hydrocele, and advised me, as soon as I came to
London, to aim at a radical cure, which they judged might be
effected in about sixteen days: When I came to London, I
consulted Mr. Wathem. He advised me, 1. Not to think of a
radical cure, which could not be hoped for, without my lying
in one posture fifteen or sixteen days. And he did not know
whether this might not give a wound to my constitution,
which I should never recover. 2. To do nothing while I
continued easy. And this advice I was determined to take.
Last month the swelling was often painful. So on this day,
Mr. Wathen performed the operation, and drew off something
more than half a pint of a thin, yellow, transparent water.
With this came out (to his no small surprise) a pearl of the
Feb. 1774.] JOURNAL, 7
size of a small shot; which he supposed might be one cause
of the disorder, by occasioning a conflux of humours to the
part. Wednesday, 5. I was as perfectly easy, as if no
operation had been performed.
Tues. 11.-I began at the east end of the town to visit the
society from house to house. I know no branch of the pas
toral office, which is of greater importance than this. But it
is so grievous to flesh and blood, that I can prevail on few,
even of our Preachers, to undertake it.
Sun. 23.−Mr. Pentycross assisted me at the chapel. O
what a curse upon the poor sons of men is the confusion of
opinions ! Worse by many degrees than the curse of Babel,
the confusion of tongues. What but this could prevent this
amiable young man from joining heart and hand with us?
Mon. 24.--I was desired by Mrs. Wright, of New-York,
to let her take my effigy in wax-work. She has that of Mr.
Whitefield and many others; but none of them, I think,
comes up to a well-drawn picture.
Fri. 28.-I buried the remains of that venerable mother in
Israel, Bilhah Aspernell. She found peace with God in 1738;
and soon after, purity of heart. From that time she walked
in the light of God’s countenance, day and might, without the
least intermission. She was always in pain, yet always re
joicing, and going about doing good. Her desire was, that
she might not live to be useless: And God granted her desire.
On Sunday evening she met her class, as usual. The next
day she sent for her old fellow-traveller, Sarah Clay, and said
to her, “Sally, I am going.” She asked, “Where are you
going?” She cheerfully answered, “To my Jesus, to be
sure !” and spoke no more.
Saturday, 29, and several times in the following week, I
had much conversation with Ralph Mather, a devoted young
man, but almost driven out of his senses by Mystic Divinity.
If he escapes out of this specious snare of the devil, he will
be an instrument of much good.
Thur. FEBRUARY 10.--I was desired by that affectionate
man, Mr. P , to give him a sermon at Chelsea. Every
corner of the room was throughly crowded; and all but two
or three gentlewomen (so called) were deeply serious, while I
strongly enforced, “Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way,
that leadeth unto life.”
8 R. E.W. J. WESLEY"S [March, 1774.
Mon. 14.--In my way to Dorking, I gave another reading
to the “Life of Anna Maria Schurman:” Perhaps a woman
of the strongest understanding that the world ever saw. And
she was likewise deeply devoted to God. So was also Antoinette
Bourignon, nearly her equal in sense, though not in learning;
and equally devoted to God. In many things there was a sur
prising resemblance between them, particularly in severity of
temper, leading them to separate from all the world, whom
they seemed to give up to the devil without remorse; only with
this difference,--Madame Bourignon believed there were
absolutely no children of God, but her and her three or four
associates: Anna Schurman believed there were almost none,
but her and her little community. No wonder that the world
returned their love, by persecuting them in every country.
Thur. MARCH 3.--I preached at L But O what a
change is there ! The society is shrunk to five or six mem
hers, and probably will soon shrink into nothing. And the
family is not even a shadow of that which was for some years
a pattern to all the kingdom |
Sun. 6.--In the evening I went to Brentford, and on Mon
day to Newbury. Tuesday, 8. Coming to Chippenham, I
was informed that the floods had made the road by Marshfield
impassable. So I went round by Bath, and came to Bristol
just as my brother was giving out the hymn; and in time to
beseech a crowded audience, not to receive “the grace of God
in vain.”
Sat. 12.--I went over to Kingswood, and put an end to some
little misunderstandings which had crept into the family. At
this I rejoiced; but I was grieved to find that Ralph Mather's
falling into Mysticism and Quakerism had well nigh put an end
to that uncommon awakening which he had before occasioned
among the children. But the next day I found, the little maids
at Publow, who found peace by his means, had retained all the
life which they had received; and had indeed increased therein.
Tues. 15.-I began my northern journey, and went by Stroud,
Gloucester, and Tewkesbury, to Worcester. Thursday, 17. I
preached in the Town-Hall at Evesham, to a numerous and
serious congregation. Friday, 18. I returned to Worcester.
The society here continues walking together in love, and are
not moved by all the efforts of those who would fain teach them
another Gospel. I was much comforted by their steadfastness
March, 1774.] JOURNAL. 9
and simplicity. Thus let them “silence the ignorance of
foolish men l’’
Sat. 19.--In the evening I preached at Birmingham, and
at eight in the morning. At noon I preached on Bramwick
Heath; and, the Room being far too small, stood in Mr.
Wiley’s courtyard, notwithstanding the keen north-east wind.
At Wednesbury, likewise, I was constrained by the multitude
of people to preach abroad in the evening. I strongly enforced
upon them the Apostle's words, “How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation?” If we do not “go on to perfection,”
how shall we escape lukewarmness, Antinomianism, hell-fire?
Mon. 21.--I preached at nine in Darlaston, and about noon
at Wolverhampton. Here I had the pleasure of meeting Mr.
Fletcher, and we took sweet counsel together. Tuesday, 22.
At five I explained that important truth, that God trieth us
every moment, weighs all our thoughts, words, and actions,
and is pleased or displeased with us, according to our works.
I see more and more clearly, that “there is a great gulf fixed”
between us and all those who, by denying this, sap the very
foundation both of inward and outward holiness.
At ten I preached at Dudley, and in the afternoon spent
some time in viewing Mr. Bolton’s works, wonderfully ingeni
ous, but the greater part of them wonderfully useless. Wed
nesday, 23. I preached at Ashby-de-la-Zouch; and Thursday,
24, went on to Markfield. The church was quickly filled. I
preached on those words in the Second Lesson, “Lazarus,
come forth !” In the evening I preached at Leicester. Here,
likewise, the people “walk in the fear of the Lord, and in the
comfort of the Holy Ghost.”
Sun. 27.--About noon I preached at Stapleford, six miles
west from Nottingham. I stood in a meadow, because no
house could contain the congregation. But it was nothing to
that at Nottingham-Cross in the evening, the largest I have
seen for many years, except at Gwennap. Monday, 28.
About noon I preached at Donnington. It was a showery
day, but the showers were suspended during the preaching.
In the evening I preached at Derby, and had the satisfaction
to observe an unusual seriousness in the congregation. Care
Hess as they used to be, they seemed at length to know the
day of their visitation.
, Tues. 29.--About ten I preached in the market-place at
10 REv. J. WESLEY’s [April, 1774.
Ashbourne to a large and tolerably serious congregation; and
some, I believe, felt the word of God quick and powerful, while
I enforced, “God now commandeth all men everywhere to
repent.” After dinner we went on to Newcastle-under-Lyne,
(that is the proper name of the river,) where I was invited by
the Mayor, a serious, sensible man, to lodge at his house. I
was desired (our Room being but small) to preach in the
market-place. Abundance of people were soon gathered toge
ther, who surprised me not a little, by mistaking the tune, and
striking up the March in Judas Maccabeus. Many of them
had admirable voices, and tolerable skill. I know not when I
have heard so agreeable a sound: It was indeed the voice of
melody. But we had one jarring string: A drunken gentle
man was a little noisy, till he was carried away.
Wed. 30.--I went on to Congleton, where I received letters,
informing me that my presence was necessary at Bristol. So
about one I took chaise, and reached Bristol about half an hour
after one the next day. Having done my business in about
two hours, on Friday in the afternoon I reached Congleton
again; (about a hundred and forty miles from Bristol;) no
more tired (blessed be God 1) than when I left it. What a
change is in this town | The bitter enmity of the townsfolks
to the Methodists is clean forgotten. So has the steady beha
viour of the little flock turned the hearts of their opposers.
APRIL 3.−(Being Easter Day.) I went on to Macclesfield,
and came just in time (so is the scene changed here also) to walk
to the old church, with the Mayor and the two Ministers. The
rain drove us into the House in the evening; that is, as many
as could squeeze in ; and we had a season of strong consola
tion, both at the preaching, and at the meeting of the society.
Mon. 4.--I went on to Manchester, where the work of God
appears to be still increasing. Tuesday, 5. About noon I
preached at New-Mills, to an earnest, artless, loving people;
and in the evening, at poor, dull, dead Stockport, not without
hopes that God would raise the dead. As one means of this,
I determined to restore the morning preaching, which had
been discontinued for many years. So I walked over from
Portwood in the morning, and found the house well filled at
five o’clock. Wednesday, 6. I preached at Pendleton-pole,
two miles from Manchester, in a new chapel designed for a
Church Minister, which was filled from end to end.
April, 1774.] JOURNAL. Il
Thur. 7.--I preached about noon at Northwich, now as quiet
as Manchester: And in the evening at that lovely spot, Little
Leigh. Friday, 8. I went on to Chester. Saturday, 9. I
visited our old friends at Alpraham ; many of whom are now
well nigh worn out, and just ready for the Bridegroom.
Mon. 11.--I preached about noon at Warrington, and in the
evening at Liverpool. Thursday, 14. I preached in Wigan
at noon, where all tumult is now at an end: The lives of the
Christians having quite put to silence the ignorance of foolish
men. In the evening I preached at Bolton, to the most lively
and most steady people in all these parts.
Fri. 15.-I preached at a preaching-house just built at Chow
bent, which was lately a den of lions; but they are all now
quiet as lambs. So they were the next day at the new House
near Bury. Saturday, 16. At noon I preached in Rochdale; and
in the evening near the church in Huddersfield. The wind was
high, and very sharp; but the people little regarded it, while I
strongly enforced those words, “What doest thou here, Elijah?”
Sun. 17.--I rode to Halifax. Such a country church I
never saw before. I suppose, except York Minster, there is
none in the county so large. Yet it would not near contain the
congregation. I was afraid it would be impossible for all to
hear; but God gave me a voice for the occasion: So that I
believe all heard and many felt the application of those words,
(part of the First Lesson,) “Let me die the death of the
righteous, and let my last end be like his l’”
While I was at dinner at Dr. Leigh's, one came from Hud
dersfield to tell me the Vicar was willing I should preach in
the church. Dr. Leigh lending me his servant and his horse,
I set out immediately; and, riding fast, came into the church
while the Vicar was reading the Psalms. It was well the people
had no notice of my preaching, till I came into the town: They
quickly filled the church. I did not spare them, but fully
delivered my own soul.
Mon. 18.--The Minister of Heptonstall sent me word that
I was welcome to preach in his church. It was with difficulty
we got up the steep mountain; and when we were upon it,
the wind was ready to bear us away. The church was filled,
not with curious but serious hearers. No others would face
so furious a storm. At the Ewood, in the evening, we had
the usual blessing.
12 REv. J. WESLEY’s [April, 1774.
Tues. 19.--Mrs. Holmes, who has been some years confined
to her bed, sent, and desired I would preach at her house.
As I stood in the passage, both she could hear, and all that
stood in the adjoining rooms. I preached on Rev. xiv. 1-5.
It was a refreshing season to her and to many. At half-hour
after ten, I preached in the new House at Hightown, and in
the evening at Daw-Green.
I found Mr. Greenwood (with whom I lodged) dying (as
was supposed) of the gout in the stomach. But, on observing
the symptoms, I was convinced it was not the gout, but the
angina pectoris : (Well described by Dr. Heberden, and still
more accurately by Dr. M'Bride of Dublin:) I therefore
advised him to take no more medicines, but to be electrified
through the breast. He was so. The violent symptoms
immediately ceased, and he fell into a sweet sleep.
Thur. 21.--I preached at Morley, on, “O thou of little
faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?” About two I preached
at the new-built House at Pudsey, where the Germans (I was
informed) are continually declining. Twenty years since one
would have thought they would never have been moved; but
who can stand any longer than God is on their side? This
evening and the next I preached to the lively congregation at
Bradford, and was much comforted; so were many; indeed
all that earnestly desired to recover the whole image of God.
Fri. 22.--I rode and walked to Bradshaw House, standing
alone in a dreary waste. But although it was a cold and
stormy day, the people flocked from all quarters. So they
did at noon the next day, to Clough, (two or three miles
from Colne,) where, though it was cold enough, I was obliged
to preach abroad. In the evening I preached to our old,
upright, loving brethren at Keighley.-
Sun. 24.--It being a cold and stormy day, Haworth church
contained the people tolerably well. On Monday, Tuesday,
and Wednesday, I preached at Bingley and Yeadon; and on
Thursday opened the new House at Wakefield. What a
change is here, since our friend was afraid to let me preach
in his house, lest the mob should pull it down | So I
preached in the main street: And then was sown the first
seed, which has since borne so plenteous a harvest.
Hence I went to Leeds, and on Saturday, 30, to Birstal.
Here, on the top of the hill, was the standard first set up four
May, 1774.] JOURNAL. 13
and-thirty years ago. And since that time, what hath God
wrought !
Sun. MAY 1.--I preached at eight on that delicate device
of Satan to destroy the whole religion of the heart, the
telling men not to regard frames or feelings, but to live by
naked faith; that is, in plain terms, not to regard either love,
joy, peace, or any other fruit of the Spirit: Not to regard
whether they feel these, or the reverse; whether their souls
be in an heavenly or hellish frame ! At one I preached at
the foot of the hill to many thousand hearers; and at Leeds
to about the same number, whom I besought in strong terms
not to receive “the grace of God in vain.”
On Monday and Tuesday I preached at Otley and Pateley
Bridge. Wednesday, 4. I went on to Ambleside; and on
Thursday to Whitehaven. Monday, 9. I set out for Scotland.
At eight I preached in the Castle-yard at Cockermouth, to
abundance of careless people, on, “Where their worm dieth
not, and the fire is not quenched.” In the evening I preached
at Carlisle. On Tuesday I went on to Selkirk, and on Wed
nesday to Edinburgh; which is distant from Carlisle ninety
five miles, and no more. Thursday, 12. I went in the stage
coach to Glasgow; and on Friday and Saturday, preached on
the old Green, to a people, the greatest part of whom hear
much, know every thing, and feel nothing. s
Sun. 15.--My spirit was moved within me at the sermons
I heard both morning and afternoon. They contained much
truth, but were no more likely to awaken one soul than an
Italian Opera. In the evening a multitude of people assem
bled on the Green, to whom I earnestly applied these words,
“Though I have all knowledge, though I have all faith,
though I give all my goods to feed the poor,” &c., “aad have
not love, I am nothing.”
Mon. 16.-In the afternoon, as also at seven in the morn
ing, I preached in the kirk at Port-Glasgow. My subjects
were Death and Judgment, and I spoke as home as I possibly
could. The evening congregation at Greenock was exceeding
large. I opened and enforced these awful words, “Strait is
the gate, and narrow is the way, that leadeth unto life.” I
know not that ever I spoke more strongly. And some fruit
of it quickly appeared; for the House, twice as large as that
at Glasgow, was throughly filled at five in the morning. In
14 REv. J. WESLEY’s [May, 1774.
the evening, Tuesday, 17, I preached on the Green at Glas
gow once more, although the north wind was piercing cold.
At five in the morning I commended our friends to God.
How is it that there is no increase in this society? It is
exceeding easy to answer. One Preacher stays here two or
three months at a time, preaching on Sunday mornings, and
three or four evenings in a week. Can a Methodist Preacher
preserve either bodily health, or spiritual life, with this exer
cise? And if he is but half alive, what will the people be?
Just so it is at Greenock too.
Wed. 18.--I went to Edinburgh, and on Thursday to Perth.
Here likewise the morning preaching had been given up:
Consequently the people were few, dead, and cold. These
things must be remedied, or we must quit the ground.
In the way to Perth, I read that ingenious tract, Dr. Gre
gory’s “Advice to his Daughters.” Although I cannot agree
with him in all things; (particularly as to dancing, decent
pride, and both a reserve and a delicacy which I think are
quite unnatural;) yet I allow there are many fine strokes
therein, and abundance of common sense: And if a young
woman followed this plan in little things, in such things as
daily occur, and in great things copied after Miranda, she
would form an accomplished character.
Fri. 20.-I rode over to Mr. Fraser's, at Monedie, whose
mother-in-law was to be buried that day. O what a difference
is there between the English and the Scotch method of burial
The English does honour to human nature; and even to the poor
remains, that were once a temple of the Holy Ghost ! But when
I see in Scotland a coffin put into the earth, and covered up with
out a word spoken, it reminds me of what was spoken concern
ing Jehoiakim, “He shall be buried with the burial of an ass!”
Sat. 21.--I returned to Perth, and preached in the evening
to a large congregation. But I could not find the way to
their hearts. The generality of the people here are so wise
that they need no more knowledge, and so good that they
need no more religion | Who can warn them that are brim
ful of wisdom and goodness, to flee from the wrath to come.
Se:... 22.--I endeavoured to stir up this drowsy people, by
speaking as strongly as I could, at five, on, “Awake, thou that
sleepest;” at seven, on, “Where their worm dieth not;” and in
the evening, on, “I saw the dead, small and great, stand before
May, 1774.] JOURNAL. 15
God.” In the afternoon a young gentleman, in the west kirk,
preached such a close, practical sermon, on, “Enoch walked
with God,” as I have not heard since I came into the kingdom.
Mon. 23.--About ten, I preached to a considerable number
of plain, serious, country-people, at Rait, a little town in the
middle of that lovely valley, called the Carse of Gowry. In
riding on to Dundee, I was utterly amazed at reading and con
sidering a tract put into my hands, which gave a fuller account
than I had ever seen of the famous Gowry conspiracy in 1600.
And I was throughly convinced,--l. From the utter impro
bability, if one should not rather say, absurdity, of the King's
account, the greater part of which rests entirely on his own
single word; 2. From the many contradictions in the deposi
tions which were made to confirm some parts of it; and, 3.
From the various collateral circumstances, related by con
temporary writers, that the whole was a piece of king
craft; the clumsy invention of a covetous and blood-thirsty
tyrant to destroy two innocent men, that he might kill and
also take possession of their large fortunes.
In the evening I preached at Dundee, and on Tuesday, 24,
went on to Arbroath. In the way I read Lord K--'s plausible
“Essays on Morality and Natural Religion.” Did ever man take
so much pains to so little purpose, as he does in his Essay on
Liberty and Necessity ? Cui bono 2 What good would it do to
mankind, if he could convince them that they are a mere piece
of clock-work? that they have no more share in directing their
own actions, than in directing the sea or the north wind? He
owns, that “if men saw themselves in this light, all sense of
moral obligation, of right and wrong, of good or ill desert, would
immediately cease.” Well, my Lord sees himself in this light;
consequently, if his own doctrine is true, he has no “sense of
moral obligation, of right and wrong, of good or ill desert.” Is
he not then excellently well-qualified for a Judge? Will he
condemn a man for not “holding the wind in his fist”
The high and piercing wind made it impracticable to preach
abroad in the evening. But the House contained the people
tolerably well, as plain and simple as those at Rait. I set out
early in the morning; but, not being able to ford the North
Esk, swollen with the late rains, was obliged to go round some
miles. However, I reached Aberdeen in the evening.
Here I met with another curious book, “Sketches of the
16 REv. J. weslEY’s [June, 1774.
History of Man.” Undoubtedly, the author is a man of strong
understanding, lively imagination, and considerable learning;
and his book contains some useful truths. Yet some things in
it gave me pain : 1. His affirming things that are not true; as
that all Negro children turn black the ninth or tenth day from
their birth. No : most of them turn partly black on the second
day, entirely so on the third. That all the Americans are of a
copper colour. Not so : Some of them are as fair as we are.
Many more such assertions I observed, which I impute not to
design but credulity. 2. His flatly contradicting himself; many
times within a page or two. 3. His asserting, and labouring
to prove, that man is a mere piece of clock-work: And, lastly,
his losing no opportunity of vilifying the Bible, to which he
appears to bear a most cordial hatred. I marvel if any but his
brother Infidels will give two guineas for such a work as this
Sun. 29.--At seven the congregation was large. In the
evening the people were ready to tread upon each other. I
scarce ever saw people so squeezed together. And they
seemed to be all ear, while I exhorted them, with strong and
pointed words, not to receive “the grace of God in vain.”
Mon. 30.--I set out early from Aberdeen, and preached at
Arbroath in the evening. I know no people in England who
are more loving, and more simple of heart, than these. Tuesday,
31. I preached at Easthaven, a small town, inhabited by fisher
men. I suppose all the inhabitants were present; and all were
ready to devour the word. In the evening I preached at Dun
dee, and had great hope that brotherly love would continue.
In my way hither, I read Dr. Reid's ingenious Essay.
With the former part of it I was greatly delighted : But after
wards I was much disappointed. I doubt whether the senti
ments are just : But I am sure his language is so obscure that
to most readers it must be mere Arabic. But I have a greater
objection than this; namely, his exquisite want of judgment in
so admiring that prodigy of self-conceit, Rousseau, La shallow,
but supercilious Infidel, two degrees below Voltaire | Is it
possible, that a man who admires him can admire the Bible 2
Wed. JUNE 1.--I went on to Edinburgh, and the next day
examined the society one by one. I was agreeably surprised.
They have fairly profited since I was here last. Such a number
of persons having sound Christian experience I never found in
this society before. I preached in the evening to a very elegant
June, 1774.] JOURNAs. 17
congregation, and yet with great enlargement of heart. Satur
day, 4. I found uncommon liberty at Edinburgh in applying
Ezekiel's vision of the Dry Bones. As I was walking home,
two men followed me, one of whom said, “Sir, you are my
prisoner. I have a warrant from the Sheriff, to carry you to
the Tolbooth.” At first I thought he jested; but finding the
thing was serious, I desired one or two of our friends to go up
with me. When we were safe lodged in a house adjoining to
the Tolbooth, I desired the Officer to let me see his warrant.
I found the prosecutor was one George Sutherland, once a
member of the society. He had deposed, “That Hugh Saun
derson, one of John Wesley’s Preachers, had taken from his
wife one hundred pounds in money, and upwards of thirty
pounds in goods; and had, besides that, terrified her into
madness; so that, through the want of her help, and the loss
of business, he was damaged five hundred pounds.”
Before the Sheriff, Archibald Cockburn, Esq., he had
deposed, “That the said John Wesley and Hugh Saunder
son, to evade her pursuit, were preparing to fly the country;
and therefore he desired his warrant to search for, seize,
and incarcerate them in the Tolbooth, till they should find
security for their appearance.” To this request the Sheriff
had assented, and given his warrant for that purpose.
But why does he incarcerate John Wesley P Nothing is
laid against him, less or more. Hugh Saunderson preaches
in connexion with him. What then 2 Was not the Sheriff
strangely overseen 2
Mr. Sutherland furiously insisted that the Officer should
carry us to the Tolbooth without delay. However, he waited
till two or three of our friends came, and gave a bond for
our appearance on the 24th instant. Mr. S. did appear,
the cause was heard, and the prosecutor fined one thousand
pounds.
Sun. 5.--About eight I preached at Ormiston, twelve miles
from Edinburgh. The House being small, Istood in the street,
and proclaimed “the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.” The
congregation behaved with the utmost decency. So did that
on the Castle-Hill in Edinburgh, at noon; though I strongly
insisted, that God “ now commandeth all men every where to
repent.” In the evening the House was throughly filled; and
many seemed deeply affected. I do not wonder that Satan, had
18 REv. J. Wesley’s [June, 1774.
it been in his power, would have had me otherwise employed
this day.
Wed. 8.--I took my leave of our affectionate friends, and
in the evening preached at Dunbar. Thursday, 9. The
wind being high, I preached in the Court-House at Alnwick;
but it was intolerably hot. Friday, 10. About eleven I
preached in the little Square, adjoining to the preaching
house in Morpeth. In the evening I preached at Newcastle;
and in the morning, Saturday, 11, set out for the Dales.
About noon I preached at Wolsingham, and in the evening
near the preaching-house in Weardale.
Sun. 12.--The rain drove us into the House, both morning
and afternoon. Afterwards I met the poor remains of the
select society; but neither of my two lovely children, neither
Peggy Spence nor Sally Blackburn, were there. Indeed a
whole row of such I had seen before ; but three in four of
them were now as careless as ever. In the evening I sent
for Peggy Spence and Sally Blackburn. Peggy came, and I
found she had well nigh regained her ground, walking in the
light, and having a lively hope of recovering all that she had
lost. Sally flatly refused to come, and then ran out of doors.
Being found at length, after a flood of tears, she was brought
almost by force. But I could not get one look, and hardly a
word, from her. She seemed to have no hope left: Yet she
is not out of God’s reach.
I now inquired into the causes of that grievous decay in the
vast work of God, which was here two years since; and I found
several causes had concurred: 1. Not one of the Preachers that
succeeded was capable of being a nursing-fatherto the new-born
children: 2. Jane Salkeld, one great instrument of the work,
marrying, was debarred from meeting the young ones; and
there being none left who so naturally cared for them, they fell
heaps upon heaps: 3. Most of the liveliest in the society were
the single men and women; and several of these in a little time
contracted an inordinate affection for each other; whereby they
wo grieved the Holy Spirit of God, that he in great measure
departed from them : 4. Men arose among ourselves, who
undervalued the work of God, and called the great work of
sanctification a delusion. By this they grieved some, and
angered others; so that both the one and the other were
unuch weakened : 5. Hence, the love of many waxing cold,
June, 1774.] JOURNAL. 19
the Preachers were discouraged; and jealousies, heart-burn
ings, evil-surmisings, were multiplied more and more. There
is now a little revival: God grant it may increase !
Mon. 13.--At eleven I preached in Teesdale, and at Swale
dale in the evening. Tuesday, 14. We crossed over the emor
mous mountain into lovely Wenaudale; the largest by far of
all the Dales, as well as the most beautiful. Some years since,
many had been awakened here, and joined together by Mr.
Ingham and his Preachers. But since the bitter dissension
between their Preachers, the poor sheep have all been scat
tered. A considerable number of these have been gleaned up,
and joined together by our Preachers. I came into the midst
of them at Redmire. As I rode through the town, the people
stood staring on every side, as if we had been a company of
monsters. I preached in the street, and they soon ran toge
ther, young and old, from every quarter. I reminded the elder,
of their having seen me thirty years before, when I preached
in Wensley church; and enforced once more, “Believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.” When [ rode
back through the town, it wore a new face. The people were
profoundly civil: They were bowing and courtesying on every
side. Such a change in two hours I have seldom seen.
Hence we hasted to Richmond, where I preached in a kind
of Square. All the Yorkshire Militia were there; and so were
their Officers, who kept them in awe, so that they behaved
with decency. At six I preached at the end of our House in
Barnard-Castle. I was faint and feverish when I began; but
the staying an hour in a cold bath (for the wind was very high
and sharp) quite refreshed me; so that all my faintness was
gone, and I was perfectly well when I concluded.
Wed. 15.--I went on by Durham to Sunderland. Saturday,
18. I preached at Biddick. It was fair while I was preaching,
but rained very hard both before and after. Sunday, 19. I
preached at the east end of the town, I think, to the largest
congregation I ever saw at Sunderland. The rain did not
begin till I had concluded. At two I preached at the Fell,
at five in the Orphan-House.
Mon. 20.-About nine I set out for Horsley, with Mr.
Hopper and Mr. Smith. I took Mrs. Smith and her two little
girls, in the chaise with me. About two miles from the town
just on the brow of the hill, on a sudden both the horses set
20 REv. J. WESLEY’s [June, 1774.
out, without any visible cause, and flew down the hill, like an
arrow out of a bow. In a minute John fell off the coach-box.
The horses then went on full speed, sometimes to the edge of
the ditch on the right, sometimes on the left. A cart came up
against them: They avoided it as exactly as if the man had
been on the box. A narrow bridge was at the foot of the hill.
They went directly over the middle of it. They ran up the
next hill with the same speed; many persons meeting us, but
getting out of the way. Near the top of the hill was a gate,
which led into a farmer's yard. It stood open. They turned
short, and run through it, without touching the gate on one
side, or the post on the other. I thought, “However, the
gate which is on the other side of the yard, and is shut, will
stop them:” But they rushed through it as if it had been a
cobweb, and galloped on through the corn-field. The little
girls cried out, “Grandpapa, save us!” I told them, “Nothing
will hurt you : Do not be afraid;” feeling no more fear or care,
(blessed be God 1) than if I had been sitting in my study. The
horses ran on, till they came to the edge of a steep precipice.
Just then Mr. Smith, who could not overtake us before, galloped
in between. They stopped in a moment. Had they gone on
ever so little, he and we must have gone down together'
I am persuaded both evil and good angels had a large share
in this transaction : How large we do not know now ; but we
shall know hereafter.
I think some of the most remarkable circumstances were, 1.
Both the horses, which were tame and quiet as could be, starting
out in a moment just at the top of the hill, and running down
full speed. 2. The coachman’s being thrown on his head with
such violence, and yet not hurt at all. 3. The chaise running
again and again to the edge of each ditch, and yet not into it.
4. The avoiding the cart. 5. The keeping just the middle of
the bridge. 6. The turning short through the first gate, in a
manner that no coachman in England could have turned them,
when in full gallop. 7. The going through the second gate as
if it had been but smoke, without slackening their pace at all.
This would have been impossible, had not the end of the chariot
pole struck exactly on the centre of the gate; whence the whole,
by the sudden impetuous shock, was broke into small pieces.
8. That the little girl, who used to have fits, on my saying, “No
thing will hurt you,” ceased crying, and was quite composed.
June, 1774.] JOURNAL. 21
Lastly, That Mr. Smith struck in just then : In a minute
more we had been down the precipice; and had not the horses
then stopped at once, they must have carried him and us
down together. “Let those give thanks whom the Lord
hath redeemed, and delivered from the hand of the enemy l’”
Fri. 24.--I read over Dr. Wilson’s tract on the Circulation
of the Blood. What are we sure of but the Bible? I thought
nothing had been more sure, than that the heart is the grand
moving power, which both begins and continues the circula
tion. But I think the Doctor has clearly proved, that it does
not begin at the heart; and that the heart has quite another
office, only receiving the blood, which then moves on through
its channels, on the mere principle of suction, assisted by the
ethereal fire, which is connected with every particle of it.
Sun. 26.--In the morning I preached at the Ballast-Hills,
among the glassmen, keelmen, and sailors. As these had
nothing to pay, I exhorted them “to buy wine and milk with
out money and without price.”
Mon. 27.-I took my leave of this lovely place and people,
and about ten preached to a serious congregation at Durham.
About six I preached at Stockton-upon-Tees, on a text suited
to the congregation, “Where their worm dieth not, and the
fire is not quenched.”
Tues. 28.--This being my birth-day, the first day of my
seventy-second year, I was considering, How is this, that I find
just the same strength as I did thirty years ago? That my
sight is considerably better now, and my nerves firmer, than
they were then? That I have none of the infirmities of old
age, and have lost several I had in my youth? The grand
cause is, the good pleasure of God, who doeth whatsoever
pleaseth Him. The chief means are, 1. My constantly rising
at four, for about fifty years. 2. My generally preaching at
five in the morning; one of the most healthy exercises in the
world. 3. My never travelling less, by sea or land, than four
thousand five hundred miles in a year.
In the evening I preached at Yarm; about eleven the next
day at Osmotherley; and in the evening at Thirsk. Thursday,
30. I preached at Hutton-Rudby, and found still remaining a
few sparks of the uncommon flame which was kindled there ten
years ago. It was quenched chiefly by the silly, childish con
tentions of those who were real partakers of that great blessing.
22 REv. J. Wesley’s [July, 1774.
Pri. JULY 1.-I preached in Stokesley at six; and many
determined to set out anew. In Guisborough I was con
strained to preach abroad; and the whole multitude was as
silent as the subject, Death ! I never before had such an
opportunity at this place. In the afternoon, through miserable
roads, we at length got to Whitby.
Sun. 3.-We had a solemn hour at five with the society
only; and another at eight, while I enforced those words on
a numerous congregation, “How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation?” While we were at church, a
poor man would needs divert himself by swimming; but he
sunk, and rose no more. The Minister preached in the after
noon a sermon suited to the occasion, on, “Be ye likewise
ready; for ye know not the hour when the Son of Man
cometh.” At five I preached in the market-place, on, “Though
I speak with the tongues of men and angels,” &c., “and have
not charity, I am nothing.” I spoke exceeding plain, and the
people were attentive: Yet few of them, I doubt, understood
what was spoken. The society, however, are well established,
and adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour.
Mon. 4.--At eleven I preached in the little Square at Robin
Hood's Bay. At six I preached to a numerous congregation,
in the new House at Scarborough. It is plain; and yet is
one of the neatest and most elegant preaching-houses in
England. Now let the people walk worthy of their calling,
and there will be a good work in this place.
Wed. 6.--I went on to Bridlington-Quay; and in the evening
preached in the town, to as stupid and ill-mannered a congrega
tion as I have seen for many years. Thursday, 7. I preached
at Beverley and Hull, where the House would not near contain
the congregation. How is this town changed since I preached
on the Car! Saturday, 9. I preached at Pocklington and York.
Sun. 10.--Some of Tadcaster informing me that the Minis
ter was willing I should preach in the church, I went thither
in the morning. But his mind was changed: So I preached
in the street, to a listening multitude, from the Lesson for the
day, on the righteousness which exceeds that of the Scribes
and Pharisees; in the morning and evening at York.
Tuesday, 12, was the Quarterly Meeting. It was a busy,
and yet a comfortable, day. Many were refreshed, both at the
love-seast, and while I was describing the “hundred forty and
July, 1774.] JOURNAL. 23
four thousand,” standing “with the Lamb on mount Sion.”
Who is ambitious to be of that number?
Thur. 14.--About nine I preached at Wakefield, and in
the evening at Doncaster. Here also God has a few names.
Friday, 15. About eleven I preached at Thorne, and in the
evening at Rotherham, to a people who both understand and
love the Gospel.
Sat. 16.-I went to Epworth, and preached in the market
place to a numerous and quiet congregation. Sunday, 17.
About eight I preached at Misterton. The sun shining in
my face was a little troublesome at first; but was soon
covered with clouds. We had an useful sermon at Haxey
church. About one I preached at Overthorpe; and between
four and five, the rain being stayed, I began in Epworth
market-place. Such a congregation never met there before ;
and they did not meet in vain.
Mon. 18.--I reached Brigg before eight; and, by the request
of the chief persons in the town, preached at nine in the market
place, to a large and attentive congregation. Hence I went on
to Tealby, and preached near the church to a multitude of plain,
serious country-people: Very different from the wild, unbroken
herd, to whom I preached at Horncastle in the evening.
Tues. 19.--I preached at Louth about noon, and at Grimsby
in the evening. At ten, on Wednesday, 20, I preached at
Wimberton. None of the hearers was more attentive than
an old acquaintance of my father's, Mr. George Stovin,
formerly a Justice of the peace near Epworth, now as teach
able as a little child, and determined to know nothing save
Christ crucified. About two I preached in an open place at
Scotter, and in the evening at Owston. One of my audience
here was Mr. Pinder, a contemporary of mine at Oxford.
But any that observed so feeble, decrepit an old man, totter
ing over the grave, would imagine there was a difference of
forty, rather than two, years between us!
On Friday and Saturday I made a little excursion into
Yorkshire. Sunday, 24. I preached at eight at Gringley-in
the-Hill, to an huge congregation, among whom I could observe
but one person that was inattentive. Here I received an invi
tation from Mr. Harvey, to give him a sermon at Tinningley.
I came thither a little before the service began; and the church
was filled, but not crowded. Between three and four I. returned
24 REv. J. WEsley’s [July, 1774.
to Epworth. The congregation there was large last Sunday;
but it was nearly doubled now : And never had we, from the
beginning, a more solemn and affectionate parting.
Mon. 25.-I went on to Sheffield, and on Tuesday met the
select society. But it was reduced from sixty to twenty; and
but half of these retained all that they once received What
a grievous error, to think those that are saved from sin cannot
lose what they have gained It is a miracle if they do not;
seeing all earth and hell are so enraged against them: While,
meantime, so very few, even of the children of God, skilfully
endeavour to strengthen their hands.
Wed. 27.--About one we reached Leek, in Staffordshire.
I could not innagine who the Quaker should be that had sent
me word he expected me to dinner; and was agreeably sur
prised to find that it was my old friend, Joshua Strongman,
of Mount-Mellick, in Ireland, whom I had not seen for many
years. I found he was the same man still; of the same open,
friendly, amiable temper: And every thing about him was
(not costly or fine, but) surprisingly neat and elegant. It
began to rain soon after we came in ; but the rain stayed
while I was preaching; and it seemed the whole town, rich and
poor, were gathered together, and listened while I explained,
“God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him
in spirit and in truth.” I preached at Burslem in the evening;
and on Thursday, 28, in the afternoon, came to Shrewsbury.
Sat. 30.-I went on to Madeley; and in the evening
preached under a sycamore-tree, in Madeley-Wood, to a
large congregation, good part of them colliers, who drank in
every word. Surely never were places more alike, than
Madeley-Wood, Gateshead-Fell, and Kingswood.
Sun. 31.--The church could not contain the congregation,
either morning or afternoon; but in the evening I preached
to a still larger congregation at Broseley; and equally attentive.
I now learned the particulars of a remarkable story, which I
had heard imperfectly before:--Some time since, one of the
colliers here, coming home at night, dropped into a coal-pit,
twenty-four yards deep. He called aloud for help, but none
heard all that night, and all the following day. The second
night, being weak and faint, he fell asleep, and dreamed that his
wife, who had been some time dead, came to him, and greatly
comforted him. In the morning, a gentleman going a hunting,
Aug. 1774.] JOURNAL. 25
an hare started up just before the hounds, ran straight to the
mouth of the pit, and was gone; no man could tell how. The
hunters searched all round the pit, till they heard a voice from
the bottom. They quickly procured proper help, and drew up
the man unhurt.
Mon. AUGUST 1.--I preached at Bewdley, in an open place
at the head of the town; and in the evening at Worcester,
which still continues one of the liveliest places in England.
Here I talked with some who believe God has lately delivered
them from the root of sin. Their account was simple, clear,
and scriptural; so that I saw no reason to doubt of their
testimony.-
Tues. 2.-I preached at ten in the Town-Hall, at Evesham,
and rode on to Broadmarston. Thursday, 4. I crossed over
to Tewkesbury, and preached at noon in a meadow near the
town, under a tall oak. I went thence to Cheltenham. As it
was the high season for drinking the waters, the town was
full of Gentry: So I preached near the market-place in the
evening, to the largest congregation that was ever seen there.
Some of the footmen at first made a little disturbance; but I
turned to them, and they stood reproved.
Sat. 6.--I walked from Newport to Berkeley-Castle. It is
a beautiful, though very ancient, building; and every part
of it kept in good repair, except the lumber-room and the
chapel; the latter of which, having been of no use for many
years, is now dirty enough. I particularly admired the fine
situation, and the garden on the top of the house. In one
corner of the castle is the room where poor Richard II. was
murdered. His effigy is still preserved, said to be taken
before his death. If he was like this, he had an open, manly
countenance, though with a cast of melancholy. In the
afternoon we went on to Bristol.
The Conference, begun and ended in love, fully employed
me on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday; and we observed
Friday, 12, as a day of fasting and prayer for the success of
the Gospel.
Mon. 15.-I set out for Wales, but did not reach Cardiff
till near eight o'clock. As the congregation was waiting in
the Town-Hall, I went thither without delay; and many, I
believe, did not regret the time they had waited there.
Tues. 16.--I preached, about noon, in the great hall at
26 Rev. J. Wesley’s [Aug. 1774.
Llandaff, on, “It is appointed unto men once to die.” Strange
doctrine, and not very welcome to the inhabitants of palaces !
Wed. 17.--At eleven I preached in the Town-Hall, at Cow
bridge: The neatest place of the kind I have ever seen. Not
only the floor, the walls, the ceiling, are kept exactly clean,
but every pane of glass in the windows.
Hence I hasted on to Swansea, and at seven preached in the
Castle to a large congregation. The next morning I went on
to Llanelly; but what a change was there! Sir Thomas Stepney,
the father of the poor, was dead: Cut down in the strength of
his years' So the family was broke up, and Wilfred Colley, his
butler, the father of the society, obliged to remove. Soon after,
John Deer, who was next in usefulness to him, was taken into
Abraham's bosom. But just then Col. St. Leger, in the neigh
bourhood, sent to Galway for Lieutenant Cook to come and
put his house into repair, and manage his estate. So another
is brought, just in time to supply the place of Wilfred Colley.
I preached at five near sister Deer's door, to a good company
of plain country-people; and then rode over to the old ruinous
house, which Mr. Cook is making all haste to repair. It is
not unlike old Mr. Gwynne's house at Garth, having a few
large handsome rooms. It is also situated much like that; only
not quite so low: For it has the command of a well-cultivated
vale, and of the fruitful side of the opposite mountain.
Fri. 19.--We rode on to Larn-Ferry; and seeing a person
just riding over the ford, we followed him with ease, the water
scarce reaching above our horses' knees. Between two and
three we came to Pembroke.
Sun. 21.--At nine I began the service at St. Daniel’s, and
concluded a little before twelve. It was a good time. The
power of the Lord was unusually present, both to wound and
to heal. Many were constrained to cry, while others were
filled with speechless awe and silent love.
After dinner I went over to Haverfordwest, but could not
preach abroad because of the rain. Both here and at Pem
broke, I found the people in general to be in a cold, dead,
languid state. And no wonder, since there had been for
several months a total neglect of discipline. I did all I could
to awaken them once more, and left them full of good resolu
tions. Tuesday, 23. I went to the New Inn, near Llandilo;
and on Wednesday, 24, to Brecknock.
Sept. 1774.] J() URNAL. 27
In the evening I preached in the Town-Hall to most of the
Gentry in the town. They behaved well, though I used great
plainness of speech in describing the narrow way.
Thur. 25.--At eleven I preached within the walls of the
old church at the Hay. Here and everywhere I heard the
same account of the proceedings at . The Jumpers (all
who were there informed me) were first in the court, and after
wards in the house. Some of them leaped up many times, men
and women, several feet from the ground: They clapped their
hands with the utmost violence; they shook their heads ; they
distorted all their features; they threw their arms and legs to
and fro, in all variety of postures; they sung, roared, shouted,
screamed with all their might, to the no small terror of those
that were near them. One gentlewoman told me, she had not
been herself since, and did not know when she should. Mean
time the person of the house was delighted above measure, and
said, “Now the power of God is come indeed.”
Sat. 27.--Being detained some hours at the Old Passage,
I preached to a small congregation ; and in the evening
returned to Bristol.
Mon. 29.-I set out for Cornwall, and preached at Collump
ton in the evening. I spoke strong words to the honest, sleepy
congregation : Perhaps some may awake out of sleep. Tues
day, 30. I preached to a far more elegant congregation at
Launceston; but what is that unless they are alive to God?
Wed. 31.-The rain, with violent wind, attended us all the
way to Bodmin. A little company are at length united here.
At their request I preached in the Town-Hall, (the most
dreary one I ever saw,) to a mixed congregation of rich and
poor. All behaved well: And who knows but some good may
be done even at poor Bodmin 2
In the evening I preached at Redruth. Thursday, SEPTEM
BER 1, after preaching at St. John’s about noon, I went on to
Penzance. When the people here were as roaring lions, we had
all the ground to ourselves; now they are become lambs, Mr.
S b and his friends step in, and take true pains to make a
rent in the society. But hitherto, blessed be God, they stand
firm in one mind and in one judgment Only a few, whom
we had expelled, they have gleaned up : If they can do them
good, I shall rejoice. In the evening I took my stand at the
end of the town, and preached the whole Gospel to a listen
28 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Sept. 1774.
ing multitude. I then earnestly exhorted the society to
follow after peace and holiness.
Fri. 2.-I preached in the market-place at St. Ives to
almost the whole town. I could not but admire the number
of serious children, as well-behaved as the eldest of the con
gregation. This was a happy meeting: So was that of the
society too, when all their hearts were as melting wax.
Sat. 3.--We had the Quarterly Meeting at Redruth. This
is frequently a dull, heavy meeting; but it was so lively a one
to-day, that we hardly knew how to part. About six I preached
at Treworgey, and applied closely to the Methodists, “What do
ye more than others?” One cried out, “Damnable doctrine !”
True; it condemns all those who hear and do not obey it.
Sun. 4.--The rain drove us into the House at St. Agnes.
At one it was fair; so I preached in the street at Redruth.
But the glorious congregation was assembled at five, in the
amphitheatre at Gwennap. They were judged to cover four
score yards, and yet those farthest off could hear.
To-day I received the following note:--
“THE sermon you preached last Thursday evening was, by
the grace of God, of great good to my soul. And when you
prayed so earnestly for backsliders, (of whom I am one,) an
arrow dipped in blood reached my heart. Ever since I have
been resolved, never to rest till I find again the rest that
remains for the people of God.
“I am, dear Sir,-
“A vile backslider from the pure love of Jesus,
and from the society at Gwennap,”
Mon. 5.--I preached at Cubert; Tuesday, 6, at Port
Isaac. Wednesday, 7. Having preached at Camelford and
Launceston, I did not think of preaching at Tavistock; but
finding a congregation waiting, I began without delay. I had
scarce half finished my discourse in the Square at Plymouth
Dock, when the rain began. At first I did not regard it: But
as it grew heavier and heavier, I thought it best to shorten
my sermon.-
It seems, after a long interval of deadness, God is again
visiting this poor people. The society is nearly doubled
within this year, and is still continually increasing. And
many are athirst for full salvation; particularly the young
Oct. 1774.] JOURNAL. 29
men. Friday, 9. I set out early from the Dock; and the
next afternoon reached Bristol.
Fri. 16.--We had a solemn watch-night at Kingswood. It
seemed, every one felt that God was there; so that hardly
any went away till the whole service was concluded.
In the following week I visited many of the country socie
ties. At Frome I learned the remarkable case of sister
Whitaker. Last Sunday she met her class as usual; and after
saying, “I know that my Redeemer liveth,” dropped down,
and in a few minutes, without any struggle or pain, expired.
Tues. 27.--I preached at Freshford and Bradford; Wed
nesday, 28, at Bath, where many of the people seemed much
moved; chiefly those who had long imagined they were
“built on a rock,” and now found they had been “building
upon the sand.”
Thur. 29.--I preached at Pill, on the “worm” that “ dieth
not, and the fire?” that “is not quenched :” If haply some of
these drowsy ones might awake, and escape from everlasting
burnings.
Mon. October 3, and on Tuesday and Wednesday, I
examined the society.
Thur. 6.--I met those of our society who had votes in the
ensuing election, and advised them, l. To vote, without fee or
reward, for the person they judged most worthy: 2. To speak
no evil of the person they voted against: And, 3. To take care
their spirits were not sharpened against those that voted on
the other side.
Sun. 9.--The evening being fair and mild, I preached in
the new Square. It was a fruitful season:
Soft fell the word as flew the air;
even “as the rain into a fleece of wool.” Many such seasons
we have had lately: Almost every day one and another has
found peace, particularly young persons and children. Shall
not they be a blessing in the rising generation ? In the even
ing we had a solemn opportunity of renewing our covenant
with God; a means of grace which I wonder has been so
seldom used either in Romish or Protestant churches |
Mon. 10.-I preached at Salisbury; and on Tuesday, 11,
set out for the Isle of Purbeck. When we came to Corfe
Castle, the evening being quite calm and mild, I preached in
a meadow near the town, to a deeply attentive congregation,
30 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Oct. 1774.
gathered from all parts of the island. I afterwards met the
society, artless and teachable, and full of good desires. But
few of them yet have got any farther, than to “see men as
trees walking.”-
Wed. 12.--I preached to a large congregation at five, wh
seemed quite athirst for instruction. Afterwards we took a
walk over the remains of the Castle, so bravely defended in
the last century, against all the power of the Parliament
forces, by the widow of the Lord Chief Justice Banks. It is
one of the noblest ruins I ever saw : The walls are of an im
mense thickness, defying even the assaults of time, and were
formerly surrounded by a deep ditch. The house, which
stands in the middle, on the very top of the rock, has been a
magnificent structure. Some time since the proprietor fitted
up some rooms on the south-west side of this, and laid out a
little garden, commanding a large prospect, pleasant beyond
description. For a while he was greatly delighted with it: But
the eye was not satisfied with seeing. It grew familiar; it
pleased no more; and is now run all to ruin. No wonder: What
can delight always, but the knowledge and love of God?
About noon I preached at Langton, three or four miles
from Corfe-Castle, to a large and deeply serious congregation.
Here is likewise a little society; but I did not find any among
them who knew in whom they had believed. In the evening I
preached in a meadow, near Swanage, to a still larger congre
gation. And here at length I found three or four persons, and
all of one family, who seemed really to enjoy the faith of the
Gospel. Few others of the society (between thirty and forty
in number) appeared to be convinced of sin. I fear the
Preachers have been more studious to please than to awaken,
or there would have been a deeper work.
The Isle (or properly Peninsula) of Purbeck is mine or ten
miles broad, and perhaps twenty long, running nearly from
north-east to south-west. Two mountains run almost the whole
length, with valleys both between them and on each side, but
poorly cultivated. The people in general are plain, artless,
good-natured, and well-behaved. If the labourers here are
zealous and active, they will surely have a plentiful harvest.
Thur. 13.--I set out early, and reached Gosport, (seventy
two miles,) not long after six. Finding a boat ready, I crossed,
and went straight to the Room. It was full enough ; so I
began without delay, and enforced our Lord’s words, (one of my
Oct. 1774.] JOURNAL. 31
favourite subjects,) “My yoke is easy, and my burden is light.”
Friday, 14. I visited as many as I could, sick or well, and
endeavoured to settle those that had been shaken by those
bigots who are continually waiting to receive the weak “ unto
doubtful disputations.” I had intended, after preaching in the
evening, to meet the society alone; but the eagerness of the
people to stay, induced me to suffer a great part of them. Yet
it was little to their satisfaction; for when I warned our brethren
not to have “itching ears,” they ran away in all haste.
Sat. 15.-Setting out (as usual) at two, I reached London
early in the evening. Monday, 17. I set out for Oxfordshire,
and preached at Wallingford in the evening. Tuesday, 18.
About nine I preached at Newnham; at noon, in the garden at
Oxford; and in the evening, at Finstock, (a village near Carn
bury-house, built by the great Earl of Clarendon, but not inha
bited by any of his descendants') to a plain, artless people.
Wednesday, 19. I rode to Witney, and found more life than I
expected, both in the congregation and the society. Thursday,
20. I preached at Wattleton, at the front of Mr. Stonehill’s
house. The whole congregation was seriously attentive. In
the evening I preached at High-Wycomb, to many more than
the Room would contain; and I believe not in vain.
Fri. 21.--I preached in Chesham, and on Saturday returned
to London.
Mon. 24.--I set out for Northamptonshire, and received a
particular account of one that eminently adorned the Gospel:--
“1. SUsANNAH SPENCER was born at Whittlebury, in the
year 1742. When she was young she contracted a very general
acquaintance, and was exceedingly beloved by them, having an
agreeable person, a good understanding, and much sweetness of
temper; and, being modest and decent in her whole behaviour,
she seemed, like others, to think she had religion enough.
“2. In 1760, Thomas Grover came down, and preached
several times at Whittlebury and at Towcester. She went to
hear him, but with a fixed resolution, “not to be catched,’ as
she called it; but her resolution was vain. In a sermon she
heard at Towcester, she was cut to the heart. Her convictions
grew deeper and deeper from that time, for about a year. She
was then hearing him preach, but felt her heart as hard as the
nether millstone. Yet at the love-feast which followed, it was
suddenly broke in pieces, and she was all melted into tears, by
32 REv. J. W.ESLEY’s [Oct. 1774.
those words applied to her inmost soul, in an inexpressible
manner,
My God is reconciled,
His pardoning voice I hear !
He owns me for his child;
I can no longer fear.
“3. The day following, being exercised with strong tempta
tion, she gave up her confidence; but the next night wrestling
with God in prayer, she received it again with double evidence:
And though afterwards she frequently felt some doubts, yet it
never continued long; but she had, in general, a clear, abiding
sense of the pardoning love of God.
“4. From that time she walked steadily and closely with
God, and was a pattern to all around her. She was particularly
exact in reproving sin, and lost no opportunity of doing it. In
her whole conversation she was remarkably lively, and yet
gentle towards all men. Her natural temper indeed was
passionate, but the grace of God left scarce any traces of it.
“5. From the very time of her justification, she clearly
saw the necessity of being wholly sanctified; and found an
unspeakable hunger and thirst after the full image of God;
and in the year 1772, God answered her desire. The second
change was wrought in as strong and distinct a manner as the
first had been. Yet she was apt to fall into unprofitable reason
ings; by which her evidence was often so clouded, that she
could not affirm she was saved from sin, though neither could
she deny it. But her whole life bore witness to the work
which God had wrought in her heart. She was as a mother
in Israel, helping those that were weak, and tenderly con
cerned for all; while she sunk deeper into the love of God,
and found more and more of the mind that was in Christ.
“6. In the summer, 1773, she took cold by lying in a damp
bed. This threw her into a violent fever, which not only brought
her very low, but fixed a deep cough upon her lungs, which no
medicine could remove. It quite wore her down; especially
when there was added the loss of both her sisters and her mother,
who were all taken away within a little time of each other. She
had likewise a continual cross from her father, and was at the
same time tried by the falsehood of those friends in whom she
confided, and whom she tenderly loved. The following year,
1774, she had a presage of her death; in consequence of which,
Oct. 1774.] JOURNAL. 33
she was continually exhorting the young women, Betty Pad
bury in particular, to fill up her place when God should
remove her from them.
“7. In the beginning of winter I* understood, that, weak
as she was, she had not proper nourishment; being unable to
procure it for herself, and having no one to procure it for her;
so I took that charge upon myself; I worked with her in the
day, (for she would work as long as she could move her fin
gers,) lay with her every night, and took care that she should
want nothing which was convenient for her.
“8. For some time her disorder seemed at a stand, growing
neither better nor worse; but in spring, after she had taken a
quantity of the bark, she was abundantly worse. Her cough
continually increased, and her strength swiftly decayed; so
that before Easter, she was obliged to take to her bed: And
having now a near prospect of death, she mightily rejoiced in
the thought, earnestly longing for the welcome moment; only
still with that reserve, ‘Not as I will, but as thou wilt.”
“9. Mr. Harper (the Preacher) took several opportunities
of asking her many questions. She answered them all with
readiness and plainness, to his entire satisfaction. She told
him abundance of temptations which she underwent from
time to time; but still witnessed, that the blood of Christ had
cleansed her from all sin. She often said to us,
The race we all are running now !
And if I first attain,
Ye too your willing heads shall bow;
Ye shall the conquest gain
“10. Commonly, when I came into her room, I was not
able to speak for a time. She would then say, ‘Why do not
you speak? Why do not you encourage me? I shall love you
better when we meet in heaven, for the help you give me now.”
“11. In the last week or two, she was not able to speak
many words at a time; but as she could, with her feeble,
dying voice, she exhorted us to go forward. Yet one day,
some of her former companions coming in, her spirit seemed
to revive; and she spoke to them, to our great surprise, for
near an hour together. They seemed deeply affected; and it
was some time before the impression wore off.
* Elizabeth Padbury.
84 REv. J. wesln, o's [Nov. 1774.
“12. Her father now frequently came, sat by her bedside,
and expressed tender affection; weeping much, and saying he
should now be quite alone, and have no one left to whom he
could speak. She spoke to him without reserve. He received
every word, and has never forgotten it since.
“13. A few days before she died, after we had been praying
with her, we observed she was in tears, and asked her the reason.
She said, ‘I feel my heart knit to you, in a manner I cannot
express; and I was thinking, if we love one another now, how
will our love be enlarged when we meet in heaven' And the
thought was too much for me to bear; it quite overcame me.”
“J4. On Friday she seemed to be just upon the wing: We
thought she was going almost every moment. So she con
tinued till Tuesday. We were unwilling to part with her,
but seeing the pain she was in, could not wish it should con
tinue; and so gave her up to God. I sat up with her that
night, and the next day, June 7, she fell asleep.”
Monday, 31, and the following days, I visited the societies
near London. Friday, NoveMBER 4. In the afternoon John
Downes (who had preached with us many years) was saying,
“I feel such a love to the people at West-Street, that I could
be content to die with them. I do not find myself very well;
but I must be with them this evening.” He went thither, and
began preaching, on, “Come unto me, ye that are weary and
heavy-laden.” After speaking ten or twelve minutes, he sunk
down, and spake no more, till his spirit returned to God.
I suppose he was by mature full as great a genius as Sir
Isaac Newton. I will mention but two or three instances of
it:--When he was at school, learning Algebra, he came one
day to his master, and said, “Sir, I can prove this proposi
tion a better way than it is proved in the book.” His master
thought it could not be; but upon trial, acknowledged it to
be so. Some time after, his father sent him to Newcastle
with a clock, which was to be mended. He observed the
clockmaker's tools, and the manner how he took it in pieces,
and put it together again; and when he came home, first
made himself tools, and then made a clock, which went as
true as any in the town. I suppose such strength of genius
as this, has scarce been known in Europe before.
Another proof of it was this:--Thirty years ago, while I was
shaving, he was whittling the top of a stick: I asked, “What
Nov. 1774.] JOURNAL. 35
are you doing?” He answered, “I am taking your face,
which I intend to engrave on a copper-plate.” Accordingly,
without any instruction, he first made himself tools, and then
engraved the plate. The second picture which he engraved,
was that which was prefixed to the “Notes upon the New
Testament.” Such another instance, I suppose, not all
England, or perhaps Europe, can produce.
For several months past, he had far deeper communion with
God, than ever he had had in his life; and for some days he
had been frequently saying, “I am so happy, that I scarce
know how to live. I enjoy such fellowship with God, as I
thought could not be had on this side heaven.” And having
now finished his course of fifty-two years, after a long conflict
with pain, sickness, and poverty, he gloriously rested from his
labours, and entered into the joy of his Lord.
Tues. 8.--I baptized two young women; one of whom
found a deep sense of the presence of God in his ordinance;
the other received a full assurance of his pardoning love, and
was filled with joy unspeakable.
Sun. 13.−After a day of much labour, at my usual time,
(half-hour past nine,) I lay down to rest. I told my servants,
“I must rise at three, the Norwich coach setting out at four.”
Hearing one of them knock, though sooner than I expected,
I rose and dressed myself; but afterwards, looking at my
watch, I found it was but half-hour past ten. While I was con
sidering what to do, I heard a confused sound of many voices
below; and looking out at the window towards the yard, I saw
it was as light as day. Meantime, many large flakes of fire
were continually flying about the house; all the upper part of
which was built of wood, which was near as dry as tinder. A
large deal-yard, at a very small distance from us, was all in a
light fire; from which the north-west wind drove the flames
directly upon the Foundery; and there was no probability of
help, for no water could be found. Perceiving I could be of
no use, I took my Diary and my papers, and retired to a friend’s
house. I had no fear; committing the matter into God’s
hands, and knowing He would do whatever was best. Imme
diately the wind turned about from north-west to south-east;
and our pump supplied the engines with abundance of water;
so that in a little more than two hours, all the danger was over.
Mon. 14.--In the evening I preached at Bury; Tuesday,
36 REV. J. WESLEY’s [Nov. 1774.
15, about one at Loddon, to a people the most athirst for God
of any I found in the county. In the afternoon I went on to
Yarmouth. When was “confusion worse confounded?” Divi
sion after division has torn the once-flourishing society all in
pieces. In order to heal the breach, in some measure, I enforced
those deep words, “Though I have all knowledge and all faith,
so as to remove mountains, and have not love, it profiteth me
nothing.” One of our former Leaders being asked what he
thought of this, frankly answered, “It is damnable doctrine.”
Thur. 17.--About noon I preached at Lowestoft, where the
little flock are remarkably lively. The evening congregation
at Yarmouth was all attention; and truly the power of God
was present to heal them.
In the evening I returned to Norwich. Never was a poor
society so neglected as this has been for the year past. The
morning preaching was at an end; the bands suffered all to
fall in pieces; and no care at all taken of the classes, so that
whether they met or not, it was all one; going to church and
sacrament were forgotten; and the people rambled hither and
thither as they listed.
On Friday evening I met the society, and told them plain,
I was resolved to have a regular society or none. I then read
the Rules, and desired every one to consider whether he was
willing to walk by these Rules or no. Those in particular, of
meeting their class every week, unless hindered by distance or
sickness, (the only reasons for not meeting which I could
allow,) and being constant at church and sacrament. I desired
those who were so minded to meet me the next night, and the
rest to stay away. The next night we had far the greater
part; on whom I strongly enforced the same thing. Sunday,
20. I spoke to every Leader, concerning every one under his
care; and put out every person whom they could not recom
mend to me. After this was done, out of two hundred and
four members, one hundred and seventy-four remained. And
these points shall be carried, if only fifty remain in the society.
Mon. 21.--I examined the society at Loddon. There are
near fifty of them, simple and teachable, all of one mind, and
many of them able to rejoice in God their Saviour. Tuesday,
22. I took a solemn and affectionate leave of the society at Nor
wich. About twelve we took coach. About eight, Wednesday,
23, Mr. Dancer met me with a chaise, and carried me to Ely.
Nov. 1774.] JOURNAL. 37
O what want of common sense ! Water covered the high
road for a mile and a half. I asked, “How must foot-people
come to the town o’” “Why, they must wade through !”
About two I preached in a house well filled with plain,
loving people. I then took a walk to the cathedral, one of the
most beautiful I have seen. The western tower is exceeding
grand; and the nave of an amazing height. Hence we went
through a fruitful and pleasant country, though surrounded
with fens, to Sutton. Here many people had lately been stirred
up : They had prepared a large barn. At six o'clock it was
well filled; and it seemed as if God sent a message to every soul.
The next morning and evening, though the weather was uncom
monly severe, the congregation increased rather than diminished.
Fri. 25.--I left them in much hope that they will continue
in this earnest, simple love.
I set out between eight and nine in a one-horse chaise, the
wind being high and cold enough. Much snow lay on the
ground, and much fell as we crept along over the fen-banks.
Honest Mr. Tubbs would needs walk and lead the horse,
through water and mud up to his mid-leg, smiling and say
ing, “We fen-men do not mind a little dirt.” When we had
gone about four miles, the road would not admit of a chaise.
So I borrowed a horse and rode forward; but not far, for
all the grounds were under water. Here therefore I pro
cured a boat full twice as large as a kneading-trough. I was
at one end, and a boy at the other, who paddled me safe to
Erith. There Miss L waited for me with another chaise,
which brought me to St. Ives.
No Methodist, I was told, had preached in this town : So
I thought it high time to begin; and about one I preached
to a very well-dressed and yet well-behaved congregation.
Thence my new friend (how long will she be such P) carried
me to Godmanchester, near Huntingdon. A large barn was
ready, in which Mr. Berridge and Mr. Venn used to preach.
And though the weather was still severe, it was well filled
with deeply attentive people. Saturday, 26. I set out early,
and in the evening reached London.
Mon. 28.--I paid a visit to the amiable family at Shoreham,
and found the work of God there still increasing. Wednes
day, 30. I crossed over to Ryegate, and had a larger con
gregation than ever before.
38 REv. T. wesley’s [Jan. 1775.
Thur. DECEMBER 1.--I preached at Dorking, and was
much pleased with the congregation, who seemed to “taste
the good word.” Friday, 2. I returned to London.
Mon. 5.-I preached at Canterbury; and Tuesday, 6, at
Dover. As I was setting out thence on Wednesday morning,
a wagon, jostling us, disabled our chaise. Our coachman
went back to procure another, saying, he would soon overtake
us. He did so after we had walked nine or ten miles, and
brought us safe to Canterbury, where I spent a day or two
with much satisfaction; and on Saturday, returned home.
Mon. 12.-I opened the new House at Sevenoaks. Tuesday,
13. About noon I preached at Newbounds; and in the evening
at Sevenoaks again, where our labour has not been in vain.
Wed. 14.--I rode to Chatham, and found that James Wood,
one of our Local Preachers, who, being in a deep consumption,
had been advised to spend some time in France, had come back
thither two or three days before me. The day after he came
he slept in peace: And two days after, his body was interred,
all our brethren singing him to the grave, and praising God
on his behalf. I preached his funeral sermon to a crowded
audience, on the text which he had chosen: “Let me die the
death of the righteous; and let my last end be like his l’”
Monday, 19, and the following days, I read with the
Preachers what I judged most useful: And we endeavoured
to “provoke one another to love and to good works.”
Thur. 22.--I walked, with one that belongs to the family,
through the Queen’s house. The apartments are nothing so
rich as those in Blenheim House, but full as elegant. Nor is
anything in Blenheim itself more grand than the staircase and
the saloon. But I was quite disappointed in the Cartoons;
they are but the shadow of what they were: The colours are
so entirely faded, that you can hardly distinguish what they
Were Once.
Sun. 25.--I buried the body of Esther Grimaldi, who died
in the full triumph of faith. “A mother in Israel” hast
thou been ; and thy “works shall praise thee in the gates 1’’
During the twelve festival days, we had the Lord's Supper
daily; a little emblem of the Primitive Church. May we be
followers of them in all things, as they were of Christ!
Sun. JANUARY 1, 1775.-We had a larger congregation at
the renewal of the Covenant than we have had for many years:
w
Feb. 1775.] JOURNAL. 39
And I do not know that ever we had a greater blessing.
Afterwards many desired to return thanks, either for a sense
of pardon, for full salvation, or for a fresh manifestation of
his grace, healing all their backslidings.
Tues. 10.--I set out for Bedfordshire, and in the evening
preached at Luton. Wednesday, 11. I crept on through a
miserable road to Bedford, but was well rewarded by the
behaviour of the congregation.
Thur. 12.--We crossed over the country to Godmanchester.
The whole town seemed to be moved. The people flocked
together from all parts, so that the barn would in nowise con
tain them. I found great liberty of speech among them, and
could not doubt but God would confirm the word of his
messenger.
Fri. 13.--Even at poor, dead Hertford was such a concourse
of people, that the Room would not near contain them. And
most of them were deeply attentive while I explained these
awful words, “I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God.”
Sun. 29.--Finding many were much dejected by the threat
ening posture of public affairs, I strongly enforced our Lord's
words, “Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?” And of
a truth God spoke in his word. Many were ashamed of
their unbelieving fears; and many enabled to “be careful
for nothing,” but simply to “make ’’ all their “requests
known unto God with thanksgiving.”
Sun. FEBRUARY 5.--I saw a glorious instance of the power
of faith. Thomas Wokins, a man of a sorrowful spirit, used
always to hang down his head like a bulrush. But a few days
since, as he was dying without hope, God broke in upon his
soul; and from that time he has been triumphing over pain
and death, and rejoicing with joy full of glory.
Wed. 8.--I had a particular conversation with Mr. Ferguson
on some difficulties in philosophy: He seemed throughly satis
fied himself; but he did not satisfy me. I still think both Mr.
Kennedy and Mr. Jones have fully proved their several points.
Wed. 22.--I had an opportunity of seeing Mr. Gordon's
curious garden at Mile-end, the like of which I suppose is
hardly to be found in England, if in Europe. One thing in
particular I learned here, the real nature of the tea-tree. I was
informed, 1. That the Green and the Bohea are of quite differ
ent species. 2. That the Bohea is much tenderer than the Green.
40 REv. J. Wesley’s [March, 1775.
3. That the Green is an evergreen; and bears, not only in the
open air, but in the frost, perfectly well. 4. That the herb of
Paraguay likewise bears the frost, and is a species of tea. 5.
And I observed that they are all species of bay or laurel. The
leaf of Green tea is both of the colour, shape, and size of a
bay leaf: That of Bohea is smaller, softer, and of a darker
colour. So is the herb of Paraguay, which is of a dirty
green ; and no larger than our common red sage.
MARch 1-03eing Ash-Wednesday.) I took a solemn leave
of our friends at London; and on Thursday, 2, met our
brethren at Reading. A few were awakened, and perhaps
converted here, by the ministry of Mr. Talbot. But as he
did not take any account of them, or join them together, we
found no trace of them remaining. A large room was pre
sently filled, and all the spaces adjoining. And I have
hardly ever seen a people who seemed more eager to hear.
Fri. 3.-The mild weather changed into cold and bluster
ing, with heavy showers of rain; notwithstanding which, we
had a very large congregation at Ramsbury Park. Saturday,
4. At noon I preached to a still larger congregation, in the
new House at Seend: In the afternoon I went on to Bristol;
whence, on Monday, 13, I set out for Ireland.
Tues. 14.--At noon I preached in Tewkesbury, now the
liveliest place in the Circuit. Many here have been lately
convinced of sin, and many converted to God. Some have
been made partakers of the great salvation, and their love
and zeal have stirred up others. So that the flame now
spreads wider and wider. O let none be able to quench it !
In the evening I preached at Worcester. Here also the flame
is gradually increasing. While I was here, there was a very
extraordinary trial at the assizes. A boy being beaten by his
master, ran away; and wandering about till he was half starved,
was then allowed to lie in the hay-loft of an inn. In the night he
stole into the room where two gentlemen lay; (probably not very
sober;) and, without waking them, picked the money out of both
their pockets; though their breeches lay under their head. In
the morning, having confessed the fact, he was committed to
gaol. He made no defence: So one of the Counsellors rose up,
and said, “My Lord, as there is none to plead for this poor boy,
I will do it myself.” He did so, and then added, “My Lord,
it may be this bad boy may make a good man. And I humbly
April, 1775.] JOURNAL. 41
conceive, it might be best to send him back to his master. I
will give him a guinea towards his expenses.” “And I will
give him another,” said the Judge. Which he did, with a
mild and serious reproof. So he was sent back full of good
resolutions.
Fri. 17.--In the evening, though it was cold, I was obliged
to preach abroad at Newcastle. One buffoon laboured much
to interrupt. But as he was bawling, with his mouth wide
open, some arch boys gave him such a mouthful of dirt as
quite satisfied him.
On Saturday and Sunday I preached at Congleton and
Macclesfield ; Monday, 20, at Stockport and Manchester.
Tuesday, 21. I preached at Knutsford; but the house would
by no means contain the congregation. The street too was
filled; and even those which could not hear were silent.
This is uncommon; especially in a town little accustomed
to this strange way of preaching: Those who cannot hear
themselves usually taking care to hinder others from hearing.
In the evening I opened the new House at Northwich, which
was sufficiently crowded both this night and the next. After
preaching at many places in the way, on Saturday, 25, I
came to Liverpool. The congregations here, both morning
and evening, were so large, and so deeply attentive, that I
could not be sorry for the contrary winds, which detained us
till Thursday, the 30th, when we went on board the Hawk.
We were scarce out of the river, when the wind turned
against us, and blew harder and harder. A rolling sea made
my companions sick enough. But so fine a ship I never
sailed in before. She never shipped one sea, and went more
steady than I thought was possible. On Friday morning it
blew hard; but the next day we had a fair, small wind. So
about six, on Sunday, APRIL 2, we landed at Dunleary; and
between nine and ten reached Whitefriar-Street.
On Monday and Tuesday I examined the society, in which,
two years ago, there were three hundred and seventy-six per
sons. And I found three hundred and seventy-six still, not
one more or less. But I found more peace and love among
them, than I had done for many years.
Thur. 6.--I visited that venerable man, Dr. Rutty, just tot
tering over the grave; but still clear in his understanding, full
of faith and love, and patiently waiting till his change should
come. Afterwards I waited on Lady Moira; and was surprised
42 REv. J. WESLEY’s [April, 1775.
to observe, though not a more grand, yet a far more elegant
room, than any I ever saw in England. It was an octagon,
about twenty feet square, and fifteen or sixteen high; having
one window, (the sides of it inlaid throughout with mother
of-pearl,) reaching from the top of the room to the bottom.
The ceiling, sides, and furniture of the room, were equally
elegant. And must this too pass away like a dream
Sun. 9.--The good old Dean of St. Patrick's desired me to
come within the rails, and assist him at the Lord's Supper.
This also was a means of removing much prejudice from those
who were zealous for the Church. Monday, 10. Leaving just
four hundred members in the society, I began my tour through
the kingdom. I preached at Edinderry in the evening; on
Tuesday and Wednesday, at Tyrrel’s Pass. Thursday, 13.
Sending my chaise straight to Athlone, I rode to Mullingar;
and thence, through miserable roads, to Longford. A large
number of people attended the preaching, both in the evening
and at eight in the morning, being Good-Friday. But I found
very little of the spirit which was here two years ago. About
eleven I preached at Loughan, and in the evening at Athlone.
On Easter-Day I would willingly have preached abroad; but
the weather would not permit. Monday, 17. I preached at
Aghrim ; and Tuesday-noon, at Eyre-Court. Afterwards I
was desired to walk down to Lord Eyre's. I was a little
surprised at the inscription over the door, “Welcome to the
house of liberty.” Does it mean liberty from sin?
It is a noble old house. The staircase is grand; and so
are two or three of the rooms. In the rest of the house, as
well as in the ruinous outhouses, gardens, and fish-ponds, the
owner seemed to say to every beholder, “All this profiteth
me nothing !”
I preached in the evening at Birr, with a good hope that
God would at length revive his work.
Wed. 19.--About noon I preached in the market-place at
Clara. It was the market-day; but that did not lessen the
congregation. The poor people eagerly flocked from the
market; and there was no buying or selling till I concluded.
After preaching at Coolylough, Tullamore, and Portarling
ton, (still “unstable as water,”) Saturday, 22, I found, at
Mount-Mellick, a little company, who appeared to be better
established. I spent Saturday and Sunday comfortably
among them, building them up in our most holy faith.
May, 1775.] JOUlt NAL. 45
Mon. 24.--The Minister of Maryborough inviting me to
preach in his church, I began reading Prayers about nine;
and afterwards preached to a numerous congregation. For
the present, every one seemed affected. Will not some bring
forth fruit with patience 2
In the evening I was scandalized both at the smallness and
deadness of the congregation at Kilkenny. The next even
ing it was a little mended, but not much. Of all the dull
congregations I have seen, this was the dullest.
Wed. 26.-I went on to Waterford, where the rain drove
us into the preaching-house,_the most foul, horrid, miserable
hole which I have seen since I left England. The next day
I got into the open air, and a large congregation attended. I
had designed to set out early in the morning; but doubting
if I should ever have such another opportunity, (the Major
of the Highland Regiment standing behind me, with several
of his Officers, many of the soldiers before me, and the sen
tinel at the entrance of the court,) I gave notice of preaching
at ten the next morning, and at four in the afternoon. I did
so to a well-behaved congregation, and in the evening went
on to Carrick.
Sat. 29.--Early in the evening we reached Rathcormuck,
but found the inn filled with Officers. It is true they were but
five, and there were seven beds; but they had bespoke all, and
would not spare us one ! So we were obliged to go some miles
further. We drove this day just threescore (English) miles.
Sun. 30.--I came to Cork time enough to preach. The
congregation was not small, and it was not large: But it was
very large in George-Street at four in the afternoon, as well
as deeply attentive. At six I preached in the Room, and
could not but observe such singing as I have seldom heard in
England. The women, in particular, sang so exactly that it
seemed but one voice. Monday, MAY 1. I examined the
society, and found it in such order, so increased both in grace
and number, as I apprehend it had not been before, since the
time of William Pennington.
Wed. 3.-I rode to Bandon, and preached in the main
street to a very numerous congregation. All behaved well,
except three or four pretty gentlemen, who seemed to know
just nothing of the matter.
I found this society likewise much established in grace, and
44 REv. J. Wesley’s [May, 1775.
greatly increased in number. So has God blessed the labours
of two plain men, who put forth all their strength in his work.
Sat. 6.--I returned to Cork, and in the evening preached
at Blackpool. It rained a little all the time I was preaching,
but the people regarded it not.
Sun. 7.--I was desired to preach on 1 John v. 7: “There
are three that bear record in heaven.” The congregation
was exceeding large; but abundantly larger in the evening.
I never saw the House so crowded before. It was much the
same the next evening. Tuesday, 9. I preached my farewell
sermon in the afternoon; and going to Mallow in the evening,
went on the next day to Limerick.
Sat. 13.--I preached to a large congregation of Papists
and Protestants, in the yard of the Custom-House, where
many could hear within as well as without.
Mon. 15.-Having waited for a chaise to go to Balligarane
as long as I could, I at length set out on horseback. But T.
Wride loitering behind, I might as well have spared my pains;
for though I came to the town at the time appointed, I could find
neither man, woman, nor child, to direct me to the preaching
house. After gaping and staring some time, I judged it best
to go to Newmarket, where I was to preach in the evening.
I began about six. The congregation was deeply serious;
great part of whom came again at five in the morning. And
were it only for this opportunity, I did not regret my labour.
Wed. 17.--I examined the society at Limerick, containing
now an hundred and one persons, seven less than they were
two years ago. I a little wonder at this; considering the
scandal of the cross is well nigh ceased here, through the wise
and steady behaviour of our brethren. But they want zeal;
they are not fervent in spirit: Therefore, they cannot increase.
Thur. 18.--In the evening I preached at Galway, in the
county Court-House, to a more civil and attentive congregation
than I ever saw there before.
Fri. 19.--About one I preached at Ballinrobe, in the
assembly-room, and was agreeably surprised, both at the un
usual number and seriousness of the hearers. I had purposed
to go on to Castlebar, but now thought it might be worth while
to stay a little longer. In the afternoon I took a view of the
Castle. Colonel Cuffe’s father took great delight in this place,
laid out beautiful gardens, and procured trees of all sorts, from
May, 1775.] JOURNAL. 45
all parts of the kingdom. Part of these placed on the slope of
the hill, (at the side of which runs the river,) form a lovely
wilderness, at the end whereof are regular rows of elms. But
the Colonel has no pleasure therein. So all is now swiftly
running to ruin.
I preached again at six, to a large congregation, and the
next evening at Castlebar. Monday, 22. I spent two or three
hours in one of the loveliest places, and with one of the love
liest families, in the kingdom. Almost all I heard put me in
mind of those beautiful lines of Prior,
The nymph did like the scene appear,
Serenely pleasant, calmly fair;
Soft fell her words, as flew the air.
How willingly could I have accepted the invitation to spend a
few days here ! Nay, at present I must be about my Father's
business: But I trust to meet them in a still lovelier place.
Between Limerick and Castlebar, I read over the famous
controversy between Drs. Clarke and Leibnitz. And is this
he whom the King of Prussia extols, as something more than
human? So poor a writer have I seldom read, either as to
sentiments or temper. In sentiment, he is a thorough
fatalist; maintaining roundly, and without reserve, that God
has absolutely decreed from all eternity whatever is done in
time; and that no creature can do more good, or less evil,
than God has peremptorily decreed. And his temper is just
suitable to his sentiments. He is haughty, self-conceited,
sour, impatient of contradiction, and holds his opponent in
utter contempt; though, in truth, he is but a child in his hands.
Wed. 24.--I reached Sligo. My old friend, Andrew Maben,
did not own me. However, a few did ; to whom, with a tole
rable congregation, I preached at six in the barracks. The
next evening I preached in the market-house, to a far larger
congregation. We seem, by all the late bustle and confusion,
to have lost nothing. Here is a little company as much alive
to God, and more united together than ever.
Fri. 26.--I preached at Manorhamilton, and the next even
ing near the bridge at Swadlingbar. Knowing a large part
of the congregation to have “tasted of the powers of the
world to come,” I spoke on the glory that shall be revealed;
and all seemed deeply affected, except a few Gentry, so called,
who seemed to understand nothing of the matter.
46 REv. J. wesley’s June, 1775.
Sun. 28.-I preached at ten to a far larger congregation,
on, “God now commandeth all men everywhere to repent;”
and after church, to a still greater multitude, on, “It is
appointed unto men once to die.”
Mon. 29.-Being desired to give them a sermon at Bel
turbet, about eight I preached in the Town-Hall. It was not
in vain. God opened, as it were, the windows of heaven, and
showered his blessing down.
I called afterwards at Ballyhays, and spent an hour with that
venerable old man, Colonel Newburgh. It does me good to
converse with those who have just finished their course, and
are quivering over the great gulf. Thence I went on to Clones,
--that is its proper name; not Clownish, as it is vulgarly
called. It is a pleasant town, finely situated on a rising ground,
in the midst of fruitful hills; and has a larger market-place
than any I have seen in England, not excepting Norwich or
Yarmouth. At six I preached in the old Danish fort, to the
largest congregation I have had in the kingdom. The next
morning I preached to a great part of them again; and again
the word sunk “as the rain into the tender herb.”
I preached at Roasky at noon, and Sydare in the evening.
Wednesday, 31. I hobbled on, through a miserable road, as
far as wheels could pass, and then rode on to Lisleen. After
dinner, we hastened to Dargbridge, and found a large congre
gation waiting. They appeared, one and all, to be deeply
serious. Indeed there is a wonderful reformation spreading
throughout this whole country, for several miles round. Out
ward wickedness is gone; and many, young and old, witness
that the kingdom of God is within them.
Thur. JUNE 1.-I reached Londonderry: But I had so deep
an hoarseness, that my voice was almost gone. However,
pounded garlick, applied to the soles of my feet, took it away
before the morning. JUNE 4, (Being Whitsunday.) The Bishop
preached a judicious, useful sermon, on the blasphemy of the
Holy Ghost. He is both a good writer, and a good speaker;
and he celebrated the Lord's Supper with admirable solemnity.
Hence I hastened to the New-Buildings. The sun was
intensely hot, as it was on Monday and Tuesday. Six such
days together, I was informed, have not been in Ireland for
several years.
Mon. 5.-I examined the society, growing in grace, and
June, 1775.] JOURNAL. 47
increased in number, from fifty-two to near seventy. Tues
day, 6. The Bishop invited me to dinner; and told me, “I
know you do not love our hours, and will therefore order
dinner to be on table between two and three o’clock.” We
had a piece of boiled beef, and an English pudding. This
is true good breeding. The Bishop is entirely easy and
unaffected in his whole behaviour, exemplary in all parts of
public worship, and plenteous in good works.
Wed. 7.--About noon I preached a few miles from Stra
bane; in the evening at Lisleen; and the next at Castle
Caulfield. In the night the rain came plentifully through
the thatch, into my lodging-room. But I found no present
inconvenience, and was not careful for the morrow.
Fri. 9.--I preached at eight to a numerous congregation,
in the market-place at Dungannon; at eleven, and at five in
the afternoon, in the main street at Charlemount. I lodged
at a gentleman's, who showed me a flower, which he called
a Gummy Cystus. It blooms in the morning, with a large,
beautiful, snow-white flower; but every flower dies in the
evening. New flowers blow and fall every day. Does not
this short-lived flower answer to that short-lived animal, the
Ephemeron-fly?
Sat. 10.-I preached at nine to a large congregation, at
Killeman. The rain began as soon as I concluded; but it
ceased time enough for me to preach in Mr. M'Gough's
avenue, at Armagh.
JUNE 11.--(Being Trinity-Sunday.) I preached at nine on,
“So God created man in his own image;” and in the even
ing, to an huge congregation. But I could not find the way
to their hearts.
Mon. 12.--Having taken a solemn leave of Armagh, about
eleven I preached at Blackwater; and in the evening at
Clanmain, where many seemed cut to the heart. O, why
should they heal the wound slightly
Tues. 13.−I was not very well in the morning, but sup
posed it would soon go off. In the afternoon, the weather being
extremely hot, I lay down on the grass, in Mr. Lark’s orchard,
at Cock-Hill. This I had been accustomed to do for forty
years, and never remember to have been hurt by it: Only I
never before lay on my face; in which posture I fell asleep. I
waked a little, and but a little, out of order, and preached with
48 REv. J. wesley’s [June, 1775.
ease to a multitude of people. Afterwards I was a good deal
worse. However, the next day I went on a few miles to the
Grange. The table was placed here in such a manner, that,
all the time I was preaching, a strong and sharp wind blew full
on the left side of my head; and it was not without a good deal
of difficulty that I made an end of my sermon. I now found a
deep obstruction in my breast: My pulse was exceeding weak
and low; I shivered with cold, though the air was sultry hot;
only now and then burning for a few minutes. I went early to
bed, drank a draught of treacle-and-water, and applied treacle
to the soles of my feet. I lay till seven on Thursday, 15, and
then felt considerably better. But I found near the same
obstruction in my breast : I had a low, weak pulse; I burned
and shivered by turns; and, if I ventured to cough, it jarred
my head exceedingly. In going on to Derry-Anvil, I won
dered what was the matter, that I could not attend to what I
was reading; no, not for three minutes together; but my
thoughts were perpetually shifting. Yet, all the time I was
preaching in the evening, (although I stood in the open air,
with the wind whistling round my head,) my mind was as com
posed as ever. Friday, 16. In going to Lurgan, I was again
surprised that I could not fix my attention on what I read:
Yet, while I was preaching in the evening, on the Parade, I
found my mind perfectly composed; although it rained a
great part of the time, which did not well agree with my head.
Saturday, 17. I was persuaded to send for Dr. Laws, a sensi
ble and skilful Physician. He told me I was in a high fever,
and advised me to lay by. But I told him that could not be
done; as I had appointed to preach at several places, and
must preach as long as I could speak. He then prescribed a
cooling draught, with a grain or two of camphor, as my
nerves were universally agitated. This I took with me to
Tanderagee: But when I came there, I was not able to
preach; my understanding being quite confused, and my
strength entirely gone. Yet I breathed freely, and had not
the least thirst, nor any pain, from head to foot.
I was now at a full stand, whether to aim at Lisburn, or to
push forward for Dublin. But my friends doubting whether I
could bear so long a journey, I went straight to Derry-Aghy;
a gentleman's seat, on the side of a hill, three miles beyond
Lisburn. Here nature sunk, and I took my bed. But I could
July, 1775.] JOURNAL. 49
no more turn myself therein, than a new-born child. My
memory failed, as well as my strength, and well nigh my
understanding. Only those words ran in my mind, when I
saw Miss Gayer on one side of the bed, looking at her
mother on the other:--*
She sat, like Patience on a monument,
Smiling at grief.
But still I had no thirst, no difficulty of breathing, no pain,
from head to foot.
I can give no account of what followed for two or three days,
being more dead than alive. Only I remember it was difficult
for me to speak, my throat being exceeding dry. But Joseph
Bradford tells me I said on Wednesday, “It will be deter
mined before this time to-morrow;” that my tongue was
much swollen, and as black as a coal; that I was convulsed
all over; and that for some time my heart did not beat
perceptibly, neither was any pulse discernible.
In the night of Thursday, 22, Joseph Bradford came to me
with a cup, and said, “Sir, you must take this.” I thought,
“I will, if I can swallow, to please him; for it will do me
neither harm nor good.” Immediately it set me a vomiting;
my heart began to beat and my pulse to play again; and from
that hour the extremity of the symptoms abated. The next
day I sat up several hours, and walked four or five times across
the room. On Saturday, I sat up all day, and walked across
the room many times, without any weariness; on Sunday, I
came down stairs, and sat several hours in the parlour; on
Monday, I walked out before the house; on Tuesday, I took
an airing in the chaise; and on Wednesday, trusting in God,
to the astonishment of my friends, I set out for Dublin.
I did not determine how far to go that day, not knowing
how my strength would hold. But finding myself no worse
at Bannbridge, I ventured to Newry; and, after travelling
thirty (English) miles, I was stronger than in the morning.
Thur. 29.--I went on to the Man-of-war, forty (Irish)
miles from the Globe, at Newry. Friday, 30. We met Mr.
Simpson, (with several other friends,) coming to meet us at
Drogheda; who took us to his country seat at James-Town,
about two miles from Dublin.
Tues. JULY 4.--Finding myself a little stronger, I preached
for the first time; and I believe most could hear. I preached
50 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Aug. 1775.
on Thursday again; and my voice was clear, though weak.
So on Sunday I ventured to preach twice, and found no
weariness at all. Monday, 10. I began my regular course of
preaching, morning and evening.
While I was in Dublin, I read two extraordinary books, but
of very different kinds;--Mr. Sheridan’s “Lectures on Elocu
tion,” and “The Life of Count Marsay;” and was disappointed
in both. There is more matter in the penny tract, “On Ac
tion and Utterance,” abundantly more, than in all Mr. S.'s
book; though he seems to think himself a mere Phenix.
Count Marsay was doubtless a pious man, but a thorough
enthusiast; guided, in all his steps, not by the written word,
but by his own imagination; which he calls the Spirit.
Sun. 23.--I again assisted at St. Patrick’s in delivering the
elements of the Lord's Supper. In the evening I embarked in
the Nonpareil; and, about ten on Tuesday morning, landed at
Park-Gate. Wednesday, 26. I found one relic of my illness,
--my hand shook, so that I could hardly write my name. But
after I had been well electrified, by driving four or five hours,
over very rugged, broken pavement, my complaint was removed,
and my hand was as steady as when I was ten years old.
About noon I preached in the shell of the House at Wigan.
In the middle of the sermon, came an impetuous storm
of thunder, lightning, and rain, which added much to the
solemnity of the occasion. Thursday, 27. I went on to
Miss Bosanquet's, and prepared for the Conference. How
willingly could I spend the residue of a busy life in this
delightful retirement l But,
Man was not born in shades to lie
Up and be doing ! Labour on, till
Death sings a requiem to the parting soul.
Sun. 30.--I preached under Birstal-Hill, and the greater
part of the huge audience could hear while I enforced, “When
the breath of man goeth forth, he turneth again to his dust,
and then all his thoughts perish.” I preached at Leeds in
the evening, and found strength in proportion to my work.
Tues. AUGUST 1,-Our Conference began. Having received
several letters, intimating that many of the Preachers were
utterly unqualified for the work, having neither grace nor gifts
sufficient for it, I determined to examine this weighty charge
Aug. 1775.] JOURNAL. 51
with all possible exactness. In order to this, I read those
letters to all the Conference; and begged that every one
would freely propose and enforce whatever objection he had to
any one. The objections proposed were considered at large:
In two or three difficult cases, Committees were appointed for
that purpose. In consequence of this, we were all fully con
vinced that the charge advanced was without foundation;
that God has really sent those labourers into his vineyard, and
has qualified them for the work: And we were all more
closely united together than we have been for many years.
Fri. 4.--I preached at Bradford, where the people are all
alive. Many here have lately experienced the great salvation,
and their zeal has been a general blessing. Indeed, this I
always observe, wherever a work of sanctification breaks out,
the whole work of God prospers. Some are convinced of sin,
others justified, and all stirred up to greater earnestness for
salvation.
I breakfasted at Great-Horton. Two or three of the neigh
bours then came in to prayer. Quickly the house was filled;
and, a few minutes after, all the space before the door. I saw
the opportunity, and without delay got upon the horse-block, in
the yard. Abundance of children crowded round me, and round
them a numerous congregation. So I gave them an earnest
exhortation, and then commended them to the grace of God.
Sun. 6.--At one I proclaimed the glorious Gospel to the
usual congregation at Birstal, and in the evening at Leeds.
Then, judging it needful to pay a short visit to our brethren
at London, I took the stage-coach, with five of my friends,
about eight o'clock. Before nine, a gentleman in a single
horse chaise struck his wheel against one of ours. Instantly
the weight of the men at top overset the coach; otherwise,
ten times the shock would not have moved it; but neither
the coachman, mor the men at top, nor any within, were
hurt at all. On Tuesday, in the afternoon, we were met at Hat
field by many of our friends, who conducted us safe to London.
Having spent a few days in town, on Monday, 14, I set
out for Wales; and Wednesday, 16, reached the Hay.
Being desired to give them one sermon at Trevecka, I turned
aside thither, and on Thursday, 17, preached at eleven to a
numerous congregation. What a lovely place | And what a
lovely family still consisting of about sixscore persons. So
52 REv. J. wesley’s [Aug. 1775.
the good “man is turned again to his dust!” But his
thoughts do not perish.
U preached at Brecon the next day, and on Saturday, 19,
went on to Carmarthen. How is this wilderness become a
fruitful field ! A year ago I knew no one in this town who
had any desire of fleeing from the wrath to come; and now
we have eighty persons in society. It is true not many of
them are awakened; but they have broke off their outward
sins. Now let us try, whether it be not possible to prevent
the greater part of these from drawing back.
About this time I received a remarkable letter, from one
of our Preachers at West-Bromwich, near Wednesbury. The
substance of it is as follows:--
“August 16, 1775.
“ABouT three weeks since, a person came and told me,
Martha Wood, of Darlaston, was dying, and had a great
desire to see me. When I came into the house, which, with
all that was in it, was scarce worth five pounds, I found, in
that mean cottage, such a jewel as my eyes never beheld
before. Her eyes even sparkled with joy, and her heart
danced like David before the ark: In truth, she seemed to
be in the suburbs of heaven, upon the confines of glory.
“She took hold of my hand, and said, ‘I am glad to see
you; you are my father in Christ. It is twenty years since I
heard you first. It was on that text, Now ye have sorrow :
But I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and
your joy no man taketh from you. In that hour God broke
into my soul, delivered me from all sorrow, and filled my
heart with joy; and, blessed be his name, I never have lost it,
from that hour to this.”
“For the first ten years, she was sometimes in transports
of joy, carried almost beyond herself; but for these last ten
years, she has had the constant witness that God has taken
up all her heart. ‘He has filled me,’ said she, “with perfect
love; and perfect love casts out fear. Jesus is mine; God,
and heaven, and etermal glory, are mine. My heart, my very
soul is lost, yea, swallowed up, in God.”
“There were many of our friends standing by her bedside.
She exhorted them all, as one in perfect health, to keep close
to God. “You can never,’ said she, “do too much for God:
When you have done all you can, you have done too little.
Aug. 1775.] JOURNAL. 53
O, who that knows Him, can love, or do, or suffer too much
for Him I?
“Some worldly people came in. She called them by name,
and exhorted them to repent and turn to Jesus. She
looked at me, and desired I would preach her funeral sermon
on those words, “I have fought the good fight; I have
finished my course; I have kept the faith. Henceforth there
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge, will give me at that day.”
“She talked to all round about her in as scriptural and
rational a manner as if she had been in her full strength, (only
now and then catching a little for breath,) with all the smiles of
heaven in her countenance. Indeed several times she seemed
to be quite gone; but in a little while the taper lit up again,
and she began to preach, with divine power, to all that stood
near her. She knew every person, and if any came into the
room whom she knew to be careless about religion, she directly
called them by name, and charged them to seek the Lord while
he might be found. At last she cried out, ‘I see the heavens
opened; I see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with numbers of
the glorified throng, coming nearer and nearer. They are just
come !’ At that word, her soul took its flight, to mingle with
the heavenly host. We looked after her, as Elisha after
Elijah; and I trust some of us have catched her mantle.”
After making a little tour through Carmarthenshire, Pem
brokeshire, and Glamorganshire, on Monday, 28, setting out
early from Cardiff, I reached Newport about eight; and soon
after preached to a large and serious congregation. I believe
it is five-and-thirty years since I preached here before, to a
people who were then wild as bears. How amazingly is
the scene changed 1 O what is too hard for God!
We came to the New-Passage just as the boat was putting
off; so I went in immediately. Some friends were waiting for
me on the other side, who received me as one risen from the
dead. The Room at Bristol was throughly filled in the even
ing; and we rejoiced in Him that heareth the prayer. Having
finished my present business here, on Wednesday, 30, I set
out at three, and at twelve preached in the great Presbyterian
meeting-house in Taunton; and indeed with such freedom and
openness of spirit as I did not expect in so brilliant a congre
gation. In the evening I preached in the dreary preaching
54 REv. J. wesley’s [Sept. 1775.
house at Tiverton. The people appeared as dull as the place.
Yet who knows but that many of them may again hear the
voice that raiseth the dead?
On Thursday and Friday I preached at Launceston, Bod
min, and Truro; on Saturday, in the main street at Redruth,
to the usual congregation, on, “Happy are the people that
have the Lord for their God.”
Sun. SEPTEMBER 3.--I preached at eight in St. Agnes
Church-town, on, “Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shalt be saved.” A young woman followed me into the house,
weeping bitterly, and crying out, “I must have Christ; I will
have Christ. Give me Christ, or else I die!” Two or three of
us claimed the promise in her behalf. She was soon filled with
joy unspeakable, and burst out, “O let me die! Let me go to
Him now ! How can I bear to stay here any longer?” We
left her full of that peace which passeth all understanding.
About eleven I preached at Redruth; at five in the evening in
the amphitheatre at Gwennap. I think this is the most mag
nificent spectacle which is to be seen on this side heaven. And
no music is to be heard upon earth comparable to the sound
of many thousand voices, when they are all harmoniously
joined together, singing praises to God and the Lamb.
Mon. 4.--I went on to our friends at St. Ives, many of
whom are now grey-headed, as well as me. In the evening
I preached in the little meadow above the town, where I was
some years ago. The people in general here (excepting the
rich) seem almost persuaded to be Christians. Perhaps the
prayer of their old Pastor, Mr. Tregoss, is answered even to
the fourth generation.
Wed. 6.--About nine I preached at Cararack, and crossed
over to Cubert, where I found my good old friend Mr. Hos
kins, quivering over the grave. He ventured, however, to
the Church-town, and I believe found a blessing under the
preaching.
Thur. 7.--About eleven I preached in the Town-Hall at
Liskeard, to a large and serious congregation. At Saltash
some of our brethren met me with a boat, which brought me
safe to Plymouth-Dock.
Understanding some of our friends here were deeply preju
diced against the King and all his Ministers, I spoke freely
and largely on the subject at the meeting of the society. God
Oct. 1775.] JOURNAL. 55
applied it to their hearts; and I think there is not one of
them now who does not see things in another light.
Fri. 8.-I preached at noon on the quay in Plymouth; in
the evening, in the new Square at the Dock. Many here
seemed to feel the application of those words, “O thou of
little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?”
Sat. 9.--I preached in Exeter at four in the afternoon, and
about seven at Collumpton. Sunday, 10. I came to Welling
ton in an acceptable time; for Mr. Jesse was ill in bed; so
that if I had not come, there could have been no Service,
either morning or evening. The church was moderately filled
in the morning: In the afternoon it was crowded in every
corner; and a solemn awe fell on the whole congregation, while
I pressed that important question, “What is a man profited,
if he should gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?”
Mon. 11.--I preached again in the new meeting at Taun
ton, to such a congregation as I suppose was never there
before. I was desired to preach on the same text as at Wel
lington; and it was attended with the same blessing. On
Tuesday I went on to Bristol. On Thursday and Friday, I
preached at Keynsham, Bradford, and Bath; on Tuesday,
19, at Frome; and on Wednesday, at Pensford. Thence I
went on to the lovely family at Publow, a pattern for all the
boarding-schools in England. Every thing fit for a Christian
to learn is taught here; but nothing unworthy the dignity
of the Christian character. I gave a short exhortation to the
children, which they received with eagerness. Many of them
have the fear of God: Some of them enjoy his love.
Thur. 21.--At the earnest request of the prisoner, who was
to die next day, (and was very willing so to do; for, after
deep agony of soul, he had found peace with God,) I preached
at Newgate to him, and a crowded audience; many of whom
felt that God was there. Sunday, 24. I preached abroad in
the afternoon to a lovely congregation. Friday, 29, we
observed as a fast-day, meeting at five, nine, one, and in the
evening: And many found a strong hope, that God will yet
be entreated for a guilty land.
Sun. October 1.--The weather favoured us again: I
preached once more abroad, and concluded at the point
where I begun, in opening and strongly applying those words,
“Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.”
56 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Oct. 1775.
Mon. 2.--I set out early; and, preaching at the Devizes,
Sarum, Winchester, and Portsmouth in my way, on Friday,
6, in the afternoon I returned to London.
Sun. 8.--I preached in Moorfields to a larger congregation
than usual. Strange that their curiosity should not be
satisfied yet, after hearing the same thing near forty years 1
Mon. 9.-I preached at Chesham, on the strait gate; and
all that heard seemed affected for the present. Tuesday, 10,
I went on to Wycomb, and was much refreshed by the earnest
attention of the whole congregation. Wednesday, 11. I took
a walk to Lord Shelburne's house. What variety, in so
small a compass! A beautiful grove, divided by a serpentine
walk, conceals the house from the town. At the side of this
runs a transparent river, with a smooth walk on each bank.
Beyond this is a level lawn; then the house with sloping gardens
behind it. Above these is a lofty hill; near the top of which is
a lovely wood, having a grassy walk running along, just within
the skirts of it. But can the owner rejoice in this paradise?
No; for his wife is snatched away in the bloom of youth !
Thur. 12.--About noon I preached at Watlington; and in
the evening at Oxford, in a large House formerly belonging to
the Presbyterians. But it was not large enough: Many could
not get in. Such a congregation I have not seen at Oxford,
either for seriousness, or number, for more than twenty years.
I borrowed here a volume of Lord Chesterfield’s Letters,
which I had heard very strongly commended. And what did I
learn?--That he was a man of much wit, middling sense, and
some learning; but as absolutely void of virtue, as any Jew,
Turk, or Heathen that ever lived. I say, not only void of all
religion, (for I doubt whether he believed there is a God, though
he tags most of his letters with the name, for better sound sake,)
but even of virtue, of justice, and mercy, which he never once
recommended to his son. And truth he sets at open defiance:
He continually guards him against it. Half his letters inculcate
deep dissimulation, as the most necessary of all accomplish
ments. Add to this, his studiously instilling into the young
man all the principles of debauchery, when himself was
between seventy and eighty years old. Add his cruel censure
of that amiable man, the Archbishop of Cambray, (quantum
dispar illi,)* as a mere time-serving hypocrite And this is
* What a vast disparity between the two 1-EDIT.
Oct. 1775.] JOURNAL. 57
the favourite of the age ' Whereas, if justice and truth take
place, if he is rewarded according to his desert, his name will
stink to all generations.
Sat. 14.--I preached at Finstock. How many days should
I spend here if I was to do my own will ! Not so : I am
“ to do the will of Him that sent me, and to finish his
work.” Therefore this is the first day I ever spent here:
And perhaps it may be the last.
Sun. 15.--About eight I preached at Witney. I admired
the seriousness and decency of the congregation at church.
I preached at five, on, “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy
self;” a word that is sufficient to convince all mankind of sin.
In meeting the select society, I was much comforted to find
so few of them losing ground, and the far greater part still
witnessing that “the blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin.”
Mon. 16.--We had a lovely congregation at five. About
mine I preached at Oxford; in Newnham at one; and in the
evening at Wallingford. Tuesday, 17. I went over the Downs
to Kingston-lodge ; a lone house; yet we had a numerous as
well as serious congregation. In the evening I preached in the
large Room at the poorhouse in Ramsbury. The people flocked
together from every side; and God gave us his blessing.
Wed. 18.--I returned to Newbury. Some of our friends
informed me, there were many red-hot patriots here; so I
took occasion to give a strong exhortation, to “fear God, and
honour the King.”
Thur. 19.--I preached at Reading; and on Friday, re
turned to London.
Mon. 23.--I set out for Northamptonshire, and in the even
ing preached at Towcester. Tuesday, 24. About noon we took
horse for Whittlebury in a fine day: But before we had rode
half an hour, a violent storm came, which soon drenched us from
head to foot. But we dried ourselves in the afternoon, and were
no worse. Wednesday, 25. I preached at Northampton, and on
Thursday noon at Brixworth; a little town about six miles
north of Northampton. I believe very few of the townsmen
were absent, and all of them seemed to be much affected. So
did many at Northampton in the evening, while I described him
“that builds his house upon a rock.” Friday, 27. I preached
about noon at Hanslop. In my way I looked over a volume
of Dr. Swift's Letters. I was amazed Was ever such trash
58 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Nov. 1775.
palmed upon the world, under the name of a great man? More
than half of what is contained in those sixteen volumes, would
be dear at twopence a volume; being all, and more than all, the
dull things which that witty man ever said. In the evening I
preached at Bedford, and the next evening came to London.
Sun. 29.--I visited one who was full of good resolutions,--
if he should recover. They might be sincere, or they might
not : But how far will these avail before God? He was not
put to the trial, how long they would last: Quickly after,
God required his soul of him.
Monday, and the following days, I visited the little societies
in the neighbourhood of London. Saturday, November 11.
I made some additions to the “Calm Address to our Ame
rican Colonies.” Need any one ask from what motive this was
wrote? Let him look round: England is in a flame ! A flame
of malice and rage against the King, and almost all that are in
authority under him. I labour to put out this flame. Ought
not every true patriot to do the same? If hireling writers on
either side judge of me by themselves, that I cannot help.
Sun. 12.--I was desired to preach, in Bethnal-Green church,
a charity sermon for the widows and orphans of the soldiers
that were killed in America. Knowing how many would seek
occasion of offence, I wrote down my sermon. I dined with
Sir John Hawkins and three other gentlemen that are in com
mission for the peace; and was agreeably surprised at a very
serious conversation, kept up during the whole time I stayed.
Wed. 15.--I preached at Dorking; the next evening at
Ryegate-place, I think, to the largest congregation that I
have seen there. But still I fear we are ploughing upon the
sand : We see no fruit of our labours. Friday, 17. I crossed
over to Shoreham, the most fruitful place in all the Circuit,
and preached in the evening to a people just ripe for all the
Gospel promises, on, “Now, why tarriest thou? Arise, and wash
away thy sins.” The next morning I returned to London.
Mon. 20.-I went on to Robertsbridge, and preached to a
deeply attentive congregation. Tuesday, 21. Several were with
us in the evening at Rye, who had never heard a Methodist
sermon before. However, considering the bulk of the congre
gation, more than an handful of Gentry, I earnestly besought
them not to “receive the grace of God in vain.” The next
evening I applied part of the thirteenth chapter of the First
Nov. 1775.] JOURNAL. 59
Epistle to the Corinthians. Many were shaken when they
weighed themselves in that balance. May we not be found
wanting in that day !
Thur. 23.--About noon I preached at Cranbrook, and in
the evening at Staplehurst. Friday, 24. I preached at Seven
oaks, and on Saturday returned to London.
In some of my late little journeys I read Mr. Wraxal’s
Travels, in which are several ingenious remarks. But the
account he gives of Count Struenzee is a mistake, from
beginning to end. Struenzee was as bad a man as most
that ever lived. He caused many horrid abuses; but never
reformed, or desired to reform, one. And there was abundant
proof of the crime for which he suffered: Therefore, the
behaviour of King George was exactly right.
Mon. 27.--I set out for Norwich. That evening I preached at
Colchester; Tuesday, at Norwich; Wednesday, at Yarmouth.
About this time I published the following letter in Lloyd's
“Evening Post:”--
“I HAve been seriously asked, “From what motive did
you publish your Calm. Address to the American Colonies 2’
“I seriously answer, Not to get money. Had that been my
motive, I should have swelled it into a shilling pamphlet, and
have entered it at Stationers' Hall.
“Not to get preferment for myself, or my brother's chil
dren. I am a little too old to gape after it for myself: And
if my brother or I sought it for them, we have only to show
them to the world.
“Not to please any man living, high or low. I know man
kind too well. I know they that love you for political service,
love you less than their dinner; and they that hate you, hate
you worse than the devil.-
“Least of all did I write with a view to inflame any : Just
the contrary. I contributed my mite toward putting out the
flame which rages all over the land. This I have more oppor
tunity of observing than any other man in England. I see
with pain to what an height this already rises, in every part
of the nation. And I see many pouring oil into the flame,
by crying out, ‘How unjustly, how cruelly, the King is using
the poor Americans; who are only contending for their
liberty, and for their legal privileges l’
6U, REv. J. Wesley’s [Nov. 1775.
“Now there is no possible way to put out this flame, or
hinder its rising higher and higher, but to show that the Ame
ricans are not used either cruelly or unjustly; that they are not
injured at all, seeing they are not contending for liberty; (this
they had, even in its full extent, both civil and religious;)
neither for any legal privileges; for they enjoy all that their
charters grant. But what they contend for, is, the illegal pri
vilege of being exempt from parliamentary taxation. A pri
vilege this, which no charter ever gave to any American colony
yet; which no charter can give, unless it be confirmed both by
King, Lords, and Commons; which, in fact, our colonies never
had ; which they never claimed till the present reign : And pro
bably they would not have claimed it now, had they not been
incited thereto by letters from England. One of these was
read, according to the desire of the writer, not only at the con
tinental Congress, but likewise in many congregations through
out the Combined Provinces. It advised them to seize upon all
the King's Officers; and exhorted them, ‘Stand valiantly, only
for six months, and in that time there will be such commotions
in England that you may have your own terms.’
“This being the real state of the question, without any
colouring or aggravation, what impartial man can either
blame the King, or commend the Americans?
“With this view, to quench the fire, by laying the blame
where it was due, the ‘Calm Address’ was written. I am, Sir,
“Your humble servant,
“JoHN WESLEY.
“As to reviewers, newswriters, London Magazines, and all
that kind of gentlemen, they behave just as I expected they
would. And let them lick up Mr. Toplady’s spittle still:
A champion worthy of their cause.”
Thur. 30.-I preached at Lowestoft at noon, and Yarmouth
in the evening. Here a gentleman, who came with me from
London, was taken ill (he informed me) of the bloody flux.
This being stopped, I thought his head was disordered; and
would fain have sent him back without delay, offering him
my chaise and my servant to attend him; though I could ill
spare either one or the other. But he could not in anywise
be prevailed on to accept of the proposal. I afterwards heard,
he had been insane before he left London. However, I could
now only make the best of it.
Dec. 1775.] JOURNAL. 6]
Fri. December 1.--After preaching at Loddon, I returned
to Norwich, and procured Mr. a lodging in a friend’s
house, where I knew he would want nothing. I now again
advised him to go straight to London in my chaise; but it
was lost labour.
Sat. 2.--I procured “the History of Norwich,” published but
a few years since. The author shows, that it was built about
the year 418. But it increased in succeeding ages, till it was
more than double to what it is now, having no less than sixty
churches. Its populousness may be indisputably proved, by
one single circumstance:-The first time it was visited with the
sweating-sickness, (which usually killed inten hours,)there died,
in about six months, upwards of fifty-seven thousand persons;
which is a considerably greater number than were in the whole
city a few years ago. He remarks concerning this unaccount
able kind of plague, 1. That it seized none but Englishmen;
none of the French, Flemings, or other foreigners then in the
kingdom, being at all affected: 2. That it seized upon English
men in other kingdoms, and upon none else: And, 3. That
the method at last taken was this,-The patient, if seized in
the day-time, was immediately to lie down in his clothes, and
to be covered up; if in the night-time, he was to keep in
bed; and if they remained four-and-twenty hours without
eating or drinking any thing, then they generally recovered.
In the evening a large mob gathered at the door of the
preaching-house, the captain of which struck many (chiefly
women) with a large, stick. Mr. Randal going out to see
what was the matter, he struck him with it in the face. But
he was soon secured, and carried before the Mayor; who,
knowing him to be a notorious offender, against whom one or
two warrants were then lying, sent him to gaol without delay.
Tues. 5.-We set out a little before day, and reached
Lynn in the afternoon. In the evening, the new House
would hardly contain one half of the congregation: And
those who could not get in were tolerably patient, considering
they could hear but a few words.-
Wed. 6.--About one, I heard a shrill voice in the street,
calling and desiring me to come to Mr. Going
directly, I found him ill in body, and in a violent agony of
mind. He fully believed he was at the point of death; nor
could any arguments convince him of the contrary. We
62 Rev. J. wesley’s [Dec. 1775.
cried to Him who has all power in heaven and earth, and
who keeps the keys of life and death. He soon started up in
bed, and said with a loud voice, “I shall not die, but live.”
In the day I visited many of those that remained with us,
and those that had left us since they had learned a new doc
trine. I did not dispute, but endeavoured to soften their
spirits, which had been sharpened to a high degree. In the
evening the chapel was quite too small: And yet even those
who could not get in were silent: A circumstance which I
have seldom observed in any other part of England.
Thur. 7.-Mr. was so thoroughly disordered, that
it was heavy work to get him forward. At every stage, “he
could not possibly go any farther; he must die there.” Never
theless we reached Bury in the afternoon. I preached at seven
to the largest congregation I ever saw there. We used to have
about a dozen at five in the morning. But on Friday, 8, I
suppose we had between forty and fifty. We set out between
six and seven, hoping to reach Burntwood in the evening. But
as we came thither some hours sooner than we expected, I
judged it most advisable to push on: And, the moon shining
bright, we easily reached London soon after six o'clock.
Sat. 9.--In answer to a very angry letter, lately published
in “the Gazetteer,” I published the following:--
“To THE REv. MR. CALEB Ev ANs.
“REv. SIR,
“You affirm, 1. That I once ‘doubted whether the
measures taken with respect to America could be defended
either on the foot of law, equity, or prudence.’ I did doubt
of these five years, may indeed five months, ago.
“You affirm, 2. That I declared,’ (last year,) ‘the Ameri
cans were an oppressed, injured people.’ I do not remember
that I did; but very possibly I might.
“You affirm, 3. That I then ‘strongly recommended an
argument for the exclusive right of the colonies to tax them
selves.’ I believe I did; but I am now of another mind.
“You affirm, 4. ‘You say in the Preface, I never saw that
book.” I did say so. The plain case was, I had so entirely
forgotten it, that even when I saw it again, Irecollected nothing
of it, till I had read several pages. If I had, I might have
observed that you borrowed more from Mr. P. than I did from
Dec. 1775.] JOURNAL. 63
Dr. Johnson. Though I know not whether I should have
observed it, as it does not affect the merits of the cause.
“You affirm, 5. “You say, But I really believe he was told
so;’ and add, “Supposing what I asserted was false, it is not
easy to conceive what reason you could have for believing I
was told so.’ My reason was, I believed you feared God, and
therefore would not tell a wilful untruth; so I made the best
excuse for you which I thought the nature of the thing would
admit of Had you not some reasons to believe this of me;
and therefore to say, (at least,) “I hope he forgot it?’
“‘But at this time I was perfectly unknown to you.” No, at
this time I knew you wrote that tract; but had I not, charity
would have induced me to hope this, even of an entire stranger.
“You now have my ‘feeble reply;’ and if you please to
advance any new argument, (personal reflections I let go,)
you may perhaps receive a farther reply from
“Your humble servant,
“John WESLEY.
“London, December 9.
“I did not see your letter till this morning.”
Mon. 11.-I began a little journey into Kent. In the even
ing I preached at Chatham, the next evening at Canterbury.
I know not that ever I saw such a congregation there before.
Tuesday, 12. I preached at Dover. As many as could,
squeezed into the House, and the rest went quietly away.
Thur. 14.--I returned to Canterbury, and had a long con
versation with that extraordinary man, Charles Perronet.
What a mystery of Providence Why is such a saint as
this buried alive by continual sickness? In the evening we
had a larger congregation than before. I never saw the
House thoroughly filled till now : And I am sure the people
had now a call from God, whether they will hear or whether
they will forbear.
Fri. 15.--In the evening I preached at Chatham, and on
Saturday returned to London. In the evening I preached a
kind of funeral sermon at Snowsfields, for that upright woman,
Jane Binknell. For many years she was a pattern of all holi
ness; and, for the latter part of her life, of patience. Yet as she
laboured under an incurable and painful disorder, which allowed
her little rest, day or night, the corruptible body pressed down
the soul, and frequently occasioned much heaviness. But,
64 REv. J. WESLEY’s Jourt NAL. [Jan. 1776.
before she went, the clouds dispersed, and she died in sweet
peace; but not in such triumphant joy as did Ann Davis, two
or three weeks before. She died of the same disorder; but
had withal, for some years, racking pains in her head day and
night, which in a while rendered her stone-blind. Add to this,
that she had a kind husband; who was continually reproach
ing her for living so long, and cursing her for not dying out
of the way. Yet in all this she did not “charge God
foolishly;” but meekly waited till her change should come.
To-day I read Dr. Beattie’s Poems; certainly one of the
best Poets of the age. He wants only the ease and simplicity
of Mr. Pope.--I know one, and only one, that has it.
Mon. 18.--I took another little journey, and in the evening
preached at Bedford. Tuesday, 19. I dragged on, through
miserable roads, to St. Neot's, and preached in a large room
to a numerous congregation. Understanding that almost all
the Methodists, by the advice of Mr. , had left the church,
I earnestly exhorted them to return to it. In the evening I
preached at Godmanchester.
Wed. 20.--I preached at Luton; the next evening, at
Hertford; and on Friday morning, returned to London.
This day we observed as a day of fasting and prayer, and
were much persuaded God will yet be entreated.
Thur. 21.--I revised a volume of Latin Poems, wrote by a
gentleman of Denmark. I was surprised. Most of the verses
are not unworthy of the Augustan age. Among the rest, there
is a translation of two of Mr. Pope’s Epistles, line for line.
And yet, in language, not only as pure as Virgil’s, but as
elegant too.
Tues. JANUARY 2, 1776.-Being pressed to pay a visit to
our brethren at Bristol, some of whom had been a little un
settled by the patriots, so called, I set out early; but the roads
were so heavy, that I could not get thither till night. I came
just time enough, not to see, but to bury, poor Mr. Hall, my
brother-in-law, who died on Wednesday morning; I trust, in
peace; for God had given him deep repentance. Such another
monument of divine mercy, considering how low he had fallen,
and from what height of holiness, I have not seen, no, not in
seventy years l I had designed to visit him in the morning;
but he did not stay for my coming. It is enough, if, after all
his wanderings, we meet again in Abraham's bosom.
JANUARY 1, 1776.--About eighteen hundred of us met
together in London, in order to renew our covenant with
God; and it was, as usual, a very solemn opportunity.
Tues. 2.-I set out for Bristol. Between London and
Bristol, I read over that elegant trifle, “The Correspondence
between Theodosius and Constantia.” I observed only one
sentiment which I could not receive, that “youth is the only
possible time for friendship; because every one has at first a
natural store of sincerity and benevolence; but as in process
of time men find every one to be false and self-interested,
they conform to them more and more, till, in riper years, they
have neither truth nor benevolence left.” Perhaps it may be
so with all that know not God; but they that do, escape “the
corruption that is in the world;” and increase both in sincerity
and in benevolence, as they grow in the knowledge of Christ.
Sat. 6.--I returned to London; and I returned just in
time; for on Sunday, 7, the severe frost set in, accompanied
with so deep a snow, as made even the high road impassable.
For some days before the frost broke up, it was observed, by
means of the thermometer, that the cold was several degrees
more intense than that in the year 1741. But God then
removed the cup from us, by a gentle, gradual thaw.
Sun. 14.--As I was going to West-Street chapel, one of
the chaise-springs suddenly snapped asunder ; but the horses
instantly stopping, I stepped out without the least incon
venience.
At all my vacant hours in this and the following week, I
endeavoured to finish the “Concise History of England.” I
am sensible it must give offence, as in many parts I am quite
singular; particularly with regard to those greatly injured
characters, Richard III., and Mary Queen of Scots. But I
must speak as I think; although still waiting for, and willing
to receive, better information.
68 REv. J. W. Esley’s [March, 1776.
Sun. 28.--I was desired to preach a charity sermon in All
hallows church, Lombard-Street. In the year 1735, about
forty years ago, I preached in this church, at the earnest request
of the Churchwardens, to a numerous congregation, who came,
like me, with an intent to hear Dr. Heylyn. This was the first
time that, having no notes about me, I preached extempore.
Wed. FEBRUARY 14.--I preached at Shoreham. How is the
last become first ! No society in the county grows so fast as
this, either in grace or number. The chief instrument of this
glorious work is Miss Perronet, a burning and a shining light.
Fri. 23-I looked over Mr. Bolt's “Considerations on the
Affairs of India.” Was there ever so melancholy a picture ?
How are the mighty fallen The Great Mogul, Emperor of
Hindostan, one of the mightiest Potentates on earth, is
become a poor, little, impotent slave to a Company of Mer
chants | His large, flourishing empire is broken in pieces
and covered with fraud, oppression, and misery ! And we
may call the myriads that have been murdered happy, in
comparison of those that still groan under the iron yoke.
Wilt not thou visit for these things, O Lord? Shall the fool
still say in his heart, “There is no God?”
Sun. 25.--I buried the remains of William Evans, one of
the first members of our Society. He was an Israelite indeed,
open (if it could be) to a fault; always speaking the truth
from his heart. Wednesday, 28. I looked over a volume of
Lord Lyttelton's Works. He is really a fine writer, both in
verse and prose, though he believed the Bible; yea, and
feared God In my scraps of time I likewise read over Miss
Talbot's Essays; equal to any thing of the kind I ever saw.
She was a woman of admirable sense and piety, and a far
better poet than the celebrated Mrs. Rowe. But here too
Heaven its choicest gold by torture tried
After suffering much, she died of a cancer in her breast.
Fri. MARCH 1.-As we cannot depend on having the Foun.
dery long, we met to consult about building a new chapel. Our
petition to the City for a piece of ground lies before their Com.
mittee; but when we shall get any farther, I know not: So I
determined to begin my circuit as usual; but promised to return
whenever I should receive notice that our petition was granted.
On Sunday evening I set out, and on Tuesday reached
March, 1776.] JOURNAL. 09
Bristol. In the way I read over Mr. Boöhm's Sermons,
Chaplain to Prince George of Denmark, husband to Queen
Anne. He was a person of very strong sense, and, in general,
sound in his judgment. I remember hearing a very remark
able circumstance concerning him, from Mr. Fraser, then
Chaplain to St. George's Hospital. “One day,” said he, “I
asked Mr. Boëhm, with whom I was intimately acquainted,
‘Sir, when you are surrounded by various persons, listening
to one, and dictating to another, does not that vast hurry of
business hinder your communion with God?” He replied,
“I bless God, I have just then as full communion with him,
as if I was kneeling alone at the altar.’”
Wed. 6.--I went down to Taunton, and at three in the
afternoon opened the new preaching-house. The people
showed great eagerness to hear. Will they at length know
the day of their visitation? Thursday, 7. I returned to Bris
tol; which I left on Monday, 11; and having visited Stroud,
Painswick, and Tewkesbury, on Wednesday, 20, came to
Worcester. Thursday, 21. I was much refreshed among this
loving people; especially by the select society, the far greater
part of whom could still witness that God had saved them
from inward as well as outward sin.
Sat. 23.−About noon I preached in the Town-Hall at
Evesham, to a congregation of a very different kind. Few of
them, I doubt, came from any other motive than to gratify
their curiosity. However, they were deeply attentive; so that
some of them, I trust, went away a little wiser than they came.
I had been informed that Mr. Weston, the Minister of
Campden, was willing I should preach in his church; but,
before I came, he had changed his mind. However, the
Vicar of Pebworth was no weathercock; so I preached in his
church, Sunday, 24, morning and evening; and, I believe,
not in vain.
Mon. 25.--I went on to Birmingham. I was surprised to
hear that a good deal of platina was used there; but, upon
inquiry, I found it was not the true platina, an original metal
between gold and silver, (being in weight nearest to gold,
even as eighteen to nineteen,) but a mere compound of brass
and spelter.
Wed. 27.--I preached at Dudley, in the midst of Antino
mians and backsliders, on, “We beseech you not to receive the
70 REv. J. WESLEY’s [April, 1776.
grace of God in vain.” In the evening I preached to our old
flock at Wednesbury; and the old spirit was among them.
Fri. 29.--About eight I preached to avery large congregation
even at Wolverhampton; and at six in the evening, to a mixed
multitude in the market-place at Newcastle-under-Lyne. All
were quiet now; the gentleman who made a disturbance when
I was here last having been soon after called to his account.
Sun. 31.--I preached at Congleton. The Minister here
having much disobliged his parishioners, most of the Gentry
in the town came to the preaching, both at two in the after
noon, and in the evening; and it was an acceptable time: I
believe very few, rich or poor, came in vain.
Mon. APRIL 1.--I went on to Macclesfield. That evening
I preached in the House; but it being far too small, on
Tuesday, 2, I preached on the Green, near Mr. Ryle's door.
There are no mockers here, and scarce an inattentive hearer.
So mightily has the word of God prevailed !
Wed. 3.-Having climbed over the mountains, I preached
at the New-Mills, in Derbyshire. The people here are quite
earnest and artless, there being no public worship in the
town but at our chapel: So that they go straight forward,
knowing nothing of various opinions, and minding nothing
but to be Bible-Christians.-
Thur. 4.--I began an answer to that dangerous Tract, Dr.
Price’s “Observations upon Liberty;” which, if practised,
would overturn all government, and bring in universal anarchy.
On Easter-Day the preaching-house at Manchester contained
the congregation pretty well at seven in the morning; but in
the afternoon I was obliged to be abroad, thousands upon thou
sands flocking together. I stood in a convenient place, almost
over against the Infirmary, and exhorted a listening multitude
to “live unto Him who died for them and rose again.”
Tues. 9.--I came to Chester, and had the satisfaction to
find an earnest, loving, well-established people.
Wed. 10.-In the evening, the House at Liverpool was
well filled with people of all ranks.
Fri. 12.-I visited one formerly a Captain, now a dying sin
ner. His eyes spoke the agony of his soul; his tongue hav
ing well nigh forgot its office. With great efforts he could
but just say, “I want--Jesus Christ l” The next day he could
not utter a word; but if he could not speak, God could hear.
April, 1776.] JOURNAL. 71
Mon. 15.-About noon I preached in the new House at
Wigan, to a very quiet and very dull congregation. But con
sidering what the town was some years ago, wicked even to a
proverb, we may well say, God hath done great things already.
And we hope to see greater things than these. In the even
ing I was obliged to preach abroad at Bolton, though the air
was cold, and the ground wet. Tuesday, 16. I preached
about noon at Chowbent, once the roughest place in all the
neighbourhood. But there is not the least trace of it
remaining: Such is the fruit of the genuine Gospel.
As we were considering in the afternoon what we should do.
the rain not suffering us to be abroad, one asked the Vicar for
the use of the church; to which he readily consented. I began
reading Prayers at half-hour past five. The church was so
crowded, pews, alleys, and galleries, as I believe it had not
been these hundred years; and God bore witness to his word.
Wed. 17.--After preaching at Bury about noon, I went on
to Rochdale, and preached in the evening to a numerous and
deeply serious congregation. Thursday, 18. I clambered over
the horrid mountains to Todmorden, and thence to Hepton
stall, on the brow of another mountain. Such a congrega
tion scarce ever met in the church before. In the evening I
preached in the Croft, adjoining to the new House at Halifax.
Fri. 19.-I preached at Smith-House, for the sake of that
lovely woman, Mrs. Holmes. It does me good to see her; such
is her patience, or, rather, thankfulness, under almost continual
pain. Sunday, 21. After strongly insisting at Daw-Green on
family religion, which is still much wanting among us, I has
tened to Birstal church, where we had a sound, practical ser
mon. At one I preached to many thousands at the foot of
the hill, and to almost as many at Leeds in the evening.
Mon. 22.-I had an agreeable conversation with that good
man, Mr. O ... O that he may be an instrument of removing
the prejudices which have so long separated chief friends !
Tues. 23.--I preached in the press-yard at Rothwell, and
have seldom seen a congregation so moved. I then spoke
severally to the class of children, and found every one of
them rejoicing in the love of God. It is particularly remark
able, that this work of God among them is broke out all at
once; they have all been justified, and one clearly sanctified,
within these last six weeks.
72 REv. J. WESLEY’s [April, 1776.
Wed. 24.--I went on to Otley, where the word of God
has free course, and brings forth much fruit. This is chiefly
owing to the spirit and behaviour of those whom God has
perfected in love. Their zeal stirs up many; and their steady
and uniform conversation has a language almost irresistible.
Friday, 26. I preached in the new chapel at Eccleshall, to
a people just sprung out of the dust, exceeding artless and
exceeding earnest; many of whom seemed to be already saved
from sin. O, why do we not encourage all to expect this
blessing every hour, from the moment they are justified In
the evening I preached at Bradford, on the Wise Man that
builds his house upon a rock; that is, who builds his hope of
heaven on no other foundation than doing these sayings con
tained in the Sermon on the Mount; although, in another
sense, we build not upon his sayings, but his sufferings.
Sat. 27.--I preached in the church at Bingley; perhaps
not so filled before for these hundred years. Sunday, 28.
The congregation at Haworth was far greater than the church
could contain. For the sake of the poor parishioners, few
of whom are even awakened to this day, I spoke as strongly
as I possibly could upon these words, “The harvest is past,
the summer is ended, and we are not saved.”
The church at Colne is, I think, at least twice as large as
that at Haworth. But it would not in any wise contain the
congregation. I preached on, “I saw a great white throne
coming down from heaven.” Deep attention sat on every
face; and, I trust, God gave us his blessing.
Mon. 29.-About two I preached at Padiham, in a broad
street, to a huge congregation. I think the only inattentive
persons were, the Minister and a kind of gentleman. I saw
none inattentive at Clough in the evening. What has God
wrought, since Mr. Grimshaw and I were seized near this place
by a furious mob, and kept prisoners for some hours The
sons of him who headed that mob now gladly receive our saying.
Tues. 30.--In the evening I preached in a kind of Square,
at Colne, to a multitude of people, all drinking in the word.
I scarce ever saw a congregation wherein men, women,
and children stood in such a posture: And this in the town
wherein, thirty years ago, no Methodist could show his head Î
The first that preached here was John Jane, who was inno
cently riding through the town, when the zealous mob pulled
May, 1776.] JOURNAL. 73
him off his horse, and put him in the stocks. He seized the
opportunity, and vehemently exhorted them “to flee from the
wrath to come.”
Wed. MAY 1.-I set out early, and the next afternoon
reached Whitehaven; and my chaise-horses were no worse
for travelling near a hundred and ten miles in two days.
In travelling through Berkshire, Oxfordshire, Bristol,
Gloucestershire, Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Staffordshire,
Cheshire, Lancashire, Yorkshire, Westmoreland, and Cum
berland, I diligently made two inquiries: The first was, con
cerning the increase or decrease of the people; the second,
concerning the increase or decrease of trade. As to the
latter, it is, within these two last years, amazingly increased;
in several branches in such a manner as has not been known
in the memory of man: Such is the fruit of the entire civil
and religious liberty which all England now enjoys | And as
to the former, not only in every city and large town, but in
every village and hamlet, there is no decrease, but a very large
and swift increase. One sign of this is the swarms of little
children which we see in every place. Which, then, shall we
most admire, the ignorance or confidence of those that affirm,
population decreases in England? I doubt not but it increases
full as fast here, as in any province of North America.
Mon. 6.--After preaching at Cockermouth and Wigton, I
went on to Carlisle, and preached to a very serious congrega
tion. Here I saw a very extraordinary genius, a man blind
from four years of age, who could wind worsted, weave flowered
plush on an engine and loom of his own making; who wove
his own name in plush, and made his own clothes, and his
own tools of every sort. Some years ago, being shut up in the
organ-loft at church, he felt every part of it, and afterwards
made an organ for himself, which, judges say, is an exceeding
good one. He then taught himself to play upon it psalm
tunes, anthems, voluntaries, or anything which he heard. I
heard him play several tunes with great accuracy, and a com
plex voluntary: I suppose all Europe can hardly produce such
another instance. His name is Joseph Strong. But what is he
the better for all this, if he is still “without God in the world?”
Tues. 7.--I went on to Selkirk. The family came to prayer
in the evening, after which the mistress of it said, “Sir, my
daughter Jenny would be very fond of having a little talk with
74 REv. J. wesley’s [May, 1776.
you. She is a strange lass; she will not come down on the
Lord’s day but to public worship, and spends all the rest of the
day in her own chamber.” I desired she would come up;
and found one that earnestly longed to be altogether a Chris
tian. I satisfied her mother that she was not mad; and
spent a little time in advice, exhortation, and prayer.
Wed. 8.--We set out early, but found the air so keen,
that before noon our hands bled as if cut with a knife. In
the evening I preached at Edinburgh; and the next evening
near the river-side in Glasgow.
Fri. 10.--I went to Greenock. It being their fast-day
before the sacrament, (ridiculously so called, for they do not
fast at all, but take their three meals, just as on other days,)
the congregation was larger than when I was here before, and
remarkably attentive. The next day I returned to Glasgow,
and on Sunday, 12, went in the morning to the high-kirk, (to
show I was no bigot,) and in the afternoon to the Church of
England chapel. The decency of behaviour here surprises me
more and more. I know nothing like it in these kingdoms,
except among the Methodists. In the evening the congre
gation by the river-side was exceeding numerous; to whom
I declared “the whole counsel of God.” Monday, 13. I
returned to Edinburgh, and the next day went to Perth,
where (it being supposed no house would contain the congre
gation) I preached at six on the South-Inch, though the wind
was cold and boisterous. Many are the stumbling-blocks
which have been laid in the way of this poor people. They
are removed; but the effects of them still continue.
Wed. 15.--I preached at Dundee, to nearly as large a con
gregation as that at Port-Glasgow. Thursday, 16. I attended
an Ordination at Arbroath. The Service lasted about four
hours; but it did not strike me. It was doubtless very
grave; but I thought it was very dull.
Fri. 17.--I reached Aberdeen in good time. Saturday, 18.
I read over Dr. Johnson’s “Tour to the Western Isles.” It is
a very curious book, wrote with admirable sense, and, I think,
great fidelity; although, in some respects, he is thought to bear
hard on the nation, which I am satisfied he never intended.
Sunday, 19. I attended the Morning Service at the kirk, full
as formal as any in England; and no way calculated either to
awaken sinners, or to stir up the gift of God in believers. In
May, 1776.] JOURNAL. 75
the afternoon I heard a useful sermon in the English chapel;
and was again delighted with the exquisite decency both of the
Minister and the whole congregation. The Methodist congre
gations come the nearest to this; but even these do not come
up to it. Our House was sufficiently crowded in the evening;
but some of the hearers did not behave like those at the chapel.
Mon. 20.--I preached about eleven at Old Meldrum, but
could not reach Banff till near seven in the evening. I went
directly to the Parade, and proclaimed, to a listening multi
tude, “the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.” All behaved
well but a few Gentry, whom I rebuked openly; and they
stood corrected.
After preaching, Mrs. Gordon, the Admiral's widow, invited
me to supper. There I found five or six as agreeable women
as I have seen in the kingdom; and I know not when I have
spent two or three hours with greater satisfaction. In the
morning I was going to preach in the assembly-room, when
the Episcopal Minister sent and offered me the use of his
chapel. It was quickly filled. After reading prayers, I
preached on those words in the Second Lesson, “What lack
I yet?” and strongly applied them to those in particular
who supposed themselves to be “rich and increased in goods,
and lacked nothing.” I then set out for Keith.
Banff is one of the neatest and most elegant towns that I have
seen in Scotland. It is pleasantly situated on the side of a hill,
sloping from the sea, though close to it; so that it is sufficiently
sheltered from the sharpest winds. The streets are straight and
broad. I believe it may be esteemed the fifth, if not the
fourth, town in the kingdom. The county quite from Banff
to Keith is the best peopled of any I have seen in Scotland.
This is chiefly, if not entirely, owing to the late Earl of Find
later. He was indefatigable in doing good, took pains to pro
cure industrious men from all parts, and to provide such little
settlements for them as enabled them to live with comfort.
About noon I preached at the New-Mills, nine miles from
Banff, to a large congregation of plain, simple people. As we
rode in the afternoon the heat overcame me, so that I was weary
and faint before we came to Keith; but I no sooner stood up in
the market-place than I forgot my weariness; such were the
seriousness and attention of the whole congregation, though as
numerous as that at Banff. Mr. Gordon, the Minister of the
76 REv. J. wesley’s [May, 1776.
parish, invited me to supper, and told me his kirk was at my
service. A little society is formed here already; and is in a
fair way of increasing. But they were just now in danger of
losing their preaching-house, the owner being determined to
sell it. I saw but one way to secure it for them, which was to
buy it myself. So (who would have thought it?) I bought an
estate, consisting of two houses, a yard, a garden, with three
acres of good land. But he told me flat, “Sir, I will take no
less for it than sixteen pounds ten shillings, to be paid, part
now, part at Michaelmas, and the residue next May.”
Here Mr. Gordon showed me a great curiosity. Near the
top of the opposite hill, a new town is built, containing, I
suppose, a hundred houses, which is a town of beggars.
This, he informed me, was the professed, regular occupation
of all the inhabitants. Early in spring they all go out, and
spread themselves over the kingdom; and in autumn they
return, and do what is requisite for their wives and children.
Wed. 22.-The wind turning north, we stepped at once from
June to January. About one I preached at Inverury, to a
plain, earnest, loving people, and before five came to Aberdeen.
Thursday, 23. I read over Mr. Pennant’s “Journey through
Scotland;” a lively as well as judicious writer. Judicious, I
mean, in most respects; but I cannot give up to all the Deists
in Great Britain the existence of witchcraft, till I give up the
credit of all history, sacred and profane. And at the present
time, I have not only as strong, but stronger proofs of this,
from eye and ear witnesses, than I have of murder; so that I
cannot rationally doubt of one any more than the other.
Fri. 24.--I returned to Arbroath, and lodged at Provost
Grey’s. So, for a time, we are in honour! I have hardly seen
such another place in the three kingdoms, as this is at present.
Hitherto there is no opposer at all, but every one seems to bid
us God-speed' Saturday, 25. I preached at Westhaven (a
town of fishermen) about noon; and at Dundee in the evening.
Sunday, 26. I went to the new church, cheerful, lightsome,
and admirably well finished. A young gentleman preached
such a sermon, both for sense and language, as I never heard
in North-Britain before; and I was informed his life is as his
preaching. At five we had an exceeding large congregation;
and the people of Dundee, in general, behave better at pub
lic worship than any in the kingdom, except the Methodists,
June, 1776.] JOURNAL. 77
and those at the Episcopal chapels. In all other kirks the
bulk of the people are bustling to and fro before the Minister
has ended his prayer. In Dundee all are quiet, and none stir
at all till he has pronounced the blessing.
Mon. 27--I paid a visit to St. Andrew's, once the largest
city in the kingdom. It was eight times as large as it is now,
and a place of very great trade: But the sea rushing from the
north-east, gradually destroyed the harbour and trade together:
In consequence of which, whole streets (that were) are now
meadows and gardens. Three broad, straight, handsome
streets remain, all pointing at the old cathedral; which, by
the ruins, appears to have been above three hundred feet
long, and proportionably broad and high: So that it seems to
have exceeded York Minster, and to have at least equalled
any cathedral in England. Another church, afterwards used
in its stead, bears date 1124. A steeple, standing near the
cathedral, is thought to have stood thirteen hundred years.
What is left of St. Leonard's College is only a heap of ruins.
Two Colleges remain. One of them has a tolerable Square;
but all the windows are broke, like those of a brothel. We
were informed, the students do this before they leave the
College. Where are their blessed Governors in the mean
time? Are they all fast asleep? The other College is a mean
building, but has a handsome library newly erected. In the
two Colleges, we learned, were about seventy students; near
the same number as at Old-Aberdeen. Those at New
Aberdeen are not more numerous: Neither those at Glasgow.
In Edinburgh, I suppose there are a hundred. So four Uni
versities contain three hundred and ten students | These all
come to their several Colleges in November, and return home
in May ! So they may study five months in the year, and
lounge all the rest O where was the common sense of those
who instituted such Colleges? In the English Colleges, every
one may reside all the year, as all my pupils did : And I should
have thought myself little better than a highwayman, if I had
not lectured them every day in the year, but Sundays.
We were so long detained at the Passage, that I only
reached Edinburgh time enough to give notice of my preach
ing the next day. After preaching at Dunbar, Alnwick, and
Morpeth, on Saturday, JUNE 1, I reached Newcastle.
Mon, 3.−I visited Sunderland, where the society then con
78 Rev. J. w Esley’s [June, 1776.
tained three hundred and seventy-two members. Thursday, 6.
I preached at Darlington and Barnard-Castle: On Friday, in
Teesdale and Weardale. Here many rejoiced with joy un
speakable, and seemed determined never to rest till they had
recovered that great salvation which they enjoyed some years
ago. Saturday, 8. As we rode to Sheep-Hill, we saw and
heard at a distance, much thunder, and rain, and lightning.
The rain was before and behind, and on each side: But none
fell upon us. About six, I preached at Sheep-Hill. It rained
hard very near us; but not a drop came upon us. After
eight, I reached Newcastle, thoroughly tired. But a night's
rest set me up again. On Monday and Tuesday I met the
classes. I left three hundred and seventy-four in the society,
and I found about four hundred : And I trust they are more
established in the “faith that worketh by love.”
While I was here, I talked largely with a pious woman,
whom I could not well understand. I could not doubt of her
being quite sincere, nay, and much devoted to God: But she
had fallen among some well-meaning enthusiasts, who taught
her so to attend to the inward voice, as to quit the society, the
preaching, the Lord's Supper, and almost all outward means.
I find no persons harder to deal with than these. One knows
not how to advise them. They must not act contrary to their
conscience, though it be an erroneous one. And who can
convince them that it is erroneous? None but the Almighty.
Mon. 17.--After preaching at Durham, I went on to Dar
lington. The society here, lately consisting of nine members,
is now increased to above seventy; many of whom are warm
in their first love. At the love-feast, many of these spoke
their experience with all simplicity. Here will surely be a
plentiful harvest, if tares do not grow up with the wheat.
Wed. 19.--I preached to my old, loving congregation at
Osmotherley; and visited, once more, poor Mr. Watson, just
quivering over the grave.
Part of this week I read, as I travelled, a famous book, which
I had not looked into for these fifty years. It was Lucian’s
“Dialogues.” He has a good deal of humour, but wonderful
little judgment. His great hero is Diogenes, the Cynic; just
such another brute as himself. Socrates (as one might expect)
he reviles and ridicules with all his might. I think there is
more sense in his “Timon,” than in all his other Dialogues
July, 1776.] JOURNAL. 79
put together: And yet, even that ends poorly, in the dull jest
of his breaking the heads of all that came near him. How
amazing is it, that such a book as this should be put into the
hands of school-boys'
Mon. 24.--I went on to Scarborough. I think the preaching
house here is the most elegant of any square Room which we
have in England; and we had as elegant a congregation: But
they were as attentive as if they had been Kingswood colliers.
Tues. 25.--I visited a poor backslider, who has given great
occasion to the enemy to blaspheme. Some time since, he
felt a pain in the soles of his feet, then in his legs, his knees,
his thighs. Now it has reached his stomach, and begins to
affect his head. No medicines have availed at all. I fear he
has sinned a sin unto death; a sin which God has determined
to punish by death.
Fri. 28.--I am seventy-three years old, and far abler to
preach than I was at three-and-twenty. What natural means
has God used to produce so wonderful an effect? 1. Continual
exercise and change of air, by travelling above four thousand
miles in a year: 2. Constant rising at four: 3. The ability, if
ever I want, to sleep immediately: 4. The never losing a night's
sleep in my life: 5. Two violent fevers, and two deep consump
tions. These, it is true, were rough medicines; but they were
of admirable service; causing my flesh to come again, as the
flesh of a little child. May I add, lastly, evenness of temper?
I feel and grieve; but, by the grace of God, I fret at nothing.
But still “the help that is done upon earth, He doeth it him
self.” And this he doeth in answer to many prayers.
Mon. JULY 1.--I preached, about eleven, to a numerous and
serious congregation at Pocklington. In my way from hence
to Malton, Mr. C (a man of sense and veracity) gave me
the following account:--His grandfather, Mr. H , he said,
about twenty years ago, ploughing up a field, two or three miles
from Pocklington, turned up a large stone, under which he per
ceived there was a hollow. Digging on, he found, at a small
distance, a large, magnificent house. He cleared away the
earth; and, going into it, found many spacious rooms. The
floors of the lower story were of Mosaic work, exquisitely
wrought. Mr. C himself counted sixteen stones within
an inch square. Many flocked to see it, from various parts,
as long as it stood open: But after some days, Mr. P (he
80 REv. J. wesley’s [July, 1776.
knew not why) ordered it to be covered again; and he would
never after suffer any to open it, but ploughed the field all
over. This is far more difficult to account for, than the sub
terraneous buildings at Herculaneum. History gives us an
account of the time when, and the manner how, these were
swallowed up. The burning mountain is still assured, and
the successive lavas that flowed from it still distinguishable.
But history gives no account of this, nor of any burning
mountains in our island. Neither do we read of any such
earthquake in England, as was capable of working that effect.
Tues. 2.--I went to York. The House was full enough in
the evening, while I pointed the true and the false way of
expounding those important words, “Ye are saved through
faith.” Wednesday, 3. I preached about noon at Tadcaster,
with an uncommon degree of freedom; which was attended
with a remarkable blessing. A glorious work is dawning here,
against which nothing can prevail; unless the ball of contention
be thrown in among the plain people, by one or two that have
lately embraced new opinions. In the evening I preached at
York, on the fashionable religion, vulgarly called morality;
and showed at large, from the accounts given of it by its
ablest patrons, that it is neither better nor worse than Atheism.
Thur. 4.--I met the select society, and was a little surprised
to find, that, instead of growing in grace, scarce two of them
retained the grace they had two years ago. All of them seemed
to be sincere; and yet a faintness of spirit ran through them all.
In the evening I showed, to a still more crowded audience,
the nature and necessity of Christian love:-Ayatom, vilely
rendered charity, to confound poor English readers. The
word was sharper than a two-edged sword, as many of the
hearers felt. God grant the wound may not be healed, till
he himself binds it up !
Fri. 5.--About eleven I preached at Foggathorp, a lone
house, a few miles from Howden. Abundance of people were
gathered together, notwithstanding heavy rain; and they
received the truth in the love thereof. I came to Howden
a little before three; when a large congregation was soon
gathered. All were serious; the more so, because of a few
claps of thunder that rolled over our heads.
I preached at Swinfleet in the evening. These are the most
sensible and gentlemanlike farmers that I have seen anywhere;
July, 1776.] v UU RNAL. 81
and many of them are “rooted and grounded in love,” and
have adorned the Gospel many years.
Sat. 6.-I went on to Epworth, and found my old friend,
Mr. Hutton, in the deepest melancholy. I judged it to be
partly natural, partly diabolical; but I doubt not he will be
saved, though as by fire.o
Tues, 9.--I preached at Brigg in the morning. All behaved
well, but a few gentlemen, (so called,) who seemed to under
stand no more of the matter, than if I had been talking Greek.
I went thence to Horncastle and to Spilsby, with Mr. Bre
While he was at Cambridge, he was convinced of sin, though
not by any outward means, and soon after justified. Coming
to Hull, he met with one of our Preachers. By long and close
conversation with him, he was clearly convinced it was his duty
to join with the people called Methodists. At first, indeed, he
staggered at Lay Preachers; but, after weighing the matter
more deeply, he began preaching himself; and found a very
remarkable blessing, both on his own soul, and on his labours.
After visiting a few more places in these parts, on Saturday,
13, I returned to Epworth. Sunday, 14. I preached in the
morning at Gringley; about one, at Ouston; and at four, in
Epworth market-place; where God “struck with the hammer
of his word, and broke the hearts of stone.” We had after
wards a love-feast, at which a flame was soon kindled; which
was greatly increased while Mr. Cundy related the manner
how God perfected him in love : A testimony which is always
attended with a peculiar blessing.
Mon. 15.--I preached at Doncaster, in one of the most
elegant Houses in England, and to one of the most elegant
congregations. They seemed greatly astonished; and well
they might; for I scarce ever spoke so strongly on, “Strait
is the gate, and marrow is the way, that leadeth unto life.”
Tuesday, 16. At Sheffield I talked at large with one whose
case is very peculiar. She never loses a sense of the love of
God; and yet is continually harassed by the devil, and con
strained to utter words which her soul abhors; while her body
feels as if it was in a burning flame. For this her father
turned her cut of doors; and she had no money, nor any
friend to take her in. To cut her off from every human
comfort, our wise Assistant turned her out of society. Yet in
all this she murmured not, neither “charged God foolishly.”
82 Rev. J. wesley’s [Aug. 1776.
Wed. 17.--Having been desired, by one of Chesterfield, to
give them a sermon in the way, I called there; but he did not
come to own me. So, after resting awhile at another house, I
stood at a small distance from the main street, and proclaimed
salvation by faith to a serious congregation. After preaching
at a few other places, on Thursday, 18, I preached at Notting
ham; and, having no time to lose, took chaise at noon, and the
next evening, Friday, 19, met the Committee at the Foundery.
Wed. 24.--I read Mr. Jenyns's admired tract, on the
“Internal Evidence of the Christian Religion.” He is un
doubtedly a fine writer; but whether he is a Christian, Deist,
or Atheist, I cannot tell. If he is a Christian, he betrays his
own cause by averring, that “all Scripture is not given by
inspiration of God; but the writers of it were sometimes left
to themselves, and consequently made some mistakes.” Nay,
if there be any mistakes in the Bible, there may as well be
a thousand. If there be one falsehood in that book, it did
not come from the God of truth.
Sun. 28.--Perceiving the immense hurt which it had done,
I spoke more strongly than ever I had done before, on the
sin and danger of indulging “itching ears.” I trust, here at
least, that plague will be stayed.
Fri. AUGUST 2.--We made our first subscription toward
building a new chapel; and at this, and the two following
meetings, above a thousand pounds were cheerfully subscribed.
Sun. 4.--Many of the Preachers being come to town, I
enforced that solemn caution, in the Epistle for the day,
“Let him that standeth take heed lest he fall.” And God
applied it to many hearts. In the afternoon I preached in
Moorfields to thousands, on Acts ii. 32, “This Jesus hath
God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses.”
Tues. 6.--Our Conference began, and ended on Friday, 9,
which we observed with fasting and prayer, as well for our
own nation as for our brethren in America. In several Con
ferences, we have had great love and unity; but in this there
was, over and above, such a general seriousness and solemnity
of spirit as we scarcely have had before. Sunday, 11. About
half an hour after four I set out ; and at half an hour after
eleven on Monday, came to Bristol.
I found Mr. Fletcher a little better, and proposed his taking
a journey with me to Cornwall; nothing being so likely to
Aug. 1776.] JOURNAL. 83
restore his health, as a journey of four or five hundred miles;
but his Physician would in mowise consent; so I gave up the
point.
Tues. 13.--I preached at Taunton, and afterwards went
with Mr. Brown to Kingston. The large, old parsonage-house
is pleasantly situated close to the church-yard, just fit for a
contemplative man. Here I found a Clergyman, Dr. Coke,
late Gentleman Commoner of Jesus College in Oxford, who
came twenty miles on purpose. I had much conversation with
him; and an union then began, which I trust shall never end.
Wed. 14.--I preached at Tiverton; and on Thursday went
on to Launceston. Here I found the plain reason why the
work of God had gained no ground in this Circuit all the year.
The Preachers had given up the Methodist testimony. Either
they did not speak of Perfection at all, (the peculiar doctrine
committed to our trust,) or they spoke of it only in general
terms, without urging the believers to “go on unto perfec
tion,” and to expect it every moment. And wherever this is
not earnestly done, the work of God does not prosper.
Fri. 16.-I was going to preach in the market-place at Ca
melford, where a few are still alive to God, when a violent storm
drove us into the House; that is, as many as could squeeze in.
The fire quickly kindled among them, and seemed to touch
every heart. My text was, “What doest thou here, Elijah o'
And God himself made the application. A flame was once
more raised in this town: May it never more be put out !
In the evening I preached in Mr. Wood’s yard, at Port
Isaac, to most of the inhabitants of the town. The same
spirit was here as at Camelford, and seemed to move upon
every heart. And we had all a good hope, that the days of
faintness and weariness are over, and that the work of God
will revive and flourish.
Sat. 17.--We found Mr. Hoskins, at Cubert, alive ; but
just tottering over the grave. I preached in the evening, on
2 Cor. v. 1-4, probably the last sermon he will hear from me.
I was afterwards inquiring, if that scandal of Cornwall, the
plundering of wrecked vessels, still subsisted. He said, “As
much as ever; only the Methodists will have nothing to do
with it. But three months since a vessel was wrecked on the
south coast, and the tinners presently seized on all the goods;
and even broke in pieces a new coach which was on board, and
84 REv. J. wesley’s [Aug. 1776.
carried every scrap of it away.” But is there no way to pre
vent this shameful breach of all the laws both of religion and
humanity? Indeed there is. The Gentry of Cornwall may
totally prevent it whenever they please. Let them only see
that the laws be strictly executed upon the next plunderers;
and after an example is made of ten of these, the next wreck
will be unmolested. Nay, there is a milder way. Let them
only agree together, to discharge any tinner or labourer that
is concerned in the plundering of a wreck, and advertise his
name, that no Cornish gentleman may employ him any
more ; and neither tinner nor labourer will any more be
concerned in that bad work.
Sun. 18.--The passage through the sands being bad for a
chaise, I rode on horseback to St. Agnes, where the rain con
strained me to preach in the House. As we rode back to
Redruth, it poured down amain, and found its way through
all our clothes. I was tired when I came in ; but after sleep
ing a quarter of an hour all my weariness was gone.
Mon. 19.--I joined together once more the select society,
who are continually flying asunder, though they all acknow
ledge the loss they have sustained thereby. At eleven I met
fifty or sixty children. How much depends upon these ! All
the hope of the rising generation. Tuesday, 20. In the
evening I preached at Helstone, where prejudice is at an
end; and all the town, except a few Gentry, willingly hear
the word of salvation.
Wed. 21.--I preached at Penzance in a gentleman's
balcony, which commanded the market-place, to a huge
congregation, on, “Without holiness no man shall see the
Lord.” The word fell heavy, upon high and low, rich and
poor. Such an opportunity I never had at Penzance before.
Thur. 22.-I preached at six in the market-place at St.
Just’s. Two or three well-dressed people walked by, stopped
a little, and then went on. So they did two or three times.
Had it not been for shame, they might have heard that which
is able to save their souls.
Fri. 23.−The congregation, both morning and evening, was
large; and great was our rejoicing in the Lord. Saturday, 24.
In the evening I preached in a meadow at St. Ives, to one of
the largest congregations I had seen in the county. Sunday,
25. I met the children; the most difficult part of our office.
Sept. 1776.] JOURNAL. 85
About five in the evening I began preaching at Gwennap, to
full twenty thousand persons. And they were so commo
diously placed, in the calm, still evening, that every one
heard distinctly.
Tues. 27.-About noon I preached in the piazza, adjoining
to the Coinage-Hall in Truro. I was enabled to speak exceed
ing plain, on, “Ye are saved through faith.” I doubt the
Antinomians gnashed on me with their teeth; but I must
declare “the whole counsel of God.” In the evening I preached
in an open space at Mevagissey, to most of the inhabitants
of the town; where I saw a very rare thing, men swiftly
increasing in substance, and yet not decreasing in holiness.
Wed. 28.--The rain drove us into the House at St. Austle,
where I think some of the stout-hearted trembled. The next
evening I preached at Medros, and was pleased to see an old
friend, with his wife, his two sons and two daughters. I
believe God sent a message to their hearts, as they could not
help showing by their tears.
Sun. SEPTEMBER 1.--I got to Plymouth church a little
after the Service began. I admired the seriousness and decency
of the congregation: None bowed or courtesied, or looked about
them. And at the Lord's Supper, although both the Ministers
spoke so low in delivering the elements, that none who were not
very near could hear a word they said, yet was the congregation
as still as if no one had been in the church. I was likewise
agreeably surprised at their number: When I was in the church
in Hull, I think we had six communicants, beside those that
came with me: Here I suppose were full three hundred.
Immediately after Service I went to the quay, and preached
on those words in the Epistle for the day, “The Scripture
hath concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of
Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.” I won
dered at the exquisite stupidity of the hearers, particularly
the soldiers; who seemed to understand no more of the
patter than so many oxen. So I told them in very plain
terms; and some of them were ashamed.
Mon. 2.-In my way to Exeter, I read over an ingenious
tract, containing some observations which I never saw before.
In particular, that if corn sells for twice as much now as it did
at the time of the Revolution, it is in effect no dearer than it
was then, because we have now twice as much money; that if
other things sell now for twice as much as they did then, corn
86 REv. J. Wesley’s [Sept. 1776.
ought to do so too; that though the price of all things increases
as money increases, yet they are really no dearer than they were
before; and, lastly, that to petition Parliament to alter these
things, is to put them upon impossibilities, and can answer no
end but that of inflaming the people against their Governors.
Wed. 4.--I was desired to call at Ottery, a large town, eleven
miles from Exeter. I preached in the market-house to abun
dance of people, who behaved with great decency. At five, I
preached in the market-place at Axminster, to a still larger con
gregation. I have seldom heard people speak with more honesty
and simplicity than many did at the love-feast which followed.
I have not seen a more unpolished people than these; but love
supplies all defects. It supplies all the essentials of good
breeding, without the help of a dancing-master.
Thur. 5.-I went on to Corfe-Castle, in the Isle of Purbeck.
At six I preached in the yard adjoining to the preaching-house.
It was a season both of conviction and consolation. Friday, 6.
I preached at the new House in Melcomb, to as many as it
would well contain. Saturday, 7. About noon I stood upon
the Cross, at Bruton, and proclaimed “the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ.” Many seemed to be astonished; all were
quiet; and a few deeply affected.
In the evening I preached at Shepton-Mallet; where the
people in general appeared to be more serious, ever since
the late terrible riot, in which two of them were killed. On
Saturday I went on to Bristol.
Mon. 9.--I began, what I had long intended, visiting the
society from house to house, setting apart at least two hours in
a day for that purpose. I was surprised to find the simplicity
with which one and all spoke, both of their temporal and spiritual
state. Nor could I easily have known, by any other means, how
great a work God has wrought among them. I found exceeding
little to reprove; but much to praise God for. And I observed
one thing which I did not expect:-In visiting all the families,
without Lawford-Gate, by far the poorest about the city, I did
not find so much as one person who was out of work.
Another circumstance I critically inquired into, What is
the real number of the people? Dr. Price says, (doubtless to
encourage our good friends, the French and Spaniards,) “The
people of England are between four and five millions; supposing
them to be four, or four and a half, on an average, in one house.”
I found, in the families which I visited, about six in a house.
Sept. 1776.]- JOURNAL, 87
But one who has lately made a more general inquiry, informs
me, there are, without Lawford-Gate, seven in a house. The
same information I received, from one who has lately made
the inquiry, concerning the inhabitants of Redcliff. Now, if
at four in a house, we are four millions, must we not, at seven
in a house, be seven millions?
But even this is far short of the truth; for a plain reason,
the houses are miscomputed. To give one instance:--The
houses without Lawford-Gate are computed to be a thousand.
Now, at the sitting of the Justices, some years since, there
were two hundred public-houses. Was then one house in five
a public-house? No, surely; one in ten at the utmost. If
so, there were two thousand houses; and, consequently, four
teen thousand persons. I believe, there are now full twenty
thousand. And these are nothing near a quarter of the
present inhabitants of Bristol.
Wed. 1].-I preached about one at Bath; and about six,
in a meadow, near the preaching-house, in Frome, besought a
listening multitude “not to receive the grace of God in vain.”
Thur. 12.-I spent about two hours in Mr. Hoare's gar
dens, at Stourton. I have seen the most celebrated gardens
in England; but these far exceed them all: 1. In the situa
tion; being laid out on the sloping sides of a semicircular moun
tain: 2. In the vast basin of water inclosed between them,
covering, I suppose, sixty acres of ground: 3. In the delightful
interchange of shady groves and sunny glades, curiously mixed
together. Above all, in the lovely grottoes, two of which
excel everything of the kind which I ever saw ; the fountain
grotto, made entirely of rock-work, admirably well imitating
nature; and the castle-grotto, into which you enter unawares,
beneath a heap of ruins. This is within totally built of roots
of trees, wonderfully interwoven. On one side of it is a little
hermitage, with a lamp, a chair, a table, and bones upon it.
Others were delighted with the temples, but I was not: 1.
Because several of the statues about them were mean: 2.
Because I cannot admire the images of devils; and we know
the gods of the Heathens are but devils: 3. Because I defy
all mankind to reconcile statues with nudities, either to
common sense or common decency.
Returning from thence through Maiden-Bradley, we saw
the clumsy house of the Duke of Somerset; and afterwards
88 R E v. J. W E SLEY’s [Nov. 1776.
the grand and elegant one of Lord Weymouth, beautifully
situated in a lovely park.
Fri. 13.--I went on to Midsummer-Norton, where the
Rector, being applied to, cheerfully granted me the use of his
church, and himself made one of the congregation. I preached
on those words in the Second Lesson, “O thou of little faith,
wherefore didst thou doubt?” About two I preached in the
new House, at Paulton, to a plain, simple, loving people; and
spent the evening at Kingswood, endeavouring to remove
some little offences, which had arisen in the family.
Wed. 18.--About one I preached at Bath, as usual, to a
crowded audience; in the afternoon at Keynsham, where, at
length, we see some fruit of our labours. Thursday, 19. Find
ing few would come to the Room at Pill, I preached in the
market-place. Many attended, and I am persuaded, God cut
some of them to the heart. About six I preached at Pensford,
and spent the evening with the lovely family at Publow.
Sat. 21.-I preached in the Paddock, at Bedminster. It
is plain (notwithstanding what some affirm) that the time of
field-preaching is not past, while the people flock to it from
every quarter.
Sun. 22.-After reading Prayers, preaching, and adminis
tering the sacrament, at Bristol, I hastened away to Kings
wood, and preached under the trees to such a multitude as
had not been lately seen there. I began in King's Square a
little before five, where the word of God was quick and
powerful. And I was no more tired at night than when I
rose in the morning. Such is the power of God!
After settling all things at Bristol and Kingswood, and visit
ing the rest of the societies in Somersetshire, Wiltshire, and
Hants, I returned, in October, to London, with Mr. Fletcher.
Sun. November 10.--I was desired to preach at St.
Vedast's church, Foster-Lane, which contained the congrega
tion tolerably well. I preached on those words in the Gospel
for the day, (how little regarded even by men that fear God!)
“Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God
the things that are God’s.”
Wed. 13.−I set out with Mr. Fletcher to Norwich. I took
coach at twelve, slept till six, and then spent the time very
agreeably, in conversation, singing, and reading. I read Mr.
Bolt's account of the affairs in the East Indies: I suppose much
Nov. 1776.] JOURNAL. 89
the best that is extant. But what a scene is here opened
What consummate villains, what devils incarnate, were the
managers there ! What utter strangers to justice, mercy,
and truth ; to every sentiment of humanity I believe no
heathen history contains a parallel. I remember none in all
the annals of antiquity: Not even the divine Cato, or the
virtuous Brutus, plundered the provinces committed to their
charge with such merciless cruelty as the English have plun
dered the desolated provinces of Indostan.
When we came to Norwich, finding many of our friends
had been shaken by the assertors of the Horrible Decree, I
employed the three following mornings in sifting the ques
tion to the bottom. Many were confirmed thereby; and, I
trust, will not again be removed from the genuine Gospel.
Thur. 14.--I showed in the evening what the Gospel is,
and what it is to preach the Gospel. The next evening, I
explained, at large, the wrong and the right sense of, “Ye
are saved by faith.” And many saw how miserably they had
been abused by those vulgarly called Gospel Preachers.
Sun. 17.-In the morning we had about a hundred and
fifty communicants, and a remarkable blessing. In the after
noon and in the evening we were crowded enough. Monday,
18. We set out for Yarmouth. Here I knew not where to
preach ; the Mayor refusing me the use of the Town-Hall.
But the Chamberlain gave me the use of a larger building,
formerly a church. In this a numerous congregation soon
assembled, to whom I described the “sect which is every
where spoken against.” I believe all that were attentive will
be a little more candid for the time to come.
Tues. 19.-I opened the new preaching-house at Lowes
toft, a new and lightsome building. It was thoroughly filled
with deeply attentive hearers. Surely some of them will bear
fruit unto perfection. Wednesday, 20. Mr. Fletcher preached
in the morning, and I at two in the afternoon. It then blew
a thorough storm, so that it was hard to walk or stand, the
wind being ready to take us off our feet. It drove one of the
boats, which were on the strand, from its moorings out to sea.
Three men were in it, who looked for nothing every moment
but to be swallowed up. But presently five stout men put
off in another open boat, and, rowing for life, overtook them,
and brought them safe to land.
90 REv. J. wesley’s [Dec. 1776.
Thur. 21.--I preached at Beccles. A duller place I have
seldom seen. The people of the town were neither pleased
nor vexed, as “caring for none of these things.” Yet fifty or
sixty came into the house, either to hear or see. The people
of Loddon seemed in the evening of another spirit, resolved
to “enter in at the strait gate.” Friday, 22, We had a
solemn parting with our friends at Norwich ; and on Saturday
evening I brought Mr. Fletcher back to London, considerably
better than when he set out.
Fri. 29.--We considered the several plans which were offered
for the new chapel. Having agreed upon one, we desired a
Surveyor to draw out the particulars, with an estimate of the
expense. We then ordered proposals to be drawn up for
those who were willing to undertake any part of the building.
Mon. DECEMBER. 2.-I set out for Bedford, in the dili
gence, and came thither at four in the afternoon. I found
great freedom of speech in the evening, and perceived God
was reviving his work in this people.
Tues. 3.-I crossed over to St. Neot’s, and had an hour’s
friendly conversation with Mr. W. O that all men would sit
as loose to opinions as I do; that they would think and
let think! I preached in the evening to a numerous con
gregation with much enlargement of spirit. Wednesday, 4.
I preached at Godmanchester, and on Thursday returned to
London.
In the way, I read over Mr. Gray's Works, and his Life
wrote by Mr. Mason. He is an admirable poet, not much
inferior to either Prior or Pope; but he does not appear,
upon the whole, to have been an amiable man. His picture,
I apprehend, expresses his character;--sharp, sensible, inge
nious; but, at the same time, proud, morose, envious, passion
ate, and resentful. I was quite shocked at the contempt with
which he more than once speaks of Mr. Mason; one full as
ingenious as himself, yea, full as good a poet ; (as even
“Elfrida” shows, as much as Mr. Gray despises, or affects to
despise it;) and, over and above, possessed of that mode, ty
and humanity, wherein Mr. Gray was so greatly deficient.
Friday, 13, was the national fast. It was observed not
only throughout the city, but (I was afterwards informed)
throughout the nation, with the utmost solemnity. I shall
not wonder if God should now internose and send us
Jan. 1777.] JOURNAL. 9]
prosperity, since, at length, we are not too proud to
acknowledge “there is a God that judgeth the earth.”
Mon. 16.--I preached at Canterbury; on Tuesday, at
Dover; Wednesday, about eleven, at poor, dry, dead Sand
wich. But I now found more hope for the poor people, than
I had done for many years. In the evening I preached at
Margate, to a very genteel, and yet very serious, congrega
tion; and I believe (although it blew a storm) near a hun
dred were present in the morning.
Thur. 19.--I had another truly comfortable opportunity at
Canterbury. God lifted up the hands that hung down, and
gave many a strong hope that they should yet see good days,
after all the days of darkness and heaviness. Friday, 20. I
returned to London; and on Sunday, 22, buried the remains
of Elizabeth Duchesne; a person eminently upright of heart,
yet for many years a child of labour and sorrow. For near
forty years she was zealous of good works, and at length
shortened her days by labouring for the poor beyond her
strength. But her end was peace. She now rests from
her labours, and her works follow her.
Tues. 31.-We concluded the year with solemn praise to
God for continuing his great work in our land. It has never
been intermitted one year or one month, since the year
1738; in which my brother and I began to preach that
strange doctrine of salvation by faith.
Wed. JANUARY 1, 1777.-We met, as usual, to renew our
covenant with God. It was a solemn season, wherein many
found his power present to heal, and were enabled to urge
their way with strength renewed.
Thur. 2.--I began expounding, in order, the book of Eccle
siastes. I never before had so clear a sight either of the
meaning or the beauties of it. Neither did I imagine that
the several parts of it were in so exquisite a manner con
nected together; all tending to prove that grand truth, that
there is no happiness out of God.
Wed. 8.-I looked over the manuscripts of that great and
good man, Charles Perronet. I did not think he had so
deep communion with God. I know exceeding few that
equal him; and had he had an University education, there
would have been few finer writers in England.
Mon. 13.--I took the opportunity of spending an hour every
92 REv. J. wesley’s [Jan. 1777.
morning with the Preachers, as I did with my pupils at Oxford.
And we endeavoured not only to increase each other's know
ledge, but “to provoke one another to love and to good works.”
Wed. 15.-I began visiting those of our society who lived
in Bethnal-Green hamlet. Many of them I found in such
poverty as few can conceive without seeing it. O why do
not all the rich that fear God constantly visit the poor?
Can they spend part of their spare time better? Certainly
not. So they will find in that day when “every man shall
receive his own reward according to his own labour.”
Such another scene I saw the next day, in visiting another
part of the society. I have not found any such distress, no,
not in the prison of Newgate. One poor man was just creep
ing out of his sick-bed, to his ragged wife and three little
children; who were more than half naked, and the very pic
ture of famine; when one bringing in a loaf of bread, they
all ran, seized upon it, and tore it in pieces in an instant.
Who would not rejoice that there is another world 2
Mon. 20.--Mrs. T. gave us a remarkable account :--On
Saturday, the llth instant, her little boy, a child of eminent
piety, between five and six years old, gave up his spirit to God.
She was saying to one in the house, “My son is gone to glory.”
A youth standing by, cried out, “But I am going to hell.”
He continued praying all Sunday and Monday; but in utter
despair. On Tuesday he found a hope of mercy, which gradually
increased. The next morning he rejoiced with joy unspeakable,
knowing his sins were blotted out; and soon after Henry Terry
(the son of many tears to his poor mother) slept in peace.
Tues. 21.-I dined at Mr. A.'s. A month or two ago he
had a trial worthy of a Christian. He saw his little son
(between four and five years old) crushed to death in a
moment. But he did not murmur : He could say, “The
Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away.”
Sun. 26.--I preached again at Allhallows church, morning
and afternoon. I found great liberty of spirit; and the con
gregation seemed to be much affected. How is this? Do
I yet please men? Is the offence of the Cross ceased ? It
seems, after being scandalous near fifty years, I am at length
growing into an honourable man
Thur. 30.-I had a visit from Mr. B , grown an old,
feeble, decrepit man; hardly able to face a puff of wind, or to
*
March, 1777.] JOURNAL, 93
creep up and down stairs | Such is the fruit of cooping one's
self in a house, of sitting still day after day !
Mon. FEBRUARY 3.--Hearing there was some disturbance
at Bristol, occasioned by men whose tongues were set on fire
against the Government, I went down in the diligence, and
on Tuesday evening strongly enforced those solemn words,
“Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers,
to speak evil of no man.” I believe God applied his word,
and convinced many that they had been out of their way.
Finding the repeated attempts to set fire to the city had
occasioned a general consternation, on Wednesday, 5, I
opened and applied those words to a crowded audience, “Is
there any evil in the city, and the Lord hath not done it?”
On Thursday I wrote “A calm Address to the Inhabitants of
England.” May God bless this, as he did the former, to the
quenching of that evil fire which is still among us! On
Saturday I returned to London.
Sat. 15.--At the third message, I took up my cross, and
went to see Dr. Dodd, in the Compter. I was greatly surprised.
He seemed, though deeply affected, yet thoroughly resigned to
the will of God. Mrs. Dodd likewise behaved with the utmost
propriety. I doubt not, God will bring good out of this evil.
Tuesday, 18. I visited him again, and found him still in a
desirable state of mind: calmly giving himself up to
whatsoever God should determine concerning him.
Wed. 19.--I was desired to see one that, after she had been
filled with peace and joy in believing, was utterly distracted.
I soon found it was a merely natural case; a temporary
disorder common to women at that period of life.
Tues. 25.-I spent an agreeable hour with Dr. C S, a
deeply serious man, who would fain reconcile the Arminians
and Calvinists. Nay, but he must first change their hearts.
Sun. MARCH 2.--Being a warm sunshiny day, I preached
in Moorfields, in the evening. There were thousands upon
thousands; and all were still as night. Not only violence
and rioting, but even scoffing at field-Preachers is now over.
To-day I received from an eye-witness a particular account
of a late remarkable occurrence. Captain Bell, a most ami
able man, beloved of all that knew him, and just engaged to
one which he tenderly loved, sailed from England last autumn.
On September 20 he was hailed by the Hawke, a small sloop,
94 REv. J. Wesley's [March, 1777.-
Captain Arthur Crawford, Commander, who told him he
came from Halifax, in His Majesty’s service, cruising for
American privateers. Captain Bell invited him to breakfast,
entertained him with all kindness, and made him some little
presents: But on his cursing and swearing at the Americans,
mildly reproved him, and he desisted. Mr. M'Aness, the
Supercargo, seeing him walk round the ship, and diligently
observe everything in it, told Captain Bell, “Be upon your
guard, this is certainly an enemy l’ But the Captain
answered, “It cannot be; no man can act so base a part.”
Captain Crawford returned to his own ship, and sailing
under the stern of the other, while Captain Bell and some
others were standing on the quarter-deck, ordered his men to
fire at him. They did so, and shot him in the belly, so that
his bowels came out. But he did not fall. He ordered them
to fire again: He fell; and while his men were carrying him
away, Crawford took the vessel.
Captain Bell being conveyed into the cabin, sent and desired
to speak with Captain Crawford: But he would not come. He
then desired to speak with his own sailors, one by one. One
of them saying, “Sir, you have been basely murdered,” he
replied, “Love your enemies; pray for them that despitefully
use you. What are our sufferings to those which our Lord
endured for us?” He then desired the account which St. John
gives of our Lord's sufferings to be read to him. He desired
his love to all that loved the Lord Jesus; particularly to her
he was about to marry. Then bidding them all farewell, he died
in peace, about two hours after he received the second shot.
But what did Captain Crawford do amiss? Have not the
English also taken American ships by surprise? Yes; but
not with such circumstances. For, 1. He hoisted no colours,
nor ever summoned the ship to yield: 2. He fired on men
who thought nothing of the matter, and pointed the men to
Captain Bell in particular. So it was a deliberate murder.
Such is the mercy, such the gratitude, of American rebels'
Mon. 10.--In the evening I preached at Reading. How
many years were we beating the air at this town! Stretching out
our hands to a people as stupid as oxen' But it is not so at
present. That generation is passed away, and their children are
of a more excellent spirit. After preaching at Newbury and
Ramsbury in the way, on Wednesday, 12, I went on to Bristol.
April, 1777.] JOURNAL. 95
Sun. 16.-I preached at St. Werburgh's, the first church I
ever preached in at Bristol. I had desired my friends not to
come thither, but to leave room for strangers. By this means
the church was well filled, but not over much crowded; which
gives occasion to them that seek occasion, as it is a real
inconvenience to the parishioners.
Fri. 21.--I preached at Bath. I often wonder at this,
Our chapel stands in the midst of all the sinners, and yet,
going or coming to it, I never heard an immodest word, but
prayers and blessings in abundance.
Sun. 23.--I preached at St. Ewin’s church, but not upon
Justification by Faith. I do not find this to be a profitable
subject to an unawakened congregation. I explained here,
and strongly applied, that awful word, “It is appointed unto
men once to die.”
Mon. 24.--I left Bristol, and preaching at Ramsbury, Wit
ney, Oxford, and High-Wycomb, in my way, on Thursday came
to London; whence I cannot be long absent while the new chapel
is building. Friday, 28. I received an affectionate message
from a great man.--But I shall not wonder if the wind changes.
Sun. 30.-Easter-day was a solemn and comfortable day,
wherein God was remarkably present with his people. During
the Octave I administered the Lord's Supper every morning,
after the example of the Primitive Church. Sunday, APRIL 6.
I began a journey through some of our societies, to desire
their assistance towards the expense of the new chapel. I
preached at Birmingham on Monday, 7; in Congleton, on
Tuesday; and on Wednesday went on to Macclesfield. The
new church here is far the most elegant that I have seen in
the kingdom. Mr. Simpson read Prayers, and I preached on
the first verse of the Second Lesson, Heb. xi. And I believe
many felt their want of the faith there spoken of. The next
evening I preached on Heb. xii. 14: “Without holiness no
man shall see the Lord.” I was enabled to make a close
application, chiefly to those that expected to be saved by faith.
I hope none of them will hereafter dream of going to heaven
by any faith which does not produce holiness.
Fri. 11.--I preached at Stockport about ten, and at Man
chester in the evening. Monday, 14. I preached about noon
at Warrington, and in the evening at Liverpool; where many
large ships are now laid up in the docks, which had been
96 REv. J. wesley’s [May, 1777.
employed for many years in buying or stealing poor Africans,
and selling them in America for slaves. The men-butchers
have now nothing to do at this laudable occupation. Since
the American war broke out, there is no demand for human
cattle. So the men of Africa, as well as Europe, may enjoy
their native liberty.
Wed. 16.--About noon I preached at Wigan; in the even
ing, at the new House in Bolton, crowded within and without,
on the “wise man” who “built his house upon a rock.”
Many here are following his example, and continually
increasing both in the knowledge and love of God.
Thur. 17.--I called upon Mr. Barker, at Little-Leigh, just
tottering over the great gulf. Being straitened for time, I
rode from thence to Chester. I had not for some years rode
so far on horseback, but it did me no hurt. After preaching,
I took chaise, and came to Middlewich, a little before the
Liverpool coach, in which I went on to London.
I have now finished Dr. Gell’s “Essay toward an Amend
ment of the last Translation of the Bible.” This part only
takes in the Pentateuch; but many other texts are occasion
ally explained. Surely he was a man mighty in the Scrip
tures, and well acquainted with the work of God in the
soul: And he plainly shows that the Antinomians and Anti
Perfectionists were just the same then, as they are now.
Monday, 21, was the day appointed for laying the foundation
of the new chapel. The rain befriended us much, by keeping
away thousands who purposed to be there. But there were still
such multitudes, that it was with great difficulty I got through
them to lay the first stone. Upon this was a plate of brass,
(covered with another stone,) on which was engraved, “This
was laid by Mr. John Wesley, on APRIL 1, 1777.” Probably
this will be seen no more, by any human eye; but will remain
there, till the earth and the works thereof are burned up.
Sun. 27.--The sun breaking out, I snatched the oppor
tunity of preaching to many thousands in Moorfields. All
were still as night, while I showed how “the Son of God was
manifested to destroy the works of the devil.”
Mon. 28.--At one I took coach, and on Wednesday evening
preached at Newcastle-upon-Tyne. I love our brethren in the
southern counties; but still I find few among them that have
the spirit of our northern societies. Saturday, MAY 3. I went
May, 1777.] JOURNAL. 97
to Sunderland, and strongly enforced, “Render unto Caesar
the things that are Caesar’s.”
Mon. 5.--Having finished my business in these parts, I set
my face southward again; and after preaching at Durham,
about eleven went on to Darlington. I have not lately found
so lively a work in any part of England as here. The society
is constantly increasing, and seems to be all on fire for God.
There is nothing among them but humble, simple love; no dis
pute, no jar of any kind. They exactly answer the descrip
tion that David Brainerd gives of his Indian congrega
tion. I particularly desired both the Preachers and Leaders
to have an especial care over them, and, if possible, to pre
vent either the devil or his agents from poisoning their
simplicity. Many of them already know, that “the blood
of Jesus Christ” hath “cleansed them from all sin.”
Wed, 7-I went to Yarm. There I found a lovely young
woman, in the last stage of a consumption; but such a one as
I never read of, nor heard any Physician speak of, but Dr.
Wilson. The seat of the ulcers is not in the lungs, but the
wind-pipe. I never yet knew it cured. My housekeeper
died of it last year. This young woman died in a few weeks.
Thur. 8.-About eleven I preached at Osmotherley. I found
my old friend Mr. Watson, who first brought me into this
country, was just dead, after living a recluse life near fifty
years. From one that attended him, I learned, that the sting
of death was gone, and he calmly delivered up his soul to God.
Fri. 9.--I went to Malton, hoping to meet Miss R y
there: But instead of her, I found a letter which informed
me that she was on the brink of the grave; but added,
“Surely my Lord will permit me to see you once more in the
hody.” I would not disappoint the congregation; but as
soon as I had done preaching, set out, and about four in the
morning came to Otley. I minutely inquired into the cir
cumstances of her illness. She is dropped suddenly into the
third stage of a consumption, having one or more ulcers in
her lungs, spitting blood, having a continual pain in her
breast, and a constant hectic fever, which disables her from
either riding on horseback, or bearing the motion of a
carriage. Meantime, she breathes nothing but praise and
love. Short-lived flower, and ripe for a better soil
Sat. 10.--After travelling between ninety and a hundred
98 Rev. J. Wesley’s [May, 1777.
miles, I came back to Malton; and, having rested an hour,
went on to Scarborough, and preached in the evening. But
the flux which I had had for a few days so increased, that at
first I found it difficult to speak. Yet the longer I spoke
the stronger I grew. Is not God a present help?
Sun. 11.--I oxperienced a second time what one calls,
febris ea insolatione.* The day was cold; but the sun shone
warm on my back, as I sat in the window. In less than half
an hour I began to shiver, and soon after had a strong fit of
an ague. I directly lay down between blankets, and drank
largely of warm lemonade. In ten minutes the hot fit came
on, and quickly after I fell asleep. Having slept half an
hour, I rose up and preached. Afterwards I met the society;
and I found no want of strength, but was just as well at the
end as at the beginning.
Mon. 12.--I preached at Bridlington; Tuesday, 13, in
the morning at Beverley; and in the evening at Hull, on,
“Narrow is the way that leadeth unto life.” And yet,
blessed be God, there are thousands walking in it now, who
a few years since thought nothing about it.
Wed. 14.--At eleven I preached at Pocklington, with an eye
to the death of that lovely woman, Mrs. Cross. A gay young
gentleman, with a young lady, stepped in, stayed five minutes,
and went out again, with as easy an unconcern as if they had
been listening to a ballad-singer. I mentioned to the congre
gation the deep folly and ignorance implied in such behaviour.
These pretty fools never thought that for this very oppor
tunity they are to give an account before men and angels!
In the evening I preached at York. I would gladly have
rested the next day, feeling my breast much out of order.
But notice having been given of my preaching at Tadcaster,
I set out at nine in the morning. About ten the chaise
broke down. I borrowed a horse ; but as he was neme of
the easiest, in riding three miles I was so thoroughly electri
fied, that the pain in my breast was quite cured. I preached
in the evening at York; on Friday took the diligence; and
on Saturday afternoon came to London.
MAY 18.-(Being Whit-Sunday.) Our Service at the Foun
dery began as usual at four. I preached in West-Street chapel
in the forenoon; and at the Foundery in the evening. In the
* A fever produced by an incautious exposure to the sun.--EDIT.
May, 1777.] JOURNAL. 99
afternoon I buried the body of Joseph Guildford, a holy man,
and a useful Preacher. Surely never before did a man of so
weak talents do so much good! He died, as he lived, in the
full triumph of faith, vehemently rejoicing and praising God.
Tues. 20.--I met the Committee for building, which indeed
was my chief business at London. We consulted together on
several articles, and were confidently persuaded, that He who
had incited us to begin, would enable us to finish.
Sat. 24.--My brother and I paid another visit to Dr. Dodd,
and spent a melancholy and useful hour. He appears, so far
as man can judge, to be a true, evangelical penitent.
To ease my journey, I went to Stevenage on Sunday even
ing. Monday, 26. I went on to Witham-Common; and on
Tuesday reached Sheffield. The next day I went to Leeds;
and, after preaching in the evening, pushed on to Otley. Here I
found E- R-- weaker and happier than ever. Her life seemed
spun out to the last thread. I spent half an hour with her, to
Teach her, at once, and learn of her, to die.
I then rested two or three hours; and took chaise at two, on
Thursday, 29, hoping to reach Whitehaven in the evening;
but I could only get to Cockermouth. Friday, 30. I went
on to Whitehaven, where I found a little vessel waiting for
me. After preaching in the evening, I went on board about
eight o'clock, and before eight in the morning landed at
Douglas, in the Isle of Man.
Douglas exceedingly resembles Newlyn in Cornwall; both
in its situation, form, and buildings; only it is much larger,
and has a few houses equal to most in Penzance. As soon as
we landed, I was challenged by Mr. Booth, who had seen me
in Ireland, and whose brother has been for many years a
member of the society in Coolylough. A chaise was pro
vided to carry me to Castletown. I was greatly surprised
at the country. All the way from Douglas to Castletown it
is as pleasant and as well cultivated as most parts of England,
with many gentlemen’s seats. Castletown a good deal resem
bles Galway; only it is not so large. At six I preached near
the Castle, I believe, to all the inhabitants of the town. Two
or three gay young women showed they knew nothing about
religion; all the rest were deeply serious. Afterwards I
spent an hour very agreeably at Mrs. Wood's, the widow of
100 REv. J. WESLEY’s [June, 1777.
the late Governor. I was much pressed to stay a little
longer at Castletown; but my time was fixed.
Sun. JUNE 1.-At six I preached in our own Room; and, to
my surprise, saw all the gentlewomen there. Young as well as
old were now deeply affected, and would fain have had me
stayed, were it but an hour or two; but I was forced to hasten
away, in order to be at Peeltown before the Service began.
Mr. Corbett said, he would gladly have asked me to preach,
but that the Bishop had forbidden him; who had also forbidden
all his Clergy to admit any Methodist Preacher to the Lord’s
Supper. But is any Clergyman obliged, either in law or con
science, to obey such a prohibition? By no means. The will
even of the King does not bind any English subject, unless it
be seconded by an express law. How much less the will of a
Bishop “But did not you take an oath to obey him?” No,
nor any Clergyman in the three kingdoms. This is a mere
vulgar error. Shame that it should prevail almost universally.
As it rained, I retired after Service into a large malt
house. Most of the congregation followed, and devoured the
word. It being fair in the afternoon, the whole congrega
tion stopped in the church-yard; and the word of God was
with power. It was a happy opportunity.
Mon. 2.-The greater part of them were present at five in
the morning. A more loving, simple-hearted people than
this I never saw. And no wonder; for they have but six
Papists, and no Dissenters, in the island. It is supposed to
contain near thirty thousand people, remarkably courteous
and humane. Ever since smuggling was suppressed, they
diligently cultivate their land : And they have a large
herring fishery, so that the country improves daily.
The old Castle at Peel (as well as the cathedral built within
it) is only a heap of ruins. It was very large and exceeding
strong, with many brass guns; but they are now removed to
England.
I set out for Douglas in the one-horse chaise, M.s. Smyth
riding with me. In about an hour, in spite of all I could do,
the headstrong horse ran the wheel against a large stone: The
chaise overset in a moment; but we fell so gently on smooth
grass, that neither of us was hurt at all. In the evening I
preached at Douglas to near as large a congregation as that at
Peel, but not near so serious. Before ten we went on board,
June, 1777.] JOURNAL, 101
and about twelve on Tuesday, 3, landed at Whitehaven. I
preached at five in the afternoon; and hastening to Cocker
mouth, found a large congregation waiting in the Castle-yard.
Between nine and ten I took chaise; and about ten on Wed
nesday, 4, reached Settle. In the evening I preached near
the market-place, and all but two or three gentlefolks were
seriously attentive. Thursday, 5. About noon I came to
Otley, and found E R. just alive, but all alive to
God. In the evening it seemed as if the departing saint had
dropped her mantle upon the congregation; such an awe was
upon them, while I explained and applied, “They were all
filled with the Holy Ghost.”
Fri. 6.--I preached at Bradford, where a blessed work has
increased ever since William Brammah was here. “Hath
not God chosen the foolish things of the world to confound
the wise?”
Sun. 8.--About one I took my stand at Birstal: Thousands
upon thousands filled the vale and the side of the hill; and
all, I found, could hear. Such another multitude assembled
near Huddersfield in the evening. Many of these had never
heard a Methodist Preacher before; yet they all behaved well.
Mon. 9.--I spent one hour more at Otley. Spectaculum
Deo dignum. /* I have not before seen so triumphant an
instance of the power of faith. Though in constant pain, she
has no complaint: So does the glory of God overshadow her,
and swallow up her will in his She is indeed
All praise, all meekness, and all love.
Wed. 11.--I had appointed to preach in the new preaching
house at Colne. Supposing it would be sufficiently crowded,
I went a little before the time; so that the galleries were but
half full when I came into the pulpit. Two minutes after,
the whole left-hand gallery fell at once, with a hundred and
fifty or two hundred persons. Considering the height, and
the weight of people, one would have supposed many lives
would have been lost. But I did not hear of one. Does not
God give his angels charge over them that fear him 2 When
the hurry was a little over, I went into the adjoining meadow,
and quietly declared the whole counsel of God.
On Thursday and Friday I preached at Halifax, Daw-Green,
* A sight wordhy of God himself.--EDIT.
102 REv. J. WESLEY’s [June, 1777.
IHorbury, and Wakefield. On Saturday I wrote “Thoughts
upon God's Sovereignty.” To a cool man, I think the whole
matter will appear to rest on a single point:--As Creator, he
could not but act according to his own sovereign will: But as
Governor he acts, not as a mere Sovereign, but according to
justice and mercy.
Mon. 16.--I met the class of children at Rothwell. This
consisted last year of eleven young maidens. They are increased
to twenty. I think, seventeen or eighteen of them are now
rejoicing in the love of God. And their whole behaviour is
suitable thereto, adorning the doctrine of God our Saviour.
Afterwards I went on to Rotherham, and was glad to find,
that the society is not discouraged by the death of that good
man, William Green, who had been as a father to them from
the beginning. He never started either at labour or suffer
ing; but went on calm and steady, trusting God with himself
and his eight children, even while all the waves and storms
went over him. He died, as he lived, in the full assurance of
faith, praising God with his latest breath.
Tues. 17.--I preached in the market-place at Chesterfield,
on, “It is appointed unto men once to die.” Although the
congregation was numerous, yet I did not observe any either
trifling or inattentive hearers. In the evening I preached at
Derby. It was supposed the people would be afraid to come,
as part of the roof had lately fallen in. (Indeed it fell an
hour before the congregation met: Otherwise many must
have been hurt.) But they were not afraid: The House was
well filled : And even the rich attended with seriousness.
Wed. 18.--I preached at Nottingham, to a serious, loving
congregation. There is something in the people of this town,
which I cannot but much approve of; although most of our
society are of the lower class, chiefly employed in the stocking
manufacture, yet there is generally an uncommon gentleness
and sweetness in their temper, and something of elegance in
their behaviour, which, when added to solid, vital religion,
make them an ornament to their profession.
Thur. 19.-I did not reach Leicester till the congregation
had waited some time: So I began immediately to enforce,
“Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.”
I had designed not to call here at all, supposing it would be lost
labour. But the behaviour of the whole congregation convinced
July, 1777.] JOURNAL. 103
me that I had judged wrong. They filled the House at five
in the morning, and seemed determined to “stir up the gift of
God which was in them.” Saturday, 21. I returned to London.
Wed. 25.--I saw Dr. Dodd for the last time. He was in
exactly such a temper as I wished. He never at any time
expressed the least murmuring or resentment at any one; but
entirely and calmly gave himself up to the will of God. Such
a prisoner I scarce ever saw before, much less such a con
demned malefactor. I should think, none could converse
with him without acknowledging that God is with him.
Thur. 26.-I read the truly wonderful performance of
Mr. Rowland Hill. I stood amazed l Compared to him,
Mr. Toplady himself is a very civil, fair-spoken gentleman
Friday, 27. I wrote an answer to it: “Not rendering
railing for railing;” (I have not so learned Christ;) but
“speaking the truth in love.”
Sat. 28.--I have now completed my seventy-fourth year;
and by the peculiar favour of God, I find my health and
strength, and all my faculties of body and mind, just the same
as they were at four-and-twenty.
Mon. 30.--I set out for Northamptonshire, and preached in
the evening at Stony-Stratford. Mr. Canham had prepared
a large and commodious place; but it would not contain the
congregation. However, all without, as well as within,
except one fine lady, were serious and attentive.
Tues. JULY 1.--I preached in the evening at Marton, near
Buckingham; the thunder, attended with heavy rain, was
likely to rob us of our whole congregation. We cried to
God. The thunder and rain ceased, and we had a fair
sunshiny evening. A large number of people flocked together,
some of whom came twelve or fourteen miles: And they did
not lose their labour; for God accompanied his word with the
demonstration of his Spirit.
Wed. 2.-The House was more than filled at five, and
chiefly with genteel young women; of whom (I learned) there
is a large number in this village, remarkable both for sense
and seriousness. After dinner we went on to Oxford, where
also we had a very serious congregation. So all the seed
sown here has not fallen either on stony or thorny ground.
In the afternoon I went to Witney; and, the evening being
fair and mild, preached on Wood-Green, to a far larger con
gregation than the House could have contained. I spent the
104 REv. J. WEsley’s [July, 1777.
rest of the evening profitably and agreeably, with a few of the
excellent ones of the earth. I was ready to say, “It is good
for me to be here.” No ! Go thou and preach the Gospel.
Thur. 3.-I was much comforted at Stroud among an
earnest, serious, loving people. Friday, 4. I preached in dull
Gloucester at ten, and at six in the new House at Tewkes
bury. Saturday, 5. I sent my chaise straight to Worcester,
and myself took horse for Bengeworth : The church was
tolerably filled. Afterwards I went down with Mr. Beale to
his house; the same in which Mr. Benjamin Seward lived
three or four and forty years ago. In the evening I
preached in the little chapel at Broadmarston.
Sun. 6.--I preached in Pebworth church morning and after
noon, and at Bengeworth in the evening. The church, large
as it is, was well filled; and many, for the present, were much
affected. I preached there once more at eight in the morning,
and then rode on to Worcester. On Tuesday evening the
Rector of the parish was at the preaching; a candid, sensible
man. He seemed much surprised, having never dreamed
before that there was such a thing as common sense among
the Methodists | The society here, by patient continuance in
well-doing, has quite overcome evil with good; even the
beasts of the people are now tame, and open not their mouths
against them. They profited much when the waves and storms
went over them: May they profit as much by the calm
Wed. 9.--I went through a delightful vale to Malvern-Wells,
lying on the side of a high mountain, and commanding one of
the finest prospects in the world; the whole vale of Evesham.
Hitherto the roads were remarkably good; but they grew worse
and worse till we came to Monmouth. Much disturbance was
expected here; but we had none: All were deeply attentive.
About six in the evening, on Thursday, 10, I preached on
the bulwarks at Brecon. Friday, 11. I called upon Mr.
Gwynne, just recovering from a dangerous illness. But he
is not recovered from the seriousness which it occasioned.
May this be a lasting blessing !
Sat. 12.-We dined at Llandeilo; after dinner we walked in
Mr. Rees's park, one of the pleasantest I ever saw; it is so
finely watered by the winding river, running through and round
the gently rising hills. Near one side of it, on the top of a high
eminence, is the old Castle; a venerable pile, at least as old
as William the Conqueror, and “majestic though in ruins.”
July, 1777.] JOURNAL. 105
In the evening I preached to a large congregation in the
market-place at Carmarthen. I was afterwards informed, the
Mayor had sent two Constables to forbid my preaching there.
But if he did, their hearts failed them, for they said not one
word.
Sun. 13.--We had a plain, useful sermon from the Vicar,
though some said, “He did not preach the Gospel.” He
preached what these men have great need to hear, lest they
seek death in the error of their life.
In the evening I explained to a huge congregation, who it
is that builds his house upon a rock. I believe many had
ears to hear, even of the young and gay; to whom I made a
particular application.
Mon. 14.--I reached Llyngwair about noon. In the even
ing Mr. Pugh read Prayers, and I preached, at Newport.
This is the only town in Wales which I had then observed to
increase.
In riding along on the side of Newport-Bay, I observed on
the ground a large quantity of turfs. These are found by
removing the sand above the high-water mark, under which
there is a continued bed of turf, with the roots of trees, leaves,
nuts, and various kinds of vegetables. So that it is plain the
sea is an intruder here, and now covers what was once dry
land. Such probably was the whole Bay a few centuries ago.
Nay, it is not at all improbable, that formerly it was dry land
from Aberystwith to St. David’s Point.
Tues. 15.--Mr. Bowen carried me in his chaise to Cardigan.
This is the second town I have seen in Wales, which is con
tinually increasing both in buildings and in number of
inhabitants. I preached at noon; five or six Clergymen
being present, with a numerous congregation; and a more
attentive one I have not seen: Many likewise appeared
deeply affected. If our Preachers constantly attended here,
I cannot think their labour would be in vain.
Wed. 16.--About nine I preached again in Newport church,
and found much liberty among that poor, simple people. We
dined with Admiral Vaughan, at Tracoom; one of the most
delightful spots that can be imagined. Thence we rode to
Haverfordwest; but the heat and dust were as much as I
could bear: I was faint for a while : But it was all gone as soon
as I came into the congregation; and after preaching, and
meeting the scciety, I was as fresh as at six in the morning.
106 REv. J. wesley’s [July, 1777.
Thur. 17.--I preached at Roach, and took a view of the old
Castle, built on a steep rock. A gentleman wisely asked Mr.
S , “Pray is this natural or artificial?” He gravely
replied, “Artificial, to be sure; I imported it from the north
of Ireland.”
Fri. 18.-The more I converse with the society at Haver
ford, the more I am united to them. Saturday, 19. About
eleven I preached at Howton, two miles short of the Ferry.
There was an uncommon blessing among the simple-hearted
people. At Pembroke, in the evening, we had the most elegant
congregation I have seen since we came into Wales. Some
of them came in dancing, and laughing, as into a theatre;
but their mood was quickly changed, and in a few minutes they
were as serious as my subject, Death. I believe, if they do
not take great care, they will remember it--for a week!
Sun. 20.--The congregation at St. Daniel’s was more than
the church could contain. After reading Prayers, I preached
an hour, (an uncommon thing with me,) on, “Not every one
that saith unto me, Lord | Lord l’” Many were cut to the
heart; and at the Lord's Supper, many were wounded and
many healed. Surely now, at least, if they do not harden
their hearts, all these will know the day of their visitation.
Mon. 21.--Having been much pressed to preach at Jatter
son, a colliery, six or seven miles from Pembroke, I began soon
after seven. The House was presently filled, and all the space
about the doors and windows; and the poor people drank in
every word. I had finished my sermon, when a gentleman,
violently pressing in, bade the people get home and mind their
business. As he used some bad words, my driver spake to
him. He fiercely said, “Do you think I need to be taught
by a chaise-boy '' The lad replying, “Really, Sir, I do
think so,” the conversation ended.
In the evening I preached in the market-place at Carmar
then, to such another congregation as I had there before ;
and my heart was so enlarged towards them, that I continued
preaching a full hour. Tuesday, 22. I preached at Llanelly
about one, and at Swansea in the evening.-
Wed. 23.−I preached in Swansea at five; in Neath,
between eight and nine ; and about one, at Margam. In the
road between this and Bridge-End, we had the heaviest rain
I ever remember to have seen in Europe: And it saved John
Prickard's life; for presently man and beast were covered
Aug. 1777.] JOURNAL, 107
with a sheet of lightning; but as he was thoroughly wet, it did
him no harm. In the evening I preached in Oldcastle
church, near Bridge-End.
Thur. 24.--I preached to a large and serious congregation,
in the Town-Hall at Cowbridge. Friday, 25. About eleven I
read Prayers, and preached in Lantwyt church, to a very
numerous congregation. I have not seen either so large or
so handsome a church since I left England. It was sixty
yards long; but one end of it is now in ruins. I suppose it
has been abundantly the most beautiful, as well as the most
spacious, church in Wales.
In the evening I preached at Mrs. Jones’s house in Fonte
gary. For the present, even the genteel hearers seemed
affected; and God is able to continue the impression.
Sat. 26.-I breakfasted at Fonmon Castle, and found a
melancholy pleasure in the remembrance of past times.
About noon I preached at Penmark, and in the evening in
that memorable old Castle at Cardiff.
Sun. 27.-I preached in the Town-Hall; and again in the
afternoon, to a crowded audience, after preaching in a little
church at Caerphilly. In the evening I preached in Mr.
M 's hall at Llandaff; and God applied his word (I
think) to every heart. Monday, 28. I preached at Newport,
and in the evening reached Bristol.
Wed. 30.--I spent an hour or two with Mr. Fletcher,
restored to life in answer to many prayers. How many pro
vidential ends have been answered by his illness And
perhaps still greater will be answered by his recovery.
Fri. AUGUST 1.--I desired as many as could to join toge
ther in fasting and prayer, that God would restore the spirit
of love and of a sound mind, to the poor deluded rebels in
America. In the evening we had a watch-night at Kings
wood; and I was agreeably surprised to observe that hardly
any one went away till the whole service was concluded.
Tues. 5.--Our yearly Conference began. I now particu
larly inquired (as that report had been spread far and wide)
of every Assistant, “Have you reason to believe, from your
own observation, that the Methodists are a fallen people?
Is there a decay or an increase in the work of God where you
have been 2 Are the societies in general more dead, or more
alive to God, than they were some years ago?” The almost
108 REv. J. wesley’s [Aug. 1777,
universal answer was, “If we must ‘know them by their fruits,’
there is no decay in the work of God, among the people in
general. The societies are not dead to God: They are as much
alive as they have been for many years. And we look on this
report as a mere device of Satan, to make our hands hang down.”
“But how can this question be decided ?” You, and you,
can judge no farther than you see. You cannot judge of one
part by another; of the people of London, suppose, by those
of Bristol. And none but myself has an opportunity of
seeing them throughout the three kingdoms.-
But to come to a short issue. In most places, the Methodists
are still a poor, despised people, labouring under reproach, and
many inconveniences; therefore, wherever the power of God is
not, they decrease. By this, then, you may form a sure judg
ment. Do the Methodists in general decrease in number?
Then they decrease in grace; they are a fallen, or, at least,
a falling people. But they do not decrease in number; they
continually increase: Therefore they are not a fallen people.
The Conference concluded on Friday, as it began, in much
love. But there was one jarring string: John Hilton told us,
he must withdraw from our Connexion, because he saw the
Methodists were a fallen people. Some would have reasoned
with him, but it was lost labour; so we let him go in peace.
Mon. 11.--I returned to London. Thursday, 14. I drew
up proposals for the “Arminian Magazine.” Friday, 15. The
Committee for the building met, which is now ready for the
roof. Hitherto God has helped us!
Sun. 17.-In the calm, fair evening, I took the opportunity
to preach in Moorfields. The congregation was at least as
large as I ever saw there. As yet I do not see any sign of
the decay of the work of God in England.
Mon. 18.--I went down to Bristol again, and read in the
way Dr. M'Bride’s “Practice of Physic.” Undoubtedly it is
an ingenious book; yet it did not answer my expectation.
Several things I could contradict from my own experience;
e.g., he says, “All fevers are attended with thirst and vigilia.”
Nay, in two violent fevers I had no thirst at all, and slept
rather more than when I was in health.
Tues. 19.--I went forward to Taunton, with Dr. Coke,
who, being dismissed from his Curacy, has bid adieu to his
honourable name, and determined to cast in his lot with
Oct. 1777.] JOURNAL. 109
us. In the evening I endeavoured to guard all who love
or fear God against that miserable bigotry which many of
our mistaken brethren are advancing with all their might.
Wed. 20.--I preached at Tiverton; Thursday, 21, at Laun
ceston; Friday, 22, about ten, in Bodmin. Thence I went
on to Cubert; and found that venerable old man, Mr. Hos
kins, calmly waiting for his discharge from the body. Saturday,
23. At noon, I preached in Redruth; and in the evening, on
the Cliff of St. Ives. In the following week I visited most of
the western societies; and on Saturday, 30, had the Quarterly
Meeting. I now inquired oarticularly, whether the societies
were increasing or decreasing. I could not hear of a decrease
in any ; but several were swiftly increasing; particularly
those of St. Just, Penzance, and Helstone.
Sun. 31.-I preached in the morning at St. Agnes; in the
evening to the huge congregation at Gwennap; larger (it
was supposed) by fifteen hundred or two thousand, than ever
it had been before.
Sat. SEPTEMBER 27.--Having abundance of letters from
Dublin, informing me that the society there was in the utmost
confusion, by reason of some of the chief members, whom the
Preachers had thought it needful to exclude from the society;
and finding all I could write was not sufficient to stop the grow
ing evil; I saw but one way remaining, to go myself, and that
as soon as possible. So the next day I took chaise with Mr.
Goodwin, and made straight for Mr. Bowen's, at Llyngwair, in
Pembrokeshire; hoping to borrow his sloop, and so cross over to
Dublin without delay. I came to Llyngwair on Tuesday, 30.
The next day, October 1, the Captain of a sloop at Fishgard,
a small sea-port town, ten or twelve miles from Llyngwair, sent
me word he would sail for Dublin in the evening; but he did
not stir till about eight the next evening. We had a small, fair
wind. From Fishgard to Dublin is about forty leagues. We
had run ten or twelve, till, at about eight in the morning,
Friday, 3, it fell dead calm. The swell was then such as I
never felt before, except in the Bay of Biscay. Our little
sloop, between twenty and thirty tons, rolled to and fro with
a wonderful motion. About nine, the Captain, finding he
could not get forward, would have returned, but he could
make no way. About eleven I desired we might go to prayer.
Quickly after the wind sprung up fair; but it increased, till,
I 10 REv. J. wesley’s [Oct. 1777.
about eight at night, it blew a storm, and it was pitch dark :
so that, having only the Captain and a boy on board, we had
much ado to work the vessel. However, about ten, though
we scarce know how, we got safe into Dublin Bay.
Sat. 4.--Between seven and eight I landed at Ring's End.
Mr. M'Kenny met me, and carried me to his house. Our
friends presently flocked from all quarters, and seemed equally
surprised and pleased at seeing me. I moved no dispute,
but desired a few of each side to meet me together at ten on
Monday morning. In the evening, although on so short a
warning, we had an exceeding large congregation; on whom
(waiving all matter of contention) I strongly enforced those
solemn words, “I must work the works of Him that sent me,
while it is day; the night cometh, when no man can work.”
Sun. 5.-I was much comforted at St. Patrick’s, where an
uncommon awe seemed to rest on the whole assembly. In
the evening I preached on Eph. iv. 30, &c., being the con
clusion of the Epistle for the day. Nothing could be more
seasonable, and I read it as a presage of good.
Mon. 6.--Atten I met the contending parties; the Preachers
on one hand, and the excluded members on the other: I heard
them at large, and they pleaded their several causes with
earnestness and calmness too. But four hours were too short
to hear the whole cause; so we adjourned to the next day:
Meantime, in order to judge in what state the society really
was, I examined them myself; meeting part of them to-day,
and the rest on Tuesday and Wednesday. Four-and-thirty
persons, I found, had been Lut out of, or left, the society: But,
notwithstanding, as there were last quarter four hundred and
fifty-eight members, so there are just four hundred and fifty
eight still. At the desire of the members lately excluded, I
now drew up the short state of the case; but I could in no
wise pacify them : They were all civil, nay, it seemed, affec
tionate to me; but they could never forgive the Preachers that
had expelled them : So that I could not desire them to return
into the society; they could only remain friends at a distance.
Thur. 9.--I was desired by some of our friends to clear up
the point of Imputed Righteousness: I did so, by preaching
on, “Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him
for righteousness.” In opening these words, I showed what
that faith was, which was imputed to him for righteousness,
Oct. 1777.j JOURNAL. 11]
viz., faith in God’s promise to give him the land of Canaan
faith in the promise that Sarah should conceive a son; and the
faith whereby he offered up Isaac on the altar. But Christ is
not in any of these instances the direct or immediate object of
Abraham's faith; whereas he is the direct, immediate object
of that faith which is imputed to us for righteousness.
Sat. 11.--I visited many, sick and well, and endeavoured
to confirm them in their love towards each other. I was
more and more convinced that God had sent me at this time
to heal the breach of his people.
Sun. 12.--We had a lovely congregation in the morning,
to whom I closely applied St. Peter's words: “I exhort you,
as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly desires which
war against the soul.” To the mixed multitude in the even
ing, I applied our Lord’s words: “All things are ready;
come unto the marriage.” I then took a solemn and affec
tionate leave of the society, and cheerfully commended them to
the Great Shepherd; more in number, and, I am persuaded,
more established in grace, than they had been for twenty years.
Mon. 13.--In the morning we went on board; but the
wind being right a-head, and blowing hard, we made but
little way, till night; and the sea was so rough, that I could
not sleep till midnight. Tuesday, 14. After beating up and
down several hours more, the Captain thought best to run
under the Carnarvonshire shore. About noon we put out to
sea again, but the storm increased, and about four carried
away our bowsprit, and tore one of the sails to tatters. But
the damage was soon repaired; and before six, by the good
providence of God, we landed at Holyhead.
Wanting to be in London as soon as possible, I took chaise
at seven, and hastened to Bangor Ferry. But here we were
at a full stop : They could not, or would not, carry us over till
one the next day; and they then gave us only two miserable
horses, although I had paid beforehand (fool as I was) for four.
At Conway Ferry we were stopped again: So that with all the
speed we could possibly make, even with a chaise and four, we
travelled eight-and-twenty miles yesterday, and seventeen to
lay. Thursday, in the afternoon, we reached Chester; Friday
morning, Lichfield; and on Saturday morning, London.
Mon. 20.--I went on to High-Wycomb; but good Mr.
James having procured a drummer to beat his drum at the
112 REv. J. Wesley’s [Nov. 1777.
window of the preaching-house, I only prayed and sung by
turns, from six to seven; and many of the people were much
comforted. In the rest of the week I visited the societies at
Oxford, Witney, Finstock, and Wallingford; and had reason to
believe that many received the seed in honest and good hearts.
Mon. 27.--I preached at Stony-Stratford. The congregation
was large and attentive : So it always is; yet I fear they receive
little good, for they need no repentance. Tuesday, I preached
at Towcester; on Wednesday, at Whittlebury; and on Thurs
day, at Northampton; and some of even that heavy congregation
seemed to feel, “The night cometh, when no man can work.”
Mon. Nov BMBER 3.--I began visiting the classes in Lon
don, in which I was fully employed for seven or eight days;
afterwards I visited those in the neighbouring towns, and
found reason to rejoice over them.
Sun. 16.-I was desired to preach a charity sermon in St.
Margaret's church, Rood-Lane. In the morning I desired
my friends not to come ; in the afternoon it was crowded
sufficiently, and I believe many of them felt the word of God
sharper than any two-edged sword.
Mon. 17.--I went to Norwich, and preached there in the
evening. The House was far too small, the congregation
being lately increased very considerably. But I place no
dependence in this people; they wave to and fro, like the
waves of the sea.
Wed. 19.-I went over to Loddon, and preached at one to
a much more settled congregation. In the evening I preached
at Norwich, and afterwards administered the Lord's Supper
to the society; and I was almost persuaded, that they will
no longer be tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine.
Thur. 20.-Abundance of people were present at five, and
we had a solemn parting. I went to Lynn the same day;
and Saturday, 22, taking chaise soon after twelve, reached
London in the afternoon.
Sun. 23.--I preached in Lewisham church for the benefit
of the Humane Society, instituted for the sake of those who
seem to be drowned, strangled, or killed by any sudden stroke.
It is a glorious design; in consequence of which many have
been recovered, that must otherwise have inevitably perished.
Mon. 24.--I spent the afternoon at Mr. Blackwell's with
the B of −. His whole behaviour was worthy of a
Dec. 1777.] JOURNAL. 113
Christian Bishop; easy, affable, courteous; and yet all his con
versation spoke the dignity which was suitable to his character.
Having been many times desired, for near forty years, to
publish a Magazine, I at length complied; and now began
to collect materials for it. If it once begin, I incline to
think it will not end but with my life.
Mon. DECEMBER 1.--I spent some hours, both morning
and afternoon, in visiting the sick at the west end of the town;
but I could not see them all. Wednesday, 3. I visited as
many as I could on the north-east part of the town. I spent
the evening at Newington, with Mr. Fletcher, almost mira
culously recovering from his consumption; and on Thursday,
4, he set out with Mr. Ireland for the south of France.
Tues. 9.-I visited the chief societies in Bedfordshire and
Huntingdonshire, and returned by Hertford ; where (for
once) I saw a quiet and serious congregation. We had a
larger congregation at Barnet, in the evening, than ever;
and a greater number of communicants. Will this poor,
barren wilderness at length blossom and bud as the rose ?
Sat. 13.--Being strongly urged to lay the first stone of the
House which was going to be built at Bath, on Sunday, 14,
after preaching at West-street chapel in the morning, and at
St. Paul’s, Shadwell, in the afternoon, I went to Brentford. I
preached at six ; and, taking chaise at twelve, on Monday, 15,
easily reached Bath in the afternoon. Tuesday, 16. I paid a
short visit to Bristol; preached in the evening and morning
following, Wednesday, 17; and at one laid the foundation of
the new chapel at Bath. The wind was piercing cold; yet
scarce any of the congregation went away before the end of
the sermon. After preaching at the Room in the evening,
I took chaise, and the next afternoon reached London.
Just at this time there was a combination among many of
the post-chaise drivers on the Bath road, especially those that
drove in the night, to deliver their passengers into each
other's hands. One driver stopped at the spot they had
appointed, where another waited to attack the chaise. In
consequence of this, many were robbed ; but I had a good
Protector still. I have travelled all roads, by day and by
night, for these forty years, and never was interrupted yet.
Thur. 25.--I buried the remains of Mr. Bespham, many
years Master of a man-of-war. From the time he received
114 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Jan. 1778.
the truth in love, he was a pattern to all that believe. His
faith was full of mercy and good fruits: His works shall
praise him in the gates.
Sat. 27.--A few days since, my Assistant, Mr. Baynes, by
far the strongest person in our family, was taken ill of a fever.
He was immediately attended both by an Apothecary and a
Physician; but their labour was in vain : This morning God
called him into the world of spirits. I had no desire to part
with him; but God knew what was best both for him and me.
Wed. 31.--We concluded the old year, and began the
new, with prayer and thanksgiving. Four or five of the
Local Preachers assisted me. I was agreeably surprised;
their manner of praying being so artless and unlaboured, and
yet rational and scriptural, both as to sense and expression.
Thur. JANUARY 1, 1778-We had a very solemn oppor
tunity of renewing our covenant with God. Tuesday, 6. I
spent an agreeable and a profitable hour with three German
gentlemen, two of them Lutheran Ministers, and the third,
Professor of Divinity at Leipsig. I admired both their good
sense, seriousness, and good breeding. How few of our
Clergy exceed or equal them 1
Mon. 19.--I went over to Tunbridge-Wells, and preached
in the large Dissenting meeting, to a numerous congrega
tion; and deep attention sat on every face. Tuesday, 20. I
went on, through miserable roads, to Robertsbridge ; where
an unusually large congregation was waiting. Thence we
went on to Rye, where the House was sufficiently crowded,
as usual. How large a society would be here, could we but
spare them in one thing ! Nay, but then all our labour would
be in vain. One sin allowed would intercept the whole blessing.
Mr. Holman’s widow being extremely desirous I should lodge
at Carborough, two miles from Rye, I ordered my chaise to take
me up at the preaching-house immediately after the service.
She had sent a servant to show me the way; which was a road
dirty and slippery enough, cast up between two impassable
marshes. The man waited a while, and then went home, leav
ing us to guide ourselves. Many rough journeys I have had ;
but such a one as this I never had before. It was one of the
darkest nights I ever saw : It blew a storm, and yet poured
down with rain. The descent, in going out of the town, was
near as steep as the ridge of a house. As soon as we had
feb. 1778.] JOURNAL. 115
passed it, the driver, being a stranger, knew not which way
to turn. Joseph Bradford, whom I had taken into the
chaise, perceiving how things were, immediately got out
and walked at the head of the horses, (who could not pos
sibly keep their eyes open, the rain so violently beating in
their faces,) through rain, wind, mud, and water; till, in
less than an hour, he brought us safe to Carborough.
Wed. 21.--I went back to Shoreham. Mr. P., though in
his eighty-fifth year, is still able to go through the whole
Sunday Service. How merciful is God to the poor people
of Shoreham | And many of them are not insensible of it.
Mon. FEBRUARY 2.--I had the satisfaction of spending an
hour with that real patriot, Lord What an unheard-of
thing it is, that even in a Court, he should retain all his sincerity
He is, indeed, (what I doubt Secretary Craggs never was,)
Statesman, yet friend to truth.
Perhaps no Prince in Europe, besides King George, is served
by two of the homestest, and two of the most sensible, men
in his kingdom.
This week I visited the society, and found a surprising
difference in their worldly circumstances. Five or six years
ago, one in three, among the lower ranks of people, was
out of employment; and the case was supposed to be nearly
the same through all London and Westminster. I did not
now, after all the tragical outcries of want of trade that fill
the nation, find one in ten out of business; nay, scarce one
in twenty, even in Spitalfields.
Sun. 15.-I buried the remains of Richard Burke, a faithful
labourer in our Lord’s vineyard : A more unblamable charac
ter I have hardly known. In all the years that he has laboured
with us, I do not remember that he ever gave me occasion to
find fault with him in any thing. He was a man of unwearied
diligence and patience, and “his works do follow him.”
Tues. 17.--I wrote “A Serious Address to the Inhabitants
of England,” with regard to the present state of the nation,-
so strangely misrepresented both by ignorant and designing
men, to remove, if possible, the apprehensions which have
been so diligently spread, as if it were on the brink of ruin.
Thur. 26.--I committed to the earth the remains of
George Parsons. He has left very few like him ; so zea
116 REv. J. wesley’s [March, 1778.
lously, so humbly, so unreservedly devoted to God. For
some time his profiting has appeared to all men. He
ripened apace for eternity. He was as a flame of fire,
wherever he went ; losing no occasion of speaking or work
ing for God. So he finished his course in the midst of his
years, and was quickly removed into the garner.
Friday, 27, was the day appointed for the national fast;
and it was observed with due solemnity. All shops were
shut up; all was quiet in the streets; all places of public
worship were crowded; no food was served up in the King's
house till five o'clock in the evening. Thus far, at least, we
acknowledge God may direct our paths.
Sun. MARCH 1.-I preached at Brentford in the evening;
Monday, 2, at Newbury; and the next evening at Bath.
Wednesday, 4, I went on to Bristol. I found the panic had
spread hither also, as if the mation were on the brink of ruin.
Strange that those who love God should be so frightened at
shadows ' I can compare this only to the alarm which spread
through the nation in King William's time, that on that very
night the Irish Papists were to cut the throats of all the
Protestants in England.
Mon. 9.--On this and the following days I visited the
society, and found a good increase. This year I myself
(which I have seldom done) chose the Preachers for Bristol;
and these were plain men; and likely to do more good than
has been done in one year, for these twenty years.
Fri. 13.--I spent an hour with the children at Kingswood,
many of whom are truly desirous to save their souls.
Mon. 16.-I took a cheerful leave of our friends at Bristol,
and set out once more for Ireland. After visiting Stroud,
Gloucester, and Tewkesbury, on Wednesday, 18, I went over
to Bewdley, and preached about moon at the upper end of the
town, to most of the inhabitants of it.
Thur. 19.--I preached to a large congregation, in the
church at Bengeworth, and spent a little time very agreeably
with the Rector, a pious, candid, sensible man. In the
evening I preached at Pebworth church; but I seemed out
of my element. A long anthem was sung ; but I suppose
none beside the singers could understand one word of it. Is
not that “praying in an unknown tongue?” I could no
more bear it in any church of mine, than Latin prayers.
April, 1778.] JOURNAL. 117
Fri. 20.--I preached at Birmingham. Saturday, 21. Call
ing at Wolverhampton, I was informed that, some time since,
a largc, old house was taken, three or four miles from the town,
which receives all the children that come, sometimes above four
hundred at once. They are taught, gratis, reading, writing,
and Popery; and, when at age, bound out apprentices.
In the evening I preached in the shell of the new House, at
Newcastle-under-Lyne; and thence hastened forward, through
Burslem, Congleton, Macclesfield, and Stockport, to Manches
ter. I found it needful here also, to guard honest Englishmen
against the vast terror which had spread far and wide. I had
designed going from hence to Chester, in order to embark at
Parkgate; but a letter from Mr. Wagner informing me that
a packet was ready to sail from Liverpool, I sent my horses
forward, and followed them in the morning. But before I
came thither, the wind turned west: So I was content.
Sun. 22.--I was much refreshed by two plain, useful ser
mons, at St. Thomas’s church; as well as by the serious and
decent behaviour of the whole congregation. In the evening
I exhorted all of our society who had been bred up in the
Church, to continue therein.
Tues. 31.--We went on board the Duke of Leinster, and
fell down the river with a small side-wind : But in the morn
ing, after a dead calm, a contrary wind arose, and blew
exceeding hard. Wednesday, APRIL 1. The sea was rough
enough. However, I went to sleep about my usual time, and
in the morning found myself in Dublin Bay; and about seven
we landed at the quay.
I was soon informed, that one of our friends, a strong, lively,
healthy man, Mr. Ham, had died the day before. From the
time he was taken ill, he was a mere self-condemned sinner,
deeply convinced of his unfaithfulness to God, and declaring,
I give up ev'ry plea beside,
Lord, I am damn'd; but thou hast died.
“When my wife dies,” said he, “let her be carried to the
Room. She has been an honour to her profession. But I
will not; I am not worthy; I have been no credit to you.”
He continued full of self-condemnation, till, after a week’s
illness, his spirit returned to God.
I daily conversed with many of the society, and had the
satisfaction to find them both more united together, and more
118 REv. J. Wesley’s [April, 1778.
alive to God, than they had been for some years. Saturday. I
began meeting the classes, and was agreeably surprised. I had
heard, that near a hundred persons had left the society: On
strict inquiry, I found about forty were wanting; the present
number being about four hundred and sixty; and therefore were
more loving and unanimous than I ever knew them before.
Sun. 5.-Meeting the society in the evening, I largely
explained the reasons of the late separation, and strongly
exhorted all our brethren not to “render railing for railing.”
Tues. 7.--I set out for the country, and reached Tyrrel's
Pass. It being a mild evening, I preached to a numerous
congregation. The next evening it was larger still ; and the
power of the Lord was present to heal.
Thur. 9.--Between eight and nine I preached in the
Court-House at Mullingar, to a more serious congregation
than I ever saw there before. In the evening I preached in
the Court-House at Longford, to a far more numerous, and
equally serious, congregation.
Fri. 10.--About eleven I preached at Abydarrig; and
before one set out for Athlone. The sun shone as hot as it
uses to do at midsummer. We had a comfortable time, both
this evening and the next day; all being peace and harmony.
Sunday, 12. God spake in his word, both to wound and to heal.
One young woman came to me just after service, who then
first rejoiced in God her Saviour.
Mon. 13.--About noon I preached at Ballinasloe to a large
congregation; some of whom seemed to be much affected; so
did many at Aghrim in the evening. Tuesday, 14. I went on
to Eyre-Court. The wind was now piercing cold, so that I
could not preach abroad: And there was no need; for the
Minister not only lent me his church, but offered me a bed
at his house; but I was obliged to go forward. At six in the
evening I preached at Birr, to a congregation of deeply
attentive hearers.
Wed. 15.--I met many of my old friends at Coolylough,
and had a numerous congregation in the evening. Thurs
day, 16. I preached in the riding-house in Tullamore. The
Commanding Officer ordered all the soldiers to be present,
and attended himself, with the rest of the Officers, while I
explained, “Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's;
and unto God the things that are God’s.”
APRIL 17.--(Being Good-Friday.) I preached at Tullamore
April, 1778.] JOURNAL. 119
in the morning, and Mount-Mellick in the evening. Saturday,
18. I preached at Portarlington in the evening; and about
eight in the morning to a very genteel, yet attentive, audience,
on, “Acquaint thyself now with him, and be at peace.” I
returned to Mount-Mellick before the church began, at which
I would always be present, if possible. I would fain have
preached abroad in the afternoon, but the weather would not
permit; so we made all the room we could in the House, and
had a solemn and comfortable meeting.
Mon. 20.--Mr. Jenkins, the Vicar of Maryborough, read
Prayers, and I preached on, “Repent, and believe the Gospel.”
The congregation was far larger than when I was here before,
and abundantly more attentive. Several Clergymen were
present, and several gentlemen; but they were as serious as
the poor.
Tues. 21.--We found the election for Parliament-men had
put all Kilkenny in an uproar. In consequence of this, we had
a small, dead congregation. But another cause of this was,
the bitter and perpetual quarrels between the chief members
of the society. I talked largely with the contending parties,
and they promised better behaviour for the time to come.
Wed. 22.--I went on to Clonmell, where, our Room being
small, and the weather unfavourable for preaching abroad, we
procured the largest room in the town, which was in the Qua
kers’ workhouse. I had scarce sat down when a young man
came and said, “My father and mother send their kind respects,
and would be glad of thy company this evening.” His mother
(now Mrs. Dudley) was my old acquaintance, Molly Stokes. I
went at four, and spent an hour very agreeably. But much
company coming in, Mr. Dudley desired I would call again in
the morning. I then told him what his wife was reported to
say of me: He answered me, it was an utter mistake; that she
had never spoke a disrespectful word concerning me.
Thur. 23.--Several of our brethren from Cork met at Rath
cormic. I was glad to find Mr. Rankin with them, just arrived
from America. When we came to Cork, the congregation was
waiting; so I began without delay.
Sun. 26.-I earnestly exhorted a numerous congregation at
eight, to “abstain from fleshly desires;”--a necessary lesson in
every place, and no where more so than in Cork. At St.
Peter's church I saw a pleasing sight, the Independent Com
120 REv. J. W. Esley’s [April, 1778.
panies, raised by private persons associating together, without
any expense to the Government. They exercised every day;
and, if they answer no other end, at least keep the Papists in
order; who were exceedingly alert, ever since the army was
removed to America.
Mon. 27.--In going to Bandon, I read Abbé Raynal's “His
tory of the Settlements and Trade of the Europeans in the
Indies.” I would be glad to propose a few queries. I ask, 1.
Is not this “Philosophical History” (so called) in many parts
profoundly dull; exactly fitted to spread a pleasing slumber over
the eyes of the gentle reader? 2. Are there not several pas
sages quite obscure? Is this the fault of the author or the trans
lator? 3. Are there not several assertions which are false in
fact? Such as that of the healthiness of Batavia, one of the
unhealthiest places in the known world. 4. Do not many of
his assertions so border upon the marvellous, that none but a
disciple of Voltaire could swallow them? As the account of
milk-white men, with no hair, red eyes, and the understanding
of a monkey. 5. Is not Raynal one of the bitterest enemies of
the Christian Revelation, that ever set pen to paper? Far more
determined, and less decent, than Voltaire himself? As, where he
so keenly inveighs against that horrid superstition, the depriv
ing men of their natural liberty of whoredom | Does he not take
every opportunity of wounding Christianity through the sides of
superstition orenthusiasm? Is not the wholelaboured panegyric
on the Chinese and the Peruvians, a blow at the root of Chris
tianity; insinuating all along, that there are no Christians in
the world so virtuous as these Heathens? Prove this fact, and it
undeniably follows that Christianity is not of God. But who
can prove it? Not all the baptized or unbaptized Infidels in the
world. From what authentic history of China is that account
taken? From none that is extant; it is pure romance, flowing
from the Abbé's fruitful brain. And from what authentic his
tory of Peru is the account of the Peruvians taken? I suppose
from that pretty novel of Marmontel, probably wrote with the
same design. 6. Is not Raynal one of the most bitter enemies
of Monarchy that ever set pen to paper? With what acrimony
does he personally inveigh against it, as absolutely, necessarily,
essentially subversive, not only of liberty, but of all national
industry, all virtue, all happiness And who can deny it?
Who? The Abbé himself? He totally confutes his own favour
May, 1778.] JOURNAL. 121
ite hypothesis: For was not Atabalipe a Monarch 2 Yea, a far
more absolute one than the King of France? And yet was
not Peru industrious, virtuous, and happy under this very
Monarch 2 So the Abbé peremptorily affirms, as it were on
purpose to confute himself. And is not the Emperor of China,
at this day, as absolute a Monarch as any in Europe? And
yet who so industrious, according to Raynal, who so virtuous,
so happy, as his subjects? So that he must totally give up either
his argument against Christianity, or that against Monarchy.
If the Peruvians were, and the Chinese are, the most indus
trious, virtuous, and happy men, then Monarchy is no way in
consistent with the industry, virtue, and happiness of a people.
But if the Peruvians were, in these respects, and the Chinese
are, no better than other men, (which is the very truth,) then
the argument against Christianity falls to the ground.
From the largeness and the seriousness of the congregations
here, I should have imagined the work of God was much in
creased; but, upon inquiry, I found just the contrary : Near
one third of those were wanting whom I left in the society
three years ago. Yet those who remained seemed much in
earnest. In the evening God clothed his word with power; few
appeared to be unaffected; and I was sorry I could not spend
a little more time, where the fields were so white to the harvest.
Wed. 29.--I returned to Cork, and met the classes. O when
will even the Methodists learn not to exaggerate” After all
the pompous accounts I had had of the vast increase of the
society, it is not increased at all; nay, it is a little smaller
than it was three years ago: And yet many of the members are
alive to God. But the smiling world hangs heavy upon them.
Sun. MAY 3.--I was a little surprised at a message from
the Gentlemen of the Aghrim Society, (a company of
Volunteers so called,) that, if I had no objection, they would
attend at the new Room in the evening. They did so, with
another Independent Company, who were just raised: (The
True Blues:) A body of so personable men I never saw toge
ther before. The gentlemen in scarlet filled the side gallery;
those in blue the front gallery: But both galleries would not
contain them all: Some were constrained to stand below. All
behaved admirably well, though I spoke exceeding plain on,
“We preach Christ crucified.” No laughing, no talking; all
seemed to hear as for life. Surely this is a token for good.
Mon. 4.--I went to Kilfinnan, in the neighbourhood of
122 REv. J. Wesley’s [May, 1778.
which there is a considerable revival of the work of God.
The rain continuing, I preached in a large empty house;
and again at five in the morning. Probably I shall see that
no more in the present world. We then went on, through
abundance of rain, to Limerick.
I felt in the evening the spirit of the congregation, the same
as many years ago; but in one circumstance I observed a con
siderable change: I used to have large congregations at my
first coming to Limerick; but from the first day they gradually
decreased. It was not so now ; but poor and rich, Protestants
and Papists, flocked together, from the beginning to the end.
Had they a presage, that they should see my face no more?
Thur. 7.--I preached once more to the loving, earnest,
simple-hearted people of Newmarket. Two months ago, good
Philip Geier fell asleep, one of the Palatines that came over and
settled in Ireland, between sixty and seventy years ago. He
was a father both to this and the other German societies, loving
and cherishing them as his own children. He retained all his
faculties to the last, and after two days’ illness went to God.
Fri. 8.--Finding the poor people at Balligarame, whom I
had not seen these five years, were very desirous to see me
once more, I went over in the morning. Although the
notice was exceeding short, yet a large number attended.
Sat. 9.-I wrote a “Compassionate Address to the Inha
bitants of Ireland.” Through which, as well as through Eng
land, the mock patriots had laboured to spread the alarm, as
though we were all on the very brink of destruction.
Sun. 10.-I examined the society, and have not known
them for many years so much alive to God; and I do not
remember to have ever found them so loving before: Indeed
the whole city seemed to breathe the same spirit. At three
in the afternoon I preached my farewell-sermon, on 1 Cor.
xiii. 13; and setting out immediately, reached Snegborough
before eight o'clock.
Tues. 12.-Setting out early, I intended to lodge at
Clare-Galway; but we found there was no lodging to be
had. However, they told us there was a good inn at Shreuil,
not many miles farther: And there we found a house; but
it afforded no food either for man or beast; so we were
obliged to push on for Ballinrobe, which we reached about
eleven o'clock. We came this day sixty-eight (English)
miles: A good day's work for a pair of horses.
May, 1778.] JOURNAL. 123
Wed. 13.--I preached in the evening to a large congrega
tion, but most of them dead as stones. The next morning I
crossed over to Holly-Mount, and preached to more than the
House would contain. In the afternoon we came to Castle
bar, and had a lively congregation in the evening. Here we
found the same spirit as at Limerick, and solemnly rejoiced
in God our Saviour.
Sun. 17.--Although the weather was rough and boisterous,
the people flocked at nine from all quarters, Papists and Pro
testants; and God sent down a gracious rain, especially upon
the backsliders. In the evening the Court-House was exceed
ingly crowded, and the fire of love ran from heart to heart.
One eminent backslider, who had drank in iniquity like
water, was utterly broken in pieces, and resolved to cut off
the right hand at once, and to be altogether a Christian.
When we came into the house, I told them, “God has
more work to do in this family.” Two of John Carr's sons,
and four of his daughters, were present. I prayed for them
in faith: They were all soon in tears; their hearts were
broken, and I left them mere sinners.
Mon. 18.-There were two roads to Sligo, one of which
was several miles shorter, but had some sloughs in it. How
ever, having a good guide, we chose this. Two sloughs we
got over well. On our approaching the third, seven or eight
countrymen presently ran to help us. One of them carried
me over on his shoulders; others got the horses through; and
some carried the chaise. We then thought the difficulty was
past; but in half an hour we came to another slough : Being
helped over it, I walked on, leaving Mr. Delap, John Carr,
Joseph Bradford, and Jesse Bugden, with the chaise, which
was stuck fast in the slough. As none of them thought of
unharnessing the horses, the traces were soon broke : At
length they fastened ropes to the chaise, and to the stronger
horse; and the horse pulling, and the men thrusting at once,
they thrust it through the slough to the firm land. In an
hour or two after we all met at Ballinacurrah.
• While I was walking, a poor man overtook me, who
appeared to be in deep distress: He said, he owed his land
lord twenty shillings rent, for which he had turned him and
his family out of doors; and that he had been down with his
relations to beg their help, but they would do nothing. Upon
my giving him a guinea, he would needs kneel down in the
124 REv. J. Wesley’s [May, 1778.
road to pray for me; and then cried out, “O, I shall have a
house ! I shall have a house over my head l’” So perhaps
God answered that poor man's prayer, by the sticking fast of
the chaise in the slough I
Tues. 19.--In the evening I preached at Sligo, in the old
Court-House, an exceeding spacious building: I know not
that ever I saw so large a congregation here before ; nor
(considering their number) so well behaved. Will God
revive his work even in this sink of wickedness, and after so
many deadly stumbling-blocks 2
Upon inquiry, I found, there had been for some time a real
revival of religion here. The congregations have considerably
increased, and the society is nearly doubled. We had in the
evening a larger congregation than before, among whom were
most of the Gentry of the town: And all but one or two young
gentlemen (so called) were remarkably serious and attentive.
I now received an intelligible account of the famous mas
sacre at Sligo. A little before the Revolution, one Mr.
Morris, a Popish gentleman, invited all the chief Protestants
to an entertainment; at the close of which, on a signal given,
the men he had prepared fell upon them, and left not one of
them alive. As soon as King William prevailed, he quitted
Sligo. But venturing thither about twenty years after,
supposing no one then knew him, he was discovered, and
used according to his deserts.
Thur. 21.-I went on to Peter Taylor’s, near Swadling
bar. At six I preached in a large room in the town, designed
for an assembly; where rich as well as poor behaved with the
utmost decency.
Fri. 22.--We went through a lovely country to Belturbet;
once populous, now greatly decayed. At eleven I preached in
the Armory, a noble room, to a very large and very serious
congregation. At six I preached in the Court-House at
Cavan, to a larger congregation than at Belturbet.
Sat. 23.−I was desired to preach once more at Coote-Hill,
which I had not seen for many years. The use of the Pres
byterian meeting-house being procured, I had a very extra
ordinary congregation. To many Church-people were added
Seceders, Arians, Moravians, and what not : However, I
went straight forward, insisting that “without holiness no
man shall see the Lord.”
After dinner we went on to Clones, finely situated on the top
June, 1778.] JOURNAL. 125
of a hill, in the midst of a fruitful and well-cultivated country;
and the people seemed as sprightly as the place. I preached in
the Green-Fort near the town, to abundance of people, but no
tritlers. Sunday, 24. I preached there again at nine, to a
still larger congregation; but the far largest of all was in the
evening; the people coming in from all parts of the country.
There is something very peculiar in this people: They are
more plain, open, and earnest, than most I have seen in the
kingdom. Indeed, some of our Irish societies, those in
Athlone, Limerick, Castlebar, and Clones, have much of the
spirit of our old Yorkshire societies.
Mon. 25.-I went through a pleasant country to Aughalan.
A very large congregation was soon assembled; and the rich
seemed to be as attentive as the poor. So they were also in
the evening at Sidare.
Tues. 26.-We went on to Loghean. Wednesday, 27. I
received a very remarkable account from Mrs. Brown, a
gentlewoman in the neighbourhood. She said, “Six years
ago my daughter Jane, then seventeen years old, was struck
raving mad; she would strike any one she could, particularly
her father; she cursed and swore horribly; she never slept;
and let her hands be bound ever so fast over night, they were
loose in the morning. The best Physicians were consulted,
and all means used; but to no purpose. On Thursday, December
28, last, she violently struck her father on the breast; the
next day, Friday, 29, she was perfectly well, without using any
means at all; and she has continued ever since, not only in
her senses, but full of faith and love.”
Thur. 28.--Between nine and ten I preached at a village
called Magharacolton, to a large and serious congregation;
and in the evening, at Londonderry. Considering the large
ness and seriousness of the congregations, I wonder no more
good is done here.
Mon. JUNE 1.-I went over to the New-Buildings, and
took my honourable post in the Mill. Deep attention sat on
every face. So it usually does, when the poor have the
Gospel preached. I preached at Londonderry in the evening,
on, “I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.” How
happy would many of those be, if they had but thoroughly
learned this lesson 1
Wed. 3.-I took an account of the present society, a little
126 REv. J. Wesley’s [June, 1778.
smaller than it was three years ago. Thursday, 4. I took my
leave of this affectionate people, and about eleven preached at
New-Town, Limavaddy. In the afternoon I went on to
Kilrea, and was cordially received by Mr. Haughton, once a
Travelling Preacher, now a Magistrate, and Rector of a parish.
But the church wherein it was at first proposed I should
preach, is, as I found, a mere heap of ruins: So I preached in
the new meeting-house; a very large and commodious build
ing. Abundance of people flocked together; some of them
seemed not a little affected; and all were seriously attentive:
Surely some will bring forth good fruit.
Fri. 5.--We went on to Coleraine. As the barracks here
are empty, we hired one wing, which, by laying several rooms
into one, supplied us with a spacious preaching-house; but it
would not contain a third of the congregation; but standing
at the door, I had them all before me in the barrack-square.
Sat. 6.--I was desired to take a ride to the celebrated
Giant's Causeway. It lies eleven English miles from Cole
raine. When we came to the edge of the precipice, three or
four poor boys were ready to hold our horses, and show us
the way down. It being dead low water, we could go any
where, and see every thing to the best advantage. It is
doubtless the effect of subterraneous fire. This manifestly
appears from many of the stones which composed the pillars
that are now fallen down: These evidently bear the mark of
fire, being burnt black on one or the other surface. It
appears likewise from the numerous pumice-stones scattered
among the pillars: Just such pillars and pumices are found in
every country which is, or ever was, subject to volcanoes.
In the evening I saw a pleasing sight. A few days ago a
young gentlewoman, without the knowledge of her relations,
entered into the society: She was informed this evening that
her sister was speaking to me upon the same account. As
soon as we came into the room, she ran to her sister, fell upon
her neck, wept over her, and could just say, “O sister,
sister!” before she sunk down upon her knees to praise God.
Her sister could hardly bear it; she was in tears too, and so
were all in the room. Such are the first fruits at Coleraine.
May there be a suitable harvest !
Sun. 7.--I breakfasted with Mr. Boyd, the twin-soul, for
humility and love, with Mr. Sh , of Staplehurst. I read
June, 1778.] JOURNAL. 127
Prayers for him, and administered the sacrament to such a
number of communicants as I suppose never met there before.
A little before the time of preaching, the rain ceased, and we
had a wonderful congregation in the barrack-yard in the even
ing. Many of them were present at five in the morning,
when I left them full of love and good desires. About nine I
preached in the Town-Hall at Ballimannely; about twelve,
at another little town; and in the evening, at Ballymena.
Tues. 9.--We rode through a small village, wherein was a
little society. One desiring me to step into a house there, it was
filled presently; and the poor people were all ear, while I gave
a short exhortation, and spent a few minutes in prayer. In the
evening, as the Town-Hall at Carrickfergus could not oontain
the congregation, I preached in the market-house, on, “Fear
God, and keep his commandments; for this is the whole of
man.” The people in general appeared to be more serious, and
the society more earnest, than they had been for many years.
Thence we went to Belfast, the largest town in Ulster, said
to contain thirty thousand souls. The streets are well laid
out; are broad, straight, and well-built. The poor-house
stands on an eminence, fronting the main street, and having
a beautiful prospect on every side over the whole country:
The old men, the old women, the male and the female children,
are all employed according to their strength; and all their
apartments are airy, sweet, and clean, equal to any thing of
the kind I have seen in England.
I preached in the evening on one side of the new church,
to far the largest congregation I have seen in Ireland; but
I doubt the bulk of them were nearly concerned in my text,
“And Gallio cared for none of these things.”
Thur. 11.--About nine I preached to five or six hundred
people in the old church at Newtown, Clannibois. The sight
of these vast buildings and large gardens running to decay,
through the extinction of the family that lately owned them,
(so successful was the scheme of those wretches who pur
posely educated poor Mr. C-, the last of the family, in
such a manner as to insure his not living long, and his dying
without issue,) always makes me pensive; but still our
comfort is, “There is a God that judgeth in the earth.”
About twelve I preached at Kirkhubly: Thence we went to
Port-a-ferry, and found a ready passage to Strangford. I stood
128 REv. J. Wesley’s [June, 1778.
on the point of a rock, which projected into a large circular
cavity, that contained in the hollow, and round the edge of it,
all the multitude who flocked together. I spoke longer than
I used to do; and was no more weary when I had done, than
I was at six in the morning. After service we went to Down
patrick, where I slept in peace.
Fri. 12.-I walked through the town; I suppose one of
the most ancient in Ulster. I was informed, it was once
abundantly larger than it is now; consisting of the Irish town,
then inhabited by none but Roman Catholics; and the English
town, encompassed with a wall, and a deep ditch filled with
water. At the head of the English town stands the Abbey,
on a hill which commands all the country. It is a noble ruin,
and is far the largest building that I have seen in the king
dom. Adjoining to it is one of the most beautiful groves
which I ever beheld with my eyes: It covers the sloping side
of the hill, and has vistas cut through it every way. In the
middle of it is a circular space, twenty or thirty yards in
diameter. I would have preached there, but the rain drove
into the House as many as could crowd together.
Sat. 13.--I took my stand in the middle of the Grove; the
people standing before me on the gradually rising ground,
which formed a beautiful theatre: The sun just glimmered
through the trees, but did not hinder me at all. It was a
glorious opportunity: The whole congregation seemed to
drink into one spirit.
Sun. 14.--I preached at Dunsford in the morning. In the
evening the congregation in the Grove exceeded even that at
Belfast; and I verily believe all of them were almost persuaded
to be Christians.
Mon. 15.--I left Downpatrick with much satisfaction; and
in the evening preached in the Linen-Hall at Lisburn, to near
as large a congregation as that in the Grove; but not near so
much affected. Afterwards I went to my old lodging at
Derry-Aghy, one of the pleasantest spots in the kingdom;
and I could relish it now ! How does God bring us down to
the gates of death, and bring us up again
Tues. 16.--I preached at eight to a lively congregation,
under the venerable old yew, supposed to have flourished in
the reign of King James, if not of Queen Elizabeth.
Wed. 17.--At eleven our brethren flocked to Lisburn from
June, 1778.] JOURNAL. 129
all parts, whom I strongly exhortcd, in the Apostle's words, to
“walk worthy of the Lord.” At the love-feast which followed,
we were greatly comforted; many of the country people declar
ing with all simplicity, and yet with great propriety both of
sentiment and expression, what God had done for their souls.
Thur. 18.-I preached at Ballinderry, (in my way to
Lurgan,) where many flocked together, though at a very short
warning. We had four or five times as many in the
evening at Lurgan; but some of them wild as colts untamed.
However, they all listened to that great truth, “Narrow is
the way that leadeth unto life.”
Fri. 19.-I preached about noon to a serious company at
Derry-Anvil; and then went on to Cockhill. I preached here
at the bottom of the garden; the table was placed under a
tree, and most of the people sat on the grass before it; and
everything seemed to concur with the exhortation, “Acquaint
thyself now with him, and be at peace.”
Sat. 20.--I travelled through a delightful country to
Charlemont, where Captain Tottenham was the Commanding
Officer. We lodged with him in the castle, which stands on
an eminence, and commands the country on all sides. A tent
was set up in the castle-yard, where all the soldiers were
drawn up at eleven, with abundance of people from many
miles round, who were all attention. In the evening their
number was considerably enlarged; but still all heard as for life.
Sun. 21.-I preached at nine in the avenue at Armagh, to
a large and serious congregation. It was increased four-fold
at six in the evening; but many were there who behaved as
if they had been in a bear-garden.
Mon. 22.--I took a walk to the Primate's ; and went through
the house, and all the improvements. The house is neat and
handsome, but not magnificent; and is elegantly, but not splen
didly, furnished. The domain is beautifully laid out in meadow
ground, sprinkled with trees; on one side of which is a long hill
covered with a shrubbery, cut into serpentine walks. On each
side of the shrubbery is a straight walk, commanding a beautiful
prospect. Since this Primate came, the town wears another face:
He has repaired and beautified the cathedral, built a row of
meat houses for the Choral-Vicars, erected a public Library
and an Infirmary, procured the Free-School to be rebuilt of the
size of a little College, and a new-built horse-barrack, together
180 REv. J. wesley’s [June, 1778.
with a considerable number of convenient and handsome
houses; so that Armagh is at length rising out of its ruins into
a large and populous city. So much good may any man of a
large fortune do, if he lays it out to the best advantage 1
Tues. 23.--I went on to Tanderagee, one of the pleasantest
towns in Ireland. As it was a fair, calm evening, I had
designed to preach in the avenue to the Castle; but being
desired to preach in the court-yard, I took my place under a
tall spreading tree, in the midst of a numerous congregation,
who were still as night. There could not be devised a more
pleasing scene: The clear sky, the setting sun, the surround
ing woods, the plain, unaffected people, were just suitable to
the subject, “My yoke is easy, and my burden is light.”
Wed. 24.--For exactly two months, we have had only two
days without rain. In the evening I preached in the same
lovely place. I dined, supped, and lodged at Dr. Lesley's, the
Rector; a well-bred, sensible, and I believe a pious man. We
had family prayers before supper, which he read with admirable
propriety and devotion; and I know not that I have spent a
more agreeable evening since I came into the kingdom.
Thur. 25.-I walked round Dr. Lesley’s domain : A plea
santer spot I never saw. It lies on the top of a fruitful hill,
at a small distance from the town; and commands the whole
view of a lovely country, east, west, north, and south; and it
is laid out with the finest taste imaginable. The ground I
took for a park I found was an orchard, tufted with fruit
trees and flowering-shrubs; and surrounded with a close,
shady walk. I spent another hour with the amiable family
this morning; and it was an hour I shall not soon forget:
But it will never return For one, if not more, of that lovely
company, are since removed to Abraham's bosom. In the
evening I preached to a large congregation at Newry; and
on Saturday morning returned to Dublin.
I had now just finished Xenophon's Kupe IIzièsia ; some
parts of which I think are exceeding dull, particularly his
numerous speeches, and above all the tedious dialogue between
Cyrus and Cambyses. But what a beautiful picture does
he draw of Cyrus ! What an understanding ! and what
tempers' Did ever a Heathen come up to this? Not since
the world began. Few, exceeding few, even of the best
instructed Christians have attained so unblamable a character.
July, 1778.] JOURNAL. 131
Sun. 28.--I am this day seventy-five years old; and I do
not find myself, blessed be God, any weaker than I was at
five-and-twenty. This also hath God wrought !-
All this week I visited as many as I could, and endeavoured
to confirm their love to each other; and I have not known
the society for many years so united as it is now.
Sat. JULY 4.--A remarkable piece was put into my hands;
the “Life of Mr. Morsay:” And I saw no reason to alter
the judgment which I had formed of him forty years ago. He
was a man of uncommon understanding, and greatly devoted
to God. But he was a consummate enthusiast. Not the word
of God, but his own imaginations, which he took for divine
inspirations, were the sole rule both of his words and actions.
Hence arose his marvellous instability, taking such huge strides
backwards and forwards; hence his frequent darkness of soul:
For when he departed from God’s word, God departed from
him. Upon the whole, I do not know that ever I read a
more dangerous writer; one who so wonderfully blends together
truth and falsehood; solid piety, and wild enthusiasm.
Tues. 7.--Our little Conference began, at which about
twenty Preachers were present. On Wednesday we heard
one of our friends at large, upon the duty of leaving the
Church; but after a full discussion of the point, we all remained
firm in our judgment, that it is our duty not to leave the
Church, wherein God has blessed us, and does bless us still.
Sun. 12.-After I had several times explained the nature
of it, we solemnly renewed our covenant with God. It was
a time never to be forgotten; God poured down upon the
assembly “the spirit of grace and supplication;” especially
in singing that verse of the concluding hymn,
To us the covenant blood apply,
Which takes our sins away;
And register our names on high,
And keep us to that day.
This afternoon, Mr. Delap, one of our Preachers, walking
through the city, met a crowd of people running from a mad
dog, who had bit several persons: He walked on, took up a
large stone, struck the dog on the head, and knocked him
down; he then leaped upon him, and dispatched him; while
the people crowded round, and gave him abundance of thanks.
Ou Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I visited many of
132 REv. J. WESLEY’s [July, 1778.
those who had left the society; but I found them so deeply
prejudiced, that, till their hearts are changed, I could not
advise them to return to it.
Thur. 16.-I went with a few friends to Lord Charlemont's,
two or three miles from Dublin. It is one of the pleasantest
places I have ever seen: The water, trees, and lawns, are so
elegantly intermixed with each other; having a serpentine walk
running through a thick wood on one side, and an open prospect
both of land and sea on the other. In the thickest part of the
wood is the Hermitage, a small room, dark and gloomy enough.
The Gothic temple, at the head of a fine piece of water, which
is encompassed with stately trees, is delightful indeed. But
the most elegant of all the buildings is not finished: The shell
of it is surprisingly beautiful, and the rooms well contrived
both for use and ornament. But what is all this unless God
is here? Unless he is known, loved, and enjoyed? Not
only vanity, unable to give happiness, but vexation of spirit.
Sun. 19.--In the evening I went on board the Prince of
Orange; but, the wind failing, we soon struck upon a sand
bank. We got clear of it about five in the morning, and set
sail. All the day before there had been a strong north-east
wind; this had raised the sea to an uncommon degree, which
affected me full as much as a storm. However, lying down at
four in the afternoon, I fell asleep, and slept most of the time
till four in the morning. About six we landed on Liverpool
quay, and all my sickness was over.
Tues. 21.--We had, as usual, a very numerous and very
serious congregation. Wednesday, 22. I went on to Bolton.
The new House here is the most beautiful in the country.
It was well filled in the evening; and I believe many of the
audience tasted largely of the powers of the world to come,
while I enlarged upon our Lord's words, “Neither can they
die any more; for they are equal to angels, and are the
children of God, being the children of the resurrection.”
Fri. 24.--I preached at Bury and Rochdale, and the next
evening at Halifax. Sunday, 26. The House was tolerably
well filled at eight. Understanding there was great need of it,
I preached on, “Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's;
and unto God the things that are God’s.” I spoke with all
plainness, and yet did not hear that any one was offended.
At one I preached on those words in the Gospel for the day,
Aug. 1778.] JOURNAL. 133
“Reckon ye yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive
unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord.” Such a time I
have not known for some years: The House was extremely
crowded; but I believe there was not only no inattentive but
no unaffected hearer. In the evening I preached at Bradford,
to such a congregation as I have not seen since I left London.
Sat. AUGUST 1.--I was desired to take a view of Mr.
Busfield’s improvements near Bingley. Isis house stands on
the top of a hill clothed with wood, opposite to another which
is covered with tall oaks. Between the hills runs the river. On
the top, at the bottom, through the midst, and along the side
of his woods, he has made partly straight, partly serpentine,
walks; some of which command a lovely prospect. He is
continually making new improvements: But will not that
thought frequently intrude,-
Must I then leave thee, Paradise ? Then leave
These happy shades and mansions fit for Gods P
Sun. 2.-At one I preached at the foot of Birstal-hill, to
the largest congregation that ever was seen there. It was
supposed there were twelve or fourteen thousand; but there
were some thousands more at Leeds: I think it was the
largest congregation that I have seen for many years, except
that at Gwennap, in Cornwall.
Tues. 4.--Our Conference began: So large a number of
Preachers never met at a Conference before. I preached,
morning and evening, till Thursday night: Then my voice
began to fail; so I desired two of our Preachers to supply my
place the next day. On Saturday the Conference ended.
Sun. 9.-I preached at eight in the market-place at Dews
bury, to some thousands of serious people; as Mr. Pawley
would not permit me to preach in the church, because it
would give offence
After visiting Bradford and Halifax, I struck across to
Manchester and Stockport; and went on by moderate jour
meys to London. Having soon finished my business there,
on Monday, 17, Dr. Coke, my brother, and I, took coach for
Bristol; and early on Thursday, 20, I set out for Cornwall.
I preached at Taunton that evening; Friday, 21, at Exon;
and on Saturday reached the Dock.
Sun. 23.--At seven I preached in our Room, and at one on
the quay, at Plymouth. The common people behaved well;
134- REv. J. wesley’s [Aug. 1778.
but I was shocked at the stupidity and ill-breeding of several
Officers, who kept walking and talking together all the time
with the most perfect unconcern. We had no such Gallios
in the evening at the Dock, though the congregation was four
times as large. Surely this is an understanding people: May
their love be equal to their knowledge |
Mon. 24.--In the way to Medros, Mr. Furz gave me a
strange relation, which was afterwards confirmed by eye and
ear witnesses:-In July, 1748, Martin Hoskins, of Sithney,
being in a violent passion, was struck raving mad, and obliged
to be chained down to the floor. Charles Sk Went to See
him. He cried out, “Who art thou? Hast thou faith?
No; thou art afraid.” Charles felt an inexpressible shock,
and was raving mad himself. He continued so for several
days, till some agreed to keep a day of fasting and prayer.
His lunacy then ended as suddenly as it began. But what
was peculiarly remarkable was, while he was ill, Martin was
quite well: As soon as he was well, Martin was as ill as ever.
Thence I went on to Redruth, Helstone, and Penzance.
On Thursday, 27, in the evening I preached in the market
place, at St. Just. Very few of our old society are now left :
The far greater part of them are in Abraham's bosom. But
the new generation are of the same spirit; serious, earnest,
devoted to God; and particularly remarkable for simplicity
and Christian sincerity.
Fri. 28.--The Stewards of the societies met at St. Ives, a
company of pious, sensible men. I rejoiced to find that peace
and love prevailed through the whole Circuit. Those who
styled themselves My Lady’s Preachers, who screamed, and
railed, and threatened to swallow us up, are vanished away.
I cannot learn that they have made one convert; a plain
proof that God did not send them.
One was mentioning to-day a wonderful oration, which Mr.
Rowland H. had lately made. I thought Mr. Toplady had
not left behind him his fellow ; but see l--
--Primo avulso, non deficit alter
Aureus, et simili frondescit virga metallo."
Sat. 29.--I found the venerable old man at Cubert pale,
* The following is Dryden's translation of these lines :-
The first thus rent, a second will arise:
And the same metal the same room supplies.--EDIT.
Sept. 1778.] JOURNAL, 135
thin, and scarce half alive. However, he made shift to go in a
chaise to the preaching, and, deaf as he was, to hear almost
every word. He had such a night's rest as he had not had
for many, months, and in the morning seemed hardly the
same person. It may be God will give him a little longer
life, for the good of many.
Sun. 30.--About five I preached in the amphitheatre at
Gwennap, it was believed, to four-and-twenty thousand. After
wards I spent a solemn hour with the society, and slept in peace.
Mon. 31.--About eleven I preached to a large and serious
congregation, near the Town-Hall, in Bodmin; and about six
in the evening at Launceston; a town as little troubled with
religion as most in Cornwall.
Tues. SEPTEMBER 1.--I went to Tiverton. I was musing
here on what I heard a good man say long since,--“Once in
seven years I burn all my sermons; for it is a shame if I can
not write better sermons now than I could seven years ago.”
Whatever others can do, I really cannot. I cannot write a
better sermon on the Good Steward, than I did seven years
ago: I cannot write a better on the Great Assize, than I did
twenty years ago: I cannot write a better on the Use of Mouey,
than I did near thirty years ago: Nay, I know not that I can
write a better on the Circumcision of the Heart, than I lid five
and-forty years ago. Perhaps, indeed I may have read five
or six hundred books more than I had then, and may know
a little more History, or Natural Philosophy, than I did; but
I am not sensible that this has made any essential addition to
my knowledge in Divinity. Forty years ago I knew and
preached every Christian doctrine which I preach now.
Thur. 3.--About noon I preached at Cathanger, about eight
miles from Taunton. It was an exceeding large house, built
(as the inscription over the gate testifies) in the year 1555, by
Sergeant Walsh, who had then eight thousand pounds a year;
perhaps more than equal to twenty thousand now. But the
once famous family is now forgotten; the estate is mouldered
almost into nothing; and three quarters of the magnificent
buildings lie level with the dust. I preached in the great hall,
like that of Lincoln College, to a very serious congregation.
In the evening I preached at South-Petherton, once a place
of renown, and the capital of a Saxon kingdom; as is vouched
by a palace of King Ina still remaining, and a very large and
136 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Sept. 1778.
ancient church. I suppose the last blow given to it was by
Judge Jefferies, who, after Monmouth’s rebellion, hanged so
many of the inhabitants, and drove so many away, that it is
mever likely to lift up its head again.
Fri. 4.--I spent some time in the evening, and an hour in
the morning, with the lovely children at Publow. Such
another company of them I never saw, since Miss Bosanquet
removed from Leytonstone.
Sat. 5.--I returned to Bristol. Sunday, 6. At eight I
preached near the Drawbridge; at two near Kingswood
school, under the tree which I planted for the use of the
next generation; and at five, near King's square, to a very
numerous and exceeding serious congregation.
Mon. 7.-In my way to Bath I read a pamphlet which sur
prised me exceedingly. For many years I had heard the King
severely blamed for giving all places of trust and profit to Scotch
men: And this was so positively and continually affirmed, that
I had no doubt of it. To put the matter beyond all possible
dispute, the writer appeals to the Court Kalendar of the
present year, which contains the names of all those that hold
places under the King. And hereby it appears, that of four
hundred and fifty odd places, just eight are possessed by
Scotchmen; and of the hundred and fifty-one places in the
Royal Household, four are possessed by Scots, and no more.
Ought not this to be echoed through the three kingdoms,
to show the regard to truth these wretches have, who are
constantly endeavouring to inflame the nation against their
Sovereign, as well as their fellow-subjects?
Tues. 8.--In the evening I stood on one side of the market
place at Frome, and declared to a very numerous congrega
tion, “His commandments are not grievous.” They stood as
quiet as those at Bristol, a very few excepted; most of whom
were, by the courtesy of England, called Gentlemen. How
much inferior to the keelmen and colliers |
On Wednesday and Thursday I made a little excursion into
Dorsetshire, and on Saturday returned to Bristol. Sunday,
13. We had a comfortable opportunity at the Room in the
morning, as well as at the Square in the afternoon; where the
congregation was considerably larger than the Sunday before:
But on Sunday, 20, it was larger still. Now let the winter
come: We have made our full use of the Michaelmas summer.
Oct. 1778.] JOURNAL. 137
On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, on meeting the
classes, I carefully examined whether there was any truth in
the assertion, that above a hundred in our society were con
cerned in unlawful distilling. The result was, that I found
two persons, and no more, that were concerned therein.
I now procured a copy of part of Mr. Fletcher's late Letter
to Mr. Ireland; which I think it my duty to publish, as a
full answer to the lying accounts which have been published
concerning that bad man:--“Mr. Voltaire, finding himself ill,
sent for Dr. Fronchin, first Physician to the Duke of Orleans,
one of his converts to infidelity, and said to him, ‘Sir, I desire
you will save my life. I will give you half my fortune, if you
will lengthen out my days only six months. If not, I shall
go to the devil, and carry you with me.’”
Thur. 24.--I read Prayers and preached in Midsummer
Norton church. Thence I went to Bradford, on a sultry hot
day, such as were several days this month; and preached on the
seed that fell among thorns. God strongly applied his word.
Tues. 29.-I preached at Almsbury, to a large number of
plain people, who seemed just ripe for the Gospel. We observed
Friday, October 2, as a day of fasting and prayer, for our
King and nation. We met, as usual, at five, at nine, at one,
and in the evening. At each time, I believe, some found that
God was with us; but more especially in the concluding service.
Sat. 3.-Visiting one at the poor-house, I was much moved
to see such a company of poor, maimed, halt, and blind, who
seemed to have no one caring for their souls. So I appointed
to be there the next day; and at two o'clock had all that
could get out of bed, young and old, in the great hall. My
heart was greatly enlarged toward them, and many blessed
God for the consolation.
Monday, I went with my brother to the Devizes, and preached
in a large, commodious room. This and the following evening
we preached at Sarum. Wednesday, 7. We went on to
Winchester. I had thoughts of preaching abroad, if haply
anything might awaken a careless, self-conceited people. Bu,
the rain would not permit: And it made the road so heavy
that we could not reach Portsmouth-Common till near six.
Thur. 8.-One of our friends, whom I have known several
years, Mrs. Sarah M d, and on whose veracity I could
depend, was mentioning some uncommon circumstances. I
138 Rev. J. Wesley’s [Oct. 1778.
desired her to relate them at large, which she readily did as
follows:--
“Six or seven years ago, a servant of my husband's died of
the small-pox. A few days after, as I was walking into the
town, I met him in his common every-day clothes, running
towards me. In about a minute he disappeared.
“Mr. Heth, a Surgeon and Apothecary, died in March,
1756. On the 14th of April following, I was walking with
two other women in the High-Street, about day-break, and
we all three saw him, dressed as he usually was, in a scarlet
surtout, a bushy wig, and a very small hat. He was standing
and leaning against a post, with his chin resting on his hands.
As we came towards him, (for we were not frighted at all,) he
walked towards us, and went by us. We looked steadily after
him, and saw him till he turned into the market-house.
“Not long after this, Mr. Sm- died. Ten or twelve days
after, as I was walking near his house, about eleven o’clock,
in a bright, sunshiny day, I saw him standing at his chamber
window, and looking full upon me; but it was with the most
horrid countenance that I ever saw. As I walked on, I could
not keep my eyes off him, till he withdrew from the window,
though I was so terrified with his ghastly look, that I was
ready to drop down.”
Fri. 9.--I returned to London, and Sunday, 11, buried the
remains of Eleanor Lee. I believe she received the great
promise of God, entire sanctification, fifteen or sixteen years
ago, and that she never lost it for an hour. I conversed
intimately with her ever since, and never saw her do any
action, little or great, nor heard her speak any word, which I
could reprove. Thou wast indeed “a mother in Israel!”
Tues. 13.--I took a little tour into Oxfordshire, and preached
in the evening at Wallingford. Wednesday, 14. I went on to
Oxford, and, having an hour to spare, walked to Christ-Church,
for which I cannot but still retain a peculiar affection. What
lovely mansions are these ! What is wanting to make the
inhabitants of them happy? That, without which, morational
cre...ure can be happy, the experimental knowledge of God.
In the evening I preached at Finstock, to a congregation
gathered from many miles round. How gladly could I spend
a few weeks in this delightful solitude' But I must not rest
yet. As long as God gives me strength to labour, I am to
Oct. 1778.] JOURNAL. 139
use it. Thursday, 15. I preached at Witney. Since Nancy
B. has been detained here, the work of God has greatly revived.
Mysterious Providence 1 That one capable of being so
extremely useful, should be thus shut up in a corner |
Fri. 16.--I was desired to preach at Thame, on my return
to London. I came thither a little after ten. The mob had
been so troublesome there, that it was a doubt with the
Preachers, whether the place should not be given up. How
ever, I thought it might not be amiss, before this was done,
to make one trial myself. But I found it impracticable to
preach abroad, the wind being so exceeding sharp. I went
therefore into a large building, formerly used by the Presby
terians. It was quickly filled, and more than filled, many
being obliged to stand without. Yet there was no breath of
moise; the whole congregation seemed to be “all but their
attention dead.” We had prayed before, that God would
give us a quiet time, and he granted us our request.
Immediately after, a strange scene occurred. I was desired
to visit one who had been eminently pious, but had now been
confined to her bed for several months, and was utterly unable
to raise herself up. She desired us to pray, that the chain
might be broken. A few of us prayed in faith. Presently
she rose up, dressed herself, came down stairs, and I believe
had not any farther complaint. In the evening I preached
at High-Wycomb, and on Saturday returned to London.
Mon. 19.-About noon I reached Mr. Fary’s near Little
Brickhill. I designed to preach in the House; but the number
of people obliged me to preach abroad, in spite of the keen east
winds. Tuesday, 20. I preached about noon at Hanslip, and
in the evening at Moreton, near Buckingham. Wednesday, 21.
1 preached about noon at Silston, (properly Silverstone,) and
then walked with a company of our friends to Whittlebury.
This is the flower of all our societies in the Circuit, both for zeal
and simplicity. Thursday, 22. I preached at Towcester; on
Friday, at Northampton; and on Saturday, returned to London.
Mon. 26.--I set out in the diligence to Godmanchester,
hoping to be there by six in the evening. But we did not come
till past eight: So, most of the people being gone, I only gave
a short exhortation. At five in the morning we had a large
congregation, but a much larger in the evening. Wednesday,
28. About moon I preached at St. Neot's, and afterwards
140 REv. J. wesley’s [Nov. 1778.
visited a lovely young woman, who appeared to be in the
last stage of a consumption, and was feebly gasping after God.
She seemed to be just ripe for the Gospel, which she drank
in with all her soul. God speedily brought her to the blood
of sprinkling, and a few days after she died in peace.
I preached in the evening at Bedford, and the next day,
Thursday, 29, at Luton. We had a miserable preaching-house
here : But Mr. Cole has now fitted up a very neat and commo
dious Room, which was thoroughly filled with well-behaved and
deeply attentive hearers. How long did we seem to be ploughing
the sand here ! But it seems there will be some fruit at last.
Fri. 30.--I preached at noon to fifty or sixty dull creatures,
at poor, desolate Hertford; and they heard with something
like seriousness. In the afternoon I went on to London.
Sunday, NoveMBER 1, was the day appointed for opening the
new chapel in the City-Road. It is perfectly meat, but not fine;
and contains far more people than the Foundery : I believe,
together with the morning chapel, as many as the Tabernacle.
Many were afraid that the multitudes, crowding from all parts,
would have occasioned much disturbance. But they were
happily disappointed: There was none at all: All was quietness,
decency, and order. I preached on part of Solomon’s Prayer
at the Dedication of the Temple; and both in the morning
and afternoon, (when I preached on the hundred forty and
four thousand standing with the Lamb on Mount Zion,) God
was eminently present in the midst of the congregation.
Mon. 2.-I went to Chatham, and preached in the evening
to a lively, loving congregation. Tuesday, 3. I went by water
to Sheerness. Our Room being far too small for the people that
attended, I sent to the Governor to desire (what had been
allowed me before) the use of the chapel. He refused me,
(uncivilly enough,) affecting to doubt whether I was in orders'
So I preached to as many as it would contain in our own Room.
Wed. 4.--I took a view of the old church at Minster, once
a spacious and elegant building. It stands pleasantly on the
top of a hill, and commands all the country round. We went
from thence to Queensborough, which contains above fifty
houses, and sends two members to Parliament. Surely the
whole Isle of Sheppy is now but a shadow of what it was once.
Thur. 5.--I returned to Chatham, and on the following
morning set out in the stage-coach for London. At the end
Dec. 1778.] JOURNAL. 141
of Stroud, I chose to walk up the hill, leaving the coach to
follow me. But it was in no great haste: It did not overtake
me till I had walked above five miles. I cared not if it had
been ten : The more I walk, the sounder I sleep.
Sun. 15.-Having promised to preach in the evening at St.
Antholine's church, I Lad desired one to have a coach ready at
the door, when the service at the new chapel was ended. But
he had forgot; so that, after preaching and meeting the society,
I was obliged to walk as fast as I could to the church. The
people were so wedged together, that it was with difficulty I got
in. The church was extremely hot; but this I soon forgot; for
it pleased God to send a gracious rain upon his inheritance.
Thur. 26.--I fulfilled the dying request of Ann Thwayte, by
burying her remains, and preaching her funeral sermon. In all
the changes of those about her, she stood steadfast, doing and
suffering the will of God: She was a woman of faith and prayer;
in life and death adorning the doctrine of God her Saviour.
Sun. 29.--I was desired to preach a charity sermon in St.
Luke's church, Old-Street. I doubt whether it was ever so
crowded before; and the fear of God seemed to possess the whole
audience. In the afternoon I preached at the new chapel; and
at seven, in St. Margaret's, Rood-Lane; full as much crowded
as St. Luke’s. Is then the scandal of the Cross ceased ?
Tues. DECEMBER 1.--I went to Rye. Here, as in many
other places, those who begin to flee from the wrath to come
are continually “received to doubtful disputations;” puzzled
and perplexed with intricate questions concerning absolute and
unconditional decrees | Lord, how long wilt thou suffer this?
How long shall these well-meaning zealots destroy the dawning
work of grace, and strangle the children in the birth”
Wed. 2.-In the evening I preached at Robertsbridge, and
spoke with all possible plainness, both for the sake of threescore
children, and of a large congregation of serious, attentive people.
Thur. 3.-Many at Sevenoaks seemed deeply affected, while
I was applying those words, “Do ye now believe?” Especially
while I was reminding them of the deep work which God
wrought among them twelve or fourteen years ago. Friday,
going on to Shoreham, I found Mr. P. once more brought
back from the gates of death; undoubtedly for the sake of his
little flock; who avail themselves of his being spared too, and
continually increase not only in number, but in the knowledge
and love of God.
142 Rev. J. wesley’s [Jan. 1779.
Sun. 6.-I buried the remains of Merchant West, snatched
away in the midst of his years. From a child he had the fear
of God, and was serious and unblamable in his behaviour.
When he was a journeyman, he was reverenced by all who
wrought in the shop with him; he was a pattern of diligence
in all things, spiritual and temporal. During a long and
severe illness, his patience was unshaken, till he joyfully
resigned his spirit to God.
Mon. 7.--I took a little journey to Canterbury and Dover,
and was much comforted among a loving, earnest people.
Friday, 11. I preached at Lambeth, in the chapel newly
prepared by Mr. Edwards, whose wife has seventy-five boarders.
Miss Owen, at Publow, takes only twenty, thinking she cannot
do her duty to any more.
Fri. 18.--I called upon Colonel Gallatin. But what a
change is here: The fine gentleman, the soldier, is clean
gone, sunk into a feeble, decrepit old man; not able to rise
off his seat, and hardly able to speak.
Sun. 20.--I buried what was mortal of homest Silas Told.
For many years he attended the malefactors in Newgate,
without fee or reward; and I suppose no man for this hundred
years has been so successful in that melancholy office. God
had given him peculiar talents for it; and he had amazing
success therein. The greatest part of those whom he attended
died in peace, and many of them in the triumph of faith.
Fri. 25.-(Being Christmas-Day.) Our service began at
four, as usual, in the new chapel. I expected Mr. Richardson to
read Prayers at West-Street chapel, but he did not come; so I
read Prayers myself, and preached, and administered the sacra
ment to several hundred people. In the afternoon I preached
at the new chapel, thoroughly filled in every corner; and in the
evening at St. Sepulchre's, one of the largest parish churches
in London. It was warm enough, being sufficiently filled;
yet I felt no weakness or weariness, but was stronger after I
had preached my fourth sermon, than I was after the first.
Thur. 31.-We concluded the old year with a solemn watch
night, and began the new with praise and thanksgiving. We
had a violent storm at night. The roaring of the wind was
like loud thunder. It kept me awake half an hour; I then
slept in peace.
Fri. JANUARY 1, 1779-At length we have a House capable
of containing the whole society. We met there this evening to
Feb. 1779.] JOURNAL. 143
renew our covenant with God; and we never met on that
solemn occasion without a peculiar blessing.
Tues. 12.--I dined and drank tea with four German
Ministers. I could not but admire the wisdom of those that
appointed them. They seem to consider not only the essential
points, their sense and piety, but even those smaller things,
the good breeding, the address, yea, the persons of those they
send into foreign countries.
Sun. 24.--I visited a young woman in such terrible fits as
I scarce ever saw before; and she was hardly out of one, when
she fell into another; so that it seemed she must soon lose
her reason, if not her life. But Dr. Wilson, in one or two
days’ time, restored her to perfect health.
Mon. FEBRUARY 8.--Finding many serious persons were
much discouraged by prophets of evil, confidently foretelling
very heavy calamities, which were coming upon our nation, I
endeavoured to lift up their hands, by opening and applying
those comfortable words: (Psalm xliii. 5, 6:) “Why art thou
so heavy, O my soul? And why art thou so disquieted within
me? O put thy trust in God; for I will yet give him thanks,
which is the help of my countenance, and my God.”
Wednesday, 10, was a National Fast. So solemn a one I never
saw before. From one end of the city to the other, there was
scarce any one seen in the streets. All places of public worship
were crowded in an uncommon degree; and an unusual awe sat
on most faces. I preached on the words of God to Abraham,
interceding for Sodom, “I will not destroy the city for his sake.”
Mon. 15.--I went to Norwich on the stage-coach, with two
very disagreeable companions, called a gentleman and gentle
woman, but equally ignorant, insolent, lewd, and profane.
Wed. 17.--I went to Yarmouth, and preached to a large
and serious congregation. Thursday, 18. I preached at
Lowestoft, where is a great awakening, especially among youth
and children; several of whom, between twelve and sixteen
years of age, are a pattern to all about them. Friday, 19. I
preached at Loddon, and afterwards talked with a girl sixteen
years of age. She was justified two months since, and has
not yet lost the sight of God’s countenance for a moment; but
has been enabled to rejoice evermore, and to pray without
ceasing. But being surrounded with relations who neither
loved nor feared God, they were pressing upon her continually,
144 REv. J. Wesley’s [March, 1779.
till by little and little she sunk back into the world, and had
neither the power nor form of religion left.
- Sun. 21.--I returned to Norwich, and took an exact account
of the society. I wish all our Preachers would be accurate in
their accounts, and rather speak under than above the truth.
I had heard again and again of the increase of the society.
... And what is the naked truth? Why, I left in it two hundred
and two members; and I find one hundred and seventy-nine !
Sunday, 21. At twelve I took coach, and in the morning
reached London.
Sun. 28.--Immediately after preaching at Spitalfields, I
hasted away to St. Peter's, Cornhill, and declared to a crowded
congregation, “God hath given us his Holy Spirit.” At four I
preached in the new chapel, for the benefit of the Reformation
Society. This also I trust will be a means of uniting together
the hearts of the children of God of various denominations.
Mon. MARCH 1-I went to Bristol. Thursday, 4. I went
over to Paulton, and preached at moon to the liveliest people
in all the Circuit. This people are now just of the same spirit
as those of Bristol were forty years ago.
Thur. 11.--I opened the new chapel at Bath. It is about
half as large as that at London, and built nearly upon the same
model. After reading Prayers, I preached on, “We preach
Christ crucified; to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the
Greeks foolishness.” I believe God sent his word home to many
hearts. We concluded the service with the Lord's Supper.
Mon. 15.--I began my tour through England and Scot
land; the lovely weather continuing, such as the oldest man
alive has not seen before, for January, February, and half of
March. In the evening I preached at Stroud, the next
morning at Gloucester, designing to preach in Stanley at
two, and at Tewkesbury in the evening; but the Minister
of Gratton (near Stanley) sending me word, I was welcome to
the use of his church, I ordered notice to be given, that the
service would begin there at six o'clock. Stanley chapel was
thoroughly filled at two. It is eighteen years since I was
there before; so that many of those whom I saw here then,
were now grey-headed; and many were gone to Abraham's
bosom. May we follow them as they did Christ !
I was preparing to go to Gratton, when one brought me word
from Mr. Roberts, that he had changed his mind; so I preached
March, 1779.]- JOURNAL. 145
in Mr. Stephen’s orchard, to far more than his church would
have contained. And it was no inconvenience either to me or
them, as it was a mild, still evening.
Wed. 17.--I preached at Tewkesbury about noon, and at
Worcester in the evening. Thursday, 18. Upon inquiry, I
found there had been no morning preaching since the Confer
ence So the people were of course weak and faint. At noon
I preached in Bewdley, in an open space, at the head of the
town, to a very numerous and quiet congregation. Here Mrs.
C informed me, “This day twelvemonth I found peace
with God; and the same day my son, till then utterly thought
less, was convinced of sin. Some time after, he died, rejoicing
in God, and praising him with his latest breath.”
Fri. 19.-I preached in Bengeworth church about noon, and
about six in Pebworth church. Saturday, 20. I went on to
Birmingham. Sunday, 21. Just at the time of preaching, at
Bromwich-Heath, began such a storm as that which ushered
in the year. Yet as no house could contain the people, I was
constrained to stand in the court-yard. For a moment I was
afraid of the tiles falling on the people; but they regarded
nothing but the word. As I concluded, we had a furious
shower of hail: Hitherto could the prince of the power of the
air go; but no farther.
After preaching at Wednesbury, Darlaston, Dudley, and
Wolverhampton, on Wednesday, 24, I went on to Madeley.
In the way I finished a celebrated “Essay on Taste.” And is
this the treatise that gained the premium ? It is lively and
pretty; but neither deep nor strong. Scarce any of the terms
are accurately defined : Indeed, defining is not this author's
talent. He has not by any means a clear apprehension; and
it is through this capital defect, that he jumbles together true
and false propositions, in every chapter and in every page.
To this Essay three extracts are subjoined. The first is
much to the purpose. The second is a superficial, empty
thing. Is this a specimen of the great M. D'Alembert? But I
was most surprised at the third. What l is this extracted
from the famous Montesquieu' It has neither strength, nor
clearness, nor justness of thought ! And is this the writer so
admired all over Europe? He is no more to be compared to
Lord Forbes, or Dr. Beattie, than a mouse to an elephant.
Thur. 25.-I preached in the new House which Mr.
146 REv. J. WESLEY’s [April, 1779.
Fletcher has built in Madeley wood. The people here exactly
resemble those at Kingswood; only they are more simple and
teachable. But for want of discipline, the immense pains
which he has taken with them has not done the good which
might have been expected.
I preached at Shrewsbury in the evening, and on Friday,
26, about noon, in the assembly-room at Broseley. It was well
we were in the shade; for the sun shone as hot as it usually
does at Midsummer. We walked from thence to Coalbrook
Dale, and took a view of the bridge which is shortly to be
thrown over the Severn. It is one arch, a hundred feet broad,
fifty-two high, and eighteen wide; all of cast-iron, weighing
many hundred tons. I doubt whether the Colossus at Rhodes
weighed much more.
Sat. 27.--I preached at Newcastle-under-Lyne; Sunday,
28, at Burslem, morning and afternoon. Monday, 29. I went
on to our loving brethren at Congleton, and preached on the
nature of Christian zeal. A measure of this they have already;
but they want much more. Tuesday, 30, and the next day, I
preached at Macclesfield. The hearts of many were enlarged;
and the society I found was increasing both in number and
strength.
Thur. APRIL 1.--About one, I preached at New-Mills, in
Derbyshire. A commodious preaching-house, lately built, has
proved a blessing to the whole country. They flock together
from every quarter, and are thankful both to God and man.
In the evening I preached at Stockport, where I received a
strange account of poor William Hamilton, who left us to join
the Quakers, and is as miserable as he can live, afraid to see
any man lest he should kill him. O what a poor exchange
has this unhappy man made
Fri. 2.--About one I opened the new chapel at Davyhulme.
APRIL 4, (being Easter-Day,) was a solemn festival. In the
afternoon I preached at Oldham, to such a congregation as I
have not seen since I was in the Cornish amphitheatre. And
all, beside a few giddy children, were seriously attentive.
Mon. 5.--I preached at Northwich. I used to go on from
hence to Little-Leigh; but since Mr. Barker is gone hence,
that place knows us no more. I cannot but wonder at the
infatuation of men that really love and fear God, and yet leave
great part of, if not all, their substance to men that neither
April, 1779.] JOURNAL. 147
love nor fear him Surely if I did little good with my money
while I lived, I would, at least, do good with it when I could
live no longer.
Tues. 6.--I went to Mr. S ’s at Nantwich, a nephew of
Mr. Matthew S ; who was, fifty years ago, one of our
little company at Oxford, and was then both in person, in
natural temper, and in piety, one of the loveliest young men I
knew. Mr. Joseph S was then unborn, and was for many
years without God in the world. But he is now as zealous in
the works of God, as he was once in the works of the devil.
While I preached it was a season of strong consolation; but
one young gentlewoman refused to be comforted. She fol
lowed me into Mr. S ’s all in tears; but would neither
touch meat nor drink. After I had spent a little time in
prayer, she broke out into prayer herself; and she did not
cease, till God turned her sorrow into joy unspeakable.
After preaching at Alpraham and Chester, on Wednesday I
went on to Warrington. The proprietor of the new chapel had
sent me word, that I was welcome to preach in it; but he had
now altered his mind: So I preached in our own; and I saw
not one inattentive hearer. “
I preached at Liverpool in the evening, and the next day;
at Wigan on Friday; on Saturday and Sunday at Bolton.
Monday, 12. I preached at Bury about one; and in the
evening at Rochdale. Now was the day of visitation for this
town. The people were all on fire : Never was such a flame
kindled here before; chiefly by the prayer-meetings scattered
through the town. Tuesday, 13. I preached at nine to a
crowded audience in the new House at Bacup; at one in the
shell of the house at Padiham, where there is at length a
prospect of peace, after abundance of disturbance, caused by
one who neither fears God nor reverences man. In the evening
I preached at Colne; but the people were still in such a panic,
that few durst go into the left-hand gallery. Wednesday, 14.
After a delightful ride through the mountains, I preached
first in Todmorden, and then in Heptonstall church. I after
wards lodged at the Ewood, which I still love for good Mr.
Grimshaw’s sake.
Thur. 15.--I went to Halifax, where a little thing had lately
occasioned great disturbance. An angel blowing a trumpet
was placed on the sounding-board over the pulpit. Many were
148 REv. J. Wesley’s [April, 1779.
vehemently against this; others as vehemently for it: But a
total end was soon put to the contest; for the angel vanished
away. The congregations, morning and evening, were very
large; and the work of God seems to increase, in depth as
well as extent.
Sun. 18.--In the morning I preached in Haworth church;
but in the afternoon I could not. Thousands upon thousands
were gathered together, so that I was obliged to stand in the
church-yard. And I believe all that stood still were able to
hear distinctly.
Mon. 19.--I preached in Bingley church to a numerous
congregation. I dined with Mr. Busfield, in his little paradise;
but it can give no happiness unless God is there. Thence I
went to Otley. Here also the work of God increases; parti
cularly with regard to sanctification. And I think every one
who has experienced it, retains a clear witness of what God
has wrought.
Thur. 22.-I was a little surprised at a passage in Dr.
Smollet’s “History of England,” vol. xv., pp. 121, 122:-
“Imposture and fanaticism still hang upon the skirts of
religion. Weak minds were seduced by the delusions of a
superstition, styled Methodism, raised upon the affectation
of superior sanctity, and pretensions to divine illumination.
Many thousands were infected with this enthusiasm by the
endeavours of a few obscure Preachers, such as Whitefield,
and the two Wesleys, who found means to lay the whole
kingdom under contribution.”
Poor Dr. Smollet ! Thus to transmit to all succeeding gene
rations a whole heap of motorious falsehoods !
“Imposture and fanaticism l’’ Neither one nor the other
had any share in the late revival of scriptural religion, which is
no other than the love of God and man, gratitude to our
Creator, and good-will to our fellow-creatures. Is this delusion
and superstition? No, it is real wisdom ; it is solid virtue.
Does this famaticism “hang upon the skirts of religion ?”
Nay, it is the very essence of it. Does the Doctor call this
enthusiasm * Why? Because he knows nothing about it.
Who told him that these “obscure Preachers ” made “preten
sions to divine illumination ?” How often has that silly
calumny been refuted to the satisfaction of all candid men?
However, they “found means to lay the whole kingdom under
April, 1779.] JOURNAL. 149
contribution.” So does this frontless man, blind and bold,
stumble on without the least shadow of truth !
Meantime, what faith can be given to his history? What
credit can any man of reason give to any fact upon his
authority ?
In travelling this week I looked over Baron Swedenborg’s
“Account of Heaven and Hell.” He was a man of piety, of a
strong understanding, and most lively imagination; but he had
a violent fever when he was five-and-fifty years old, which
quite overturned his understanding. Nor did he ever recover
it; but it continued “majestic, though in ruins.” From that
time he was exactly in the state of that gentleman at Argos,
Qui se credebat miros audire tragaedos,
In vacuo lastus sessor plausorque theatro.
Who wondrous tragedies was wont to hear,
Sitting alone in the empty theatre.
His words, therefore, from that time were agri somnia, the
dreams of a disordered imagination; just as authentic as
Quevedo’s “Visions of Hell.” Of this work in particular I
must observe, that the doctrine contained therein is not only
quite unproved, quite precarious from beginning to end, as
depending entirely on the assertion of a single brain-sick man;
but that, in many instances, it is contradictory to Scripture, to
reason, and to itself. But, over and above this, it contains
many sentiments that are essentially and dangerously wrong.
Such is that concerning the Trinity; for he roundly affirms
God to be only one person, who was crucified: So that he
revives and openly asserts the long-exploded heresy of the
Sabellians and Patripassians ; yea, and that of the Anthropo
morphites; affirming that God constantly appears in heaven
in the form of a man. And the worst is, he flatly affirms,
“None can go to heaven, who believes three persons in the
Godhead: ” Which is more than the most violent Arian or
Socinian ever affirmed before.
Add to this, that his ideas of heaven are low, grovelling, just
suiting a Mahometan paradise; and his account of it has a
natural tendency to sink our conceptions, both of the glory of
heaven, and of the inhabitants of it; whom he describes as far
inferior both in holiness and happiness to Gregory Lopez, or
Monsieur De Renty. And his account of hell leaves nothing
terrible in it; for, first, he quenches the unquenchable fire.
150 REv. J. wesley’s [April, 1779.
He assures us there is no fire there; only he allows that the
governor of it, the devil, sometimes orders the spirits that behave
ill, to be “laid on a bed of hot ashes.” And, secondly, he
informs you, that all the damned enjoy their favourite pleasures.
He that delights in filth is to have his filth; yea, and his harlot
too ! Now, how dreadful a tendency must this have in such an
age and nation as this ' I wish those pious men, Mr. Clowes
and Clotworthy, would calmly consider these things, before
they usher into the world any more of this madman's dreams.
Mon. 26.--I preached at Huddersfield, where there is a great
revival of the work of God. Many have found peace with God:
Sometimes sixteen, eighteen, yea, twenty in one day. So that
the deadly wound they suffered, when their Predestinarian
brethren left them, is now fully healed; and they are not only
more lively, but more in number, than ever they were before.
Tues. 27.--I saw a melancholy sight indeed! One that ten
years ago was clearly perfected in love; but was worried by
Mr. , day and night, threaping him down he was in a
delusion, that at length it drove him stark mad. And so he
continues to this day. Observe it was not Perfection drove
this man mad, but the incessant teasing him with doubtful
disputations.
Wed. 28.-I had promised to preach at six in the morning,
to the poor prisoners at Whiteley. Though the ground was
covered with snow, so many people flocked together, that I
was constrained to preach in the court of the prison. The
snow continued to fall, and the north wind to whistle round
us; but I trust God warmed many hearts.
I preached at Wakefield in the evening; Thursday, 29, at
Rothwell and Leeds; and on Friday noon, at Harewood. In
the afternoon we walked to Mr. Lascelles's house. It is finely
situated on a little eminence, commanding a most delightful
prospect of hill and dale, and wood and water. It is built of a
fine white stone, with two grand and beautiful fronts. I was
not much struck with anything within. There is too much
sameness in all the great houses I have seen in England; two
rows of large, square rooms, with costly beds, glasses, chairs,
and tables. But here is a profusion of wealth; every pane
of glass, we were informed, cost six-and-twenty shillings. One
looking-glass cost five hundred pounds, and one bed, six
hundred. The whole floor was just on the plan of Montague
May, 1779.] JOURNAL. 15]
House; now the British Museum. The grounds round the
house are pleasant indeed, particularly the walks on the river
side, and through the woods. But what has the owner thereof,
save the beholding them with his eyes?
Sat. MAY 1.--I looked over the first volume of Mr. Bryant’s
“Ancient Mythology.” He seems to be a person of immense
reading, and indefatigable industry. But I have two objec
tions to the whole work: 1. That his discoveries, being built
chiefly on etymologies, carry no certainty in them. 2. That
were they ever so certain, they are of no consequence. For
instance, Whether Chiron was a man or a mountain, and
whether the Cyclops were giants or watch-towers, are points
of no manner of importance, either to me or any man living.
Sun. 2.--Dr. Kershaw, the Vicar of Leeds, desired me to
assist him at the sacrament. It was a solemn season. We were
ten Clergymen, and seven or eight hundred communicants.
Mr. Atkinson desired me to preach in the afternoon. Such a
congregation had been seldom seen there; but I preached to
a much larger in our own House at five ; and I found no want
of strength.
Fri. 7.--After having visited the intermediate societies, 1
came to Darlington, and found some of the liveliest people in
the north of England. All but one or two of the society are
justified; great part of them partakers of the great salvation;
and all of them seem to retain their first simplicity, and to be
as teachable as little children.
Sun. 9.--I preached in the market-place; and all the con
gregation behaved well, but a party of the Queen's Dragoons.
Monday, 10. I preached at Barnard-Castle; and saw a quite
different behaviour in the Durham Militia; the handsomest
body of soldiers I ever saw, except in Ireland. The next
evening they all came, both Officers and soldiers, and were a
pattern to the whole congregation. In my journey to Brough,
(where I preached at noon,) I read over a volume of Dr.
Blair's Sermons. He is an elegant, but not a deep, writer;
much resembling, but not equalling, Mr. Seed. I do not
remember that any day in January, February, or March, was
near so cold as this.
Wed. 12.--After preaching at Cuthburton and in Teesdale,
I went a little out of my way, to see one of the wonders of
nature. The river Tees rushes down between two rocks, and
152 Rev. J. wesley’s [May, 1779,
falls sixty feet perpendicular into a basin of water, sixty feet
deep. In the evening I preached to the lovely congregation
in Weardale, and the next day went on to Newcastle.
Sun. 16.--I preached at Gateshead-Fell in the morning; and
in the new House, near Shcephill, at noon. Here the work of
God greatly revives; many are lately convinced of sin, and
many enabled, from day to day, to rejoice in God their Saviour.
Mon. 17.-About moon I preached at Shields, and in the
evening at Sunderland. Tuesday, 18. I read Prayers and
preached in Monkwearmouth church; and Thursday, 20,
returned to Newcastle. Sunday, 23. In the morning I preached
at Ballast-Hills; about two, at the Fell; about five, at the
Garth-Heads. The congregation was double to that at the
Fell; and I trust God gave us a double blessing.
Mon. 24.--I preached at five in the Orphan-House; about
nine, at Placey; at noon, in the market-house, at Morpeth.
Many soldiers, who were marching through the town, came
in ; and the power of the Lord was present to heal. In the
evening I preached in the Court-House, at Alnwick, and at
might was no more tired than in the morning.
Tues. 25.-We walked through the Castle. Two of the
rooms are more elegant than even those at Harewood-House.
But it is not a profusion of ornaments, (they are exceeding
plain and simple,) it is not an abundance of gold and silver,
but a je ne soai quoi, that strikes every person of taste.
In the evening I preached in the Town-Hall, at Berwick.
Many Officers, as well as soldiers, were there; and the whole
congregation seemed much affected. Shall we see fruit at
Berwick also 2
Wed. 26.--We had such a congregation at Dunbar as I
have not seen there for many years. Thursday, 27. I went
on to Edinburgh. I was agreeably surprised at the singing
in the evening. I have not heard such female voices, so
strong and clear, anywhere in England.
Fri. 28.--I went to Glasgow, and preached in the House;
but the next evening, by the river-side. Sunday, 30. At seven
I spoke exceeding strong words, in applying the parable of the
Sower. In the afternoon I went to the English chapel. But
how was I surprised ! Such decency have I seldom seen even
at West-Street, or the new Room in Bristol. 1. All, both men
and women, were dressed plain: I did not see one high head:
June, 1779.] JOURNAL. 153
2. No one took notice of any one, at coming in ; but, after a
short ejaculation, sat quite still: 3. None spoke to any one
during the Service, nor looked either on one side or the other:
4. All stood, every man, woman, and child, while the Psalms
were sung : 5. Instead of an unmeaning voluntary, was an
anthem, and one of the simplest and sweetest I ever heard:
6. The Prayers, preceding a sound, useful sermon, were seri
ously and devoutly read: 7. After service, none bowed, or
courtesied, or spoke, but went quietly and silently away.
After church, I preached again by the river side, to a huge
multitude of serious people: I believe, full as many more as
we had the Sunday before, at Newcastle. Surely we shall not
lose all our labour here.
Mon. 31.--I returned to Edinburgh; and, JUNE 1, set
out on my northern journey. In the evening I preached at
Dundee. The congregation was, as usual, very large and
deeply attentive. But that was all. I did not perceive that
any one was affected at all. I admire this people: So decent,
so serious, and so perfectly unconcerned.
Wed. 2.--We went on to Arbroath, where was near as large
a congregation as at Dundee, but nothing so serious. The
poor Glassites here, pleading for a merely notional faith, greatly
hinder either the beginning or the progress of any real work of
God. Thursday, 3. I preached at Aberdeen, to a people that
can feel as well as hear. Friday, 4. I set out for Inverness,
and about eight preached at Inverury, to a considerable number
of plain country people, just like those we see in Yorkshire.
My spirit was much refreshed among them, observing several
of them in tears. Before we came to Strathbogie, (now new
named Huntley,) Mr. Brackenbury was much fatigued. So I
desired him to go into the chaise, and rode forward to Keith.
Mr. Gordon, the Minister, invited us to drink tea at his
house. In the evening I went to the market-place. Four
children, after they had stood a while to consider, ventured to
come near me; then a few men and women crept forward;
till we had upwards of a hundred. At nine on Sunday, 6, I
suppose they were doubled ; and some of them seemed a little
affected. I dimed at Mr. Gordon's, who behaved in the most
courteous, yea, and affectionate, manner. At three I preached
in the kirk, one of the largest I have seen in the kingdom, but
very ruinous. It was thoroughly filled, and God was there in
154 REv. J. wesley’s [June, 1779.
an uncommon manner. He sent forth his voice, yea, and that
a mighty voice; so that I believe many of the stout-hearted
trembled. In the evening I preached once more in the
market-place, on those awful words, “Where their worm dieth
not, and the fire is not quenched.”
Mon. 7.--I came to Grange-Green, near Forres, about
twelve o’clock. But I found the house had changed its master
since I was here before, nine years ago. Mr. Grant (who then
lived here in his brother's house) was now Sir Lodowick
Grant; having succeeded to the title and estate of Sir Alex
ander, dying without issue. But his mind was not changed
with his fortune. He received me with cordial affection, and
insisted on my sending for Mrs. Smith and her little girl,
whom I had left at Forres. We were all here as at home,
in one of the most healthy and most pleasant situations in the
kingdom ; and I had the satisfaction to observe my daughter
sensibly recovering her strength, almost every hour. In the
evening all the family were called in to prayers; to whom I first
expounded a portion of Scripture. Thus ended this comfort
able day. So has God provided for us in a strange land
Tues. 8.--I found another hearty welcome from Mr. Dunbar,
the Minister of Nairn. A little after ten I preached in his kirk,
which was full from end to end. I have seldom seen a Scotch
congregation so sensibly affected. Indeed it seemed that God
smote the rocks, and brake the hearts of stone in pieces.
In the afternoon I reached Inverness, but found a new face
of things there. Good Mr. Mackenzie had been for some years
removed to Abraham's bosom. Mr. Fraser, his colleague, a
pious man of the old stamp, was likewise gone to rest. The
three present Ministers are of another kind; so that I have no
more place in the kirk; and the wind and rain would not permit
me to preach on the Green. However, our House was large,
though gloomy enough. Being now informed, (which I did not
suspect before,) that the town was uncommonly given to drunk
enness, I used the utmost plainness of speech; and I believe
not without effect. I then spent some time with the society,
increased from twelve to between fifty and sixty: Many of these
knew in whom they had believed; and many were going on to
perfection: So that all the pains which have been taken to
stop the work of God here, have hitherto been in vain.
Wed. 9.-We had another rainy day, so that I was again
June, 1779.] JOURNAL. 155
driven into the House; and again I delivered my own soul, to
a larger congregation than before. In the morning we had an
affectionate parting, perhaps to meet no more. I am glad,
however, that I have made three journeys to Inverness. It
has not been lost labour.
Between ten and eleven I began preaching at Nairn. The
House was pretty well filled again; and many more of the
Gentry were there, than were present on Tuesday. It pleased
God to give me again liberty of speech, in opening and
applying those words, “God is a Spirit; and they that worship
him, must worship him in spirit and in truth.”
About two we reached Sir Lodowick Grant’s. In the evening
we had a very serious congregation. Afterwards I spent an
hour very agreeably with the family, and two or three neigh
bouring gentlemen.
Fri. 11.--We did not stop at Keith, but went on to Strath
bogie. Here we were in a clean, convenient house, and had
everything we wanted. All the family very willingly joined us
in prayer. We then slept in peace.
Sat. 12.--About one I preached at Inverury, to a larger
congregation than before, and was again refreshed with the
simplicity and earnestness of the plain country-people. In the
evening i preached at Aberdeen. Sunday, 13. I spoke as
closely as I could, both morning and evening, and made a
pointed application to the hearts of all that were prescnt. I am
convinced this is the only way whereby we can do any good
in Scotland. This very day I heard many excellent truths
delivered in the kirk. But as there was no application, it was
likely to do as much good as the singing of a lark. I wonder
the pious Ministers in Scotland are not sensible of this.
They cannot but see, that no sinners are convinced of sin,
none converted to God, by this way of preaching. How
strange is it then, that neither reason nor experience teaches
them to take a better way !
Mon. 14.--I preached again at Arbroath; Tú2sday, 15, at
Dundee; and Wednesday, 16, at Edinburgh. Thursday, 17.
I examined the society. In five years I found five members
had been gained Ninety-nine being increased to a hundred
and four. What then have our Preachers been doing all this
time? 1. They have preached four evenings in the week, and
on Sunday morning; the other mornings they have fairly
156 Rev. J. wesley’s [June, 1779.
given up. 2. They have taken great care not to speak too
plain, lest they should give offence. 3. When Mr. Bracken
bury preached the old Methodist doctrine, one of them said,
“You must not preach such doctrine here. The doctrine of
Perfection is not calculated for the meridian of Edinburgh ''
Waving then all other hinderances, is it any wonder, that the
work of God has not prospered here *
On Friday and Saturday, I preached with all possible
plainness; and some appeared to be much stirred up. On
Sunday, 20, I preached at eight, and at half an hour past
twelve; and God gave us a parting blessing.
I was in hopes of preaching abroad at Dunbar in the
evening, but the rain would not permit. Monday, 21. I
preached in the Court-House at Alnwick; and finding the
people were greatly alarmed, with the news of the French
and Spanish fleets, I opened and applied, “Say ye to the
righteous, it shall be well with him.” I believe many laid
hold of the promise, and were not a little comforted.
Tues. 22.--Finding the panic had spread to Newcastle, I
strongly enforced those words, “The Lord sitteth above the
waterfloods; the Lord reigneth a King for ever.” Wednesday,
23. I rested here. Lovely place, and lovely company But
I believe there is another world : Therefore, I must “arise
and go hence 1”
Thur. 24.--I preached at Stockton-upon-Tees at noon, and
at Yarm in the evening. Friday, 25. At two in the afternoon
I preached to a lovely congregation, at Potto, and to such
another at Hutton-Rudby. I was afterwards agreeably sur
prised in examining the select society. Many of them have been
members thereof for near twenty years. And not one of them
has lost the pure love of God ever since they first received it.
Sat. 26.--After preaching at Stokesley and Guisborough, I
went on to our loving, earnest brethren at Whitby; just of the
same spirit with those at Darlington, in the opposite point of
the Circuit.
Sun. 27.-I preached at eight in the Room, and at five in
the market-place, to a huge congregation. They were deeply
attentive; but no more affected than the stones they stood upon.
Mon. 28.--I preached in the new preaching-house, at Robin
Hood's Bay, and then went on to Scarborough. Tuesday,
29, I spent agreeably and profitably with my old friends; and
July, 1779.] JOURNAL. 157
in my way to Bridlington, Wednesday, 30, took a view
of Flamborough-Head. It is an huge rock, rising perpen
dicular from the sea to an immense height, which gives shelter
to an innumerable multitude of sea-fowl of various kinds. I
preached in the evening at Bridlington, and afterwards heard a
very uncommon instance of paternal affection -Agentleman
of the town had a favourite daughter, whom he set up in a
milliner's shop. Some time after she had a concern for her
soul, and believed it her duty to enter into the society. Upon
this her good father forbad her his house ; demanding all the
money he had laid out; and required her instantly to sell all
her goods, in order to make the payment
In this journey I looked over the “History of Whitby,” in
which are many curious things. Among others, there is an
account of St. Ninian, a Monk of Whitby Abbey, long before
the Conquest. Here is also an account of the father of the
Percy family: He came over with William the Conqueror, and
took his name from a town in Normandy. So the pretty tale
of piercing the eye of the Scotch King proves to be mere
invention |
Thur. JULY 1.--This was the first of eighteen or twenty
days full as hot as any I remember in Georgia; and yet the
season is remarkably healthy. I preached in Beverley at
noon, and at Hull in the evening. Saturday, 3. I reached
Grimsby, and found a little trial. In this, and many other
parts of the kingdom, those striplings, who call themselves
Lady Huntingdon's Preachers, have greatly hindered the
work of God. They have neither sense, courage, nor grace, to
go and beat up the devil’s quarters, in any place where Christ
has not been named ; but wherever we have entered as by
storm, and gathered a few souls, often at the peril of our
lives, they creep in, and, by doubtful disputations, set every
one's sword against his brother. One of these has just crept
into Grimsby, and is striving to divide the poor little flock;
but I hope his labour will be in vain, and they will still hold
“ the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.”
Sun. 4.--I had designed to preach abroad at Louth; but
the rain drove us into the House. In the evening I expounded,
and strongly applied, the story of Dives and Lazarus. The
whole congregation, except a few poor gentlemen, behaved
with decency.
158 REv. J. WESLEY’s [July 1779.
Mon. 5.--I preached about eleven, at Langham-Row, to a
congregation gathered from many miles round, on, “How
amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts l’” As a great
part of them were athirst for perfect love, they drank in every
word. In the afternoon we went to Raithby. It is a small
village on the top of a hill. The shell of Mr. Brackenbury's
house was just finished, near which he has built a little chapel.
It was quickly filled with deeply serious hearers. I was much
comforted among them, and could not but observe, while the
landlord and his tenants were standing together, how
Love, like death, makes all distinctions void.
Tues. 6.--After an absence of near twenty years, I once
more visited poor Coningsby, and preached at eleven in their
new preaching-house, to a plain, simple people. In the evening
I took my usual stand in the market-place at Horncastle. The
wild men were more quiet than usual; I suppose, because they
saw Mr. Brackenbury standing by me; whom they knew to
be in Commission for the Peace, for this part of the county.
Wed. 7.-I preached at Sturton and Gainsborough ; and
Thursday, 8, at Scotter, where the poor people walk “in the
fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost.” In
the evening I preached at Ouston; and on Friday, 9, went on
to Epworth. How true is this trite remark,+
Nescio quá natale solum dulcedine cunctos
Ducit, et immemores nom sinet esse suá /
The natal soil to all how strangely sweet !
The place where first he breathed who can forget !
In the evening I took my usual stand in the market-place;
but had far more than the usual congregation. Saturday, 10.
Taking a solitary walk in the churchyard, I felt the truth of,
“One generation goeth, and another cometh.” See how the
earth drops its inhabitants as the tree drops its leaves |
Sun. 11.--About eight I preached at Misterton; and about
one at Overthorpe. But good Alice Shadford was not there.
She was long “a mother in Israel,” a burning and shining light,
an unexceptionable instance of perfect love. After spending
near a hundred years on earth, she was some months since
transplanted to paradise.
So general an out-pouring of God’s Spirit we had seldom
known, as we had at Epworth in the afternoon.
July, 1779.j JOURNAL. 159
Iike mighty wind, or torrent fierce,
It did opposers all o'errun.
O that they may no more harden their hearts, lest God should
swear, “They shall not enter into my rest l”
Mon. 12.-I preached at Crowle; and afterwards searched
the church-yard, to find the tomb of Mr. Ashbourn. We could
find nothing of it there. At length we found a large flat stone
in the church; but the inscription was utterly illegible, the
letters being filled up with dust. However, we made a shift
to pick it out; and then read as follows:--
%cre Iics tijc 33dup
of
AND SO L E MNLY BE QUEATHEID THE FOLLOW IN G VERSE S T O HIS
“Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the
Holy Ghost: As your fathers did, so do ye.”--Acts vii. 51.
“I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought, and in vain:
Yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God.”--Isai.
xlix. 4.
But that generation, which was abandoned to all wickedness,
is gone : So are most of their children. And there is reason
to hope, that the curse entailed on them and their children is
gone also: For there is now a more lively work of God here,
than in any of the neighbouring places.
Tues. 13.−About moon I preached at Swinfleet, under the
shade of some tall elms. At six in the evening I preached on
the Green at Thorne. to a multitude of people. The work
of God goes on swiftly here: Many are awakened, many
converted to God. Wednesday, 14. I preached to an elegant
congregation at Doncaster; in the evening to a numerous one
at Rotherham. Thursday, 15. I preached in Paradise
Square, in Sheffield, to the largest congregation I ever saw on
a week-day. Friday, 16. I preached in the evening at Derby,
to many genteel and many plain people. Saturday, 17. I
preached at noon in Castle-Donnington; but in the open air,
for there was no enduring the House. Yet they persuaded
me to preach within at Nottingham in the evening; but the
160 REV. J. WESLEY’s Jourt NAL. [Aug. 1779,
House was as hot as an oven. Sunday, 18. I made shift to
preach in the Room at eight; but at five I went to the Cross.
We had a London congregation; and all as well behaved as if
they had been in Moorfields.
One who had left us, to join the Quakers, desired to be present
at the love-feast; in the close of which, being able to contain
himself no longer, he broke out and declared, he must join us
again. I went home with him; and, after spending some
time in prayer, left him full of love and thankfulness.
Mon. 19.--At five our House was quite filled with people,
and with the presence of God. Farewell, ye loving, lovely
followers of the Lamb May ye still adorn the doctrine of
God your Saviour !
About nine I preached in the market-place at Lough
borough ; about noon, at Grifty-Dam ; and in the evening, at
Ashby. Tuesday, 20. I preached in Markfield church about
noon ; and in the evening at Leicester; where we had an
exceeding solemn time, while I described the Son of man
coming in his glory.
Wed. 21.--The House was filled at five, and we had another
solemn opportunity. About eight, calling at Hinckley, I was
desired to preach : As also at Forcell, ten or twelve miles far
ther. When I came to Coventry, I found notice had been
given for my preaching in the park; but the heavy rain pre
vented. I sent to the Mayor, desiring the use of the Town
hall. He refused ; but the same day gave the use of it to a
dancing-master. I then went to the women's market. Many
soon gathered together, and listened with all seriousness. I
preached there again the next morning, Thursday, 22, and
again in the evening. Then I took coach for London. I was
nobly attended; behind the coach were ten convicted felons,
loudly blaspheming and rattling their chains; by my side sat
a man with a loaded blunderbuss, and another upon the coach.
Sun. 25.--Both the chapels were full enough. On Monday,
I retired to Lewisham to write. Tuesday, AUGUST 3. Our
Conference began; which continued and ended in peace and
love. Sunday, 8. I was at West-Street in the morning, and
at the new chapel in the evening, when I took a solemn leave
of the affectionate congregation. This was the last night
which I spent at the Foundery. What hath God wrought
there in one-and-forty years
Mon. August 9.-I set out for Wales, with my brother
and his family. In the evening I preached at Oxford; the
next, at Witney. Wednesday. We went on to Gloucester, where
I preached with much satisfaction to a crowded audience.
Thursday, 12. We went on to Monmouth, where the late
storm is blown over. I preached at six in the evening, but
did not observe one inattentive person then, any more than at
five in the morning.
Fri. 13.--As I was going down a steep pair of stairs, my
foot slipped, and I fell down several steps. Falling on the
edge of one of them, it broke the case of an Almanack, which
was in my pocket, all to pieces. The edge of another stair
met my right buckle, and snapped the steel chape of it in two;
but I was not hurt. So doth our good Master give his angels
charge over us! In the evening I preached at Brecknock;
and, leaving my brother there, on Saturday, 14, went forward
to Carmarthen.
This evening, and in the morning, Sunday, 15, the new
preaching-house contained the congregation; but in the after
noon we had, I think, the largest congregation I ever saw
in Wales. I preached on the Gospel for the day, the story of
the Pharisee and the Publican ; and I believe many were
constrained to cry out, for the present, “God be merciful to
me a sinner | *
Mon. 16.--In the evening I preached in the market-place
again, to a very serious congregation; many of whom were in
tears, and felt the word of God to be sharper than a two-edged
sword.
Tues. 17.--Having some steep mountains to climb, I took a
pair of post-horses. About four miles from the town, one of
them began to kick and flounce, without any visible cause, till
he got one of his legs over the pole. Mr. Broadbent and I then
came out of the chaise, and walked forward. While the drivers
164 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Aug. 1779.
were setting the chaise right, the horses ran back almost to the
town; so that we did not reach Llyngwair till between two and
three o'clock. Mr. Bowen was not returned from a journey to
Glasgow. However, I spent a very comfortable evening with
Mrs. Bowen and the rest of the family.
Wed. 18.--I preached about ten in Newport church; and
then we went on to Haverfordwest. Here we had a very
different congregation, both as to number and spirit; and we
found the society striving together for the hope of the Gospel.
Thursday, 19. We went over to Fracoon, one of the loveliest
places in Great Britain. The house stands in a deep valley,
surrounded with tall woods, and them with lofty mountains.
But, as Admiral Vaughan was never married, this ancient
family will soon come to an end. At two I preached in
Newcastle church, and in the evening at Haverford.
Fri. 20.--Many of us met at noon, and spent a solemn hour
in intercession for our King and country. In the evening the
House was thoroughly filled with people of all denominations.
I believe they all felt that God was there, and that he was no
respecter of persons.
Sat. 21.--I went to Pembroke. Understanding that a large
number of American prisoners were here, in the evening Itook
my stand over against the place where they were confined; so
that they all could hear distinctly. Many of them seemed
much affected. O that God may set their souls at liberty
Sun. 22.--Mr. Rees, a neighbouring Clergyman, assisting
me, I began at St. Daniel’s between nine and ten. The con
gregation came from many miles round; and many of them
were greatly refreshed. While we rode to Haverford after
dinner, I think it was full as hot as it used to be in Georgia; till
about five o’clock a violent shower exceedingly cooled the air;
but it ceased in half an hour, and we had then such a congre
gation as was scarce ever seen here before; and though many
of the Gentry were there, yet a solemn awe spread over the
whole assembly.
Mon. 23.--I came once more to Carmarthen. Finding the
people here (as indeed in every place) under a deep consterna
tion through the terrible reports which flew on every side, I
cried aloud in the market-place, “Sayye unto the righteous, it
shall be well with him.” God made it a word in season to
them, and many were no longer afraid.
Aug. 1779.] JOURNAL. 165
Tues. 24.--Setting out immediately after preaching, about
eight I preached at Kidwelly, about nine miles from Carmar
then, to a very civil and unaffected congregation. At eleven,
though the sun was intensely hot, I stood at the end of the
church-yard in Llanelly, and took occasion from a passing
bell strongly to enforce those words, “It is appointed unto men
once to die.” About six I preached at Swansea to a large
congregation, without feeling any weariness.
Wed. 25.--I preached at five; and about eight in the Town
Hall at Neath. In the afternoon I preached in the church
near Bridge-End, to a larger congregation than Iever saw there
before; and at six, in the Town-Hall at Cowbridge, much
crowded, and hot enough. The heat made it a little more
difficult to speak; but, by the mercy of God, I was no more
tired when I had done, than when I rose in the morning.
Thur. 26.--I preached at five, and again at eleven. I think
this was the happiest time of all. The poor and the rich seemed
to be equally affected. O how are the times changed at Cow
bridge, since the people compassed the house where I was, and
poured in stones from every quarter | But my strength was
then according to my day; and (blessed be God!) so it is still.
In the evening I preached in the large hall at Mr. Matthews's
in Llandaff. And will the rich also hear the words of eternal
life? “With God all things are possible.”
Fri. 27.--I preached at Cardiff about noon, and at six in the
evening. We then went on to Newport; and setting out early
in the morning, reached Bristol in the afternoon. Sunday, 29.
I had a very large number of communicants. It was one of
the hottest days I have known in England. The thermometer
rose to eighty degrees;-as high as it usually rises in Jamaica.
Being desired to visit a dying man on Kingsdown, I had no
time but at two o'clock. The sun shone without a cloud; so
that I had a warm journey. But I was well repaid; for the
poor sinner found peace. At five I preached to an immense
multitude in the Square; and God comforted many drooping
souls.
Mon. 30.--I set out for the west, and in the evening preached
at Taunton, on, “Walk worthy of the Lord.” Tuesday, 31.
After preaching at Collumpton about noon, in the evening 1
preached at Exeter, in a convenient Room, lately a school; I
suppose formerly a chapel. It is both neat and solemn, and is
166 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Sept. 1779.
believed to contain four or five hundred people. Many were
present again at five in the morning, SEPTEMBER 1, and found
it a comfortable opportunity. Here a gentleman, just come
from Plymouth, gave us a very remarkable account:-‘‘For
two days the combined fleets of France and Spain lay at the
mouth of the harbour. They might have entered it with per
fect ease. The wind was fair; there was no fleet to oppose
them; and the island, which is the grand security of the place,
being incapable of giving them any hinderance; for there was
scarce any garrison, and the few men that were there had no
wadding at all, and but two rounds of powder.” But had they
not cannon 2 Yes, in abundance; but only two of them were
mounted ! Why then did they not go in, destroy the dock,
and burn, or at least plunder, the town 2 I believe they could
hardly tell themselves.--The plain reason was, the bridle of
God was in their teeth; and he had said, “Hitherto shall ye
come, and no farther.”
After preaching at Tiverton, Halberton,Taunton, and South
Brent in the way, on Saturday, 4, I returned to Bristol.
Sun. 5.--Being willing to make the best of the fine weather,
I preached at eight on the quay, on, “The Lord sitteth above
the water-flood: And the Lord remaineth a King for ever.”
At ten I began the service at Kingswood; and in the afternoon
preached in the avenue, to a multitude of people. But we had
five or six times as many at King's Square; and great was our
rejoicing in the Lord.
Mon. 6.--I preached on David’s prayer, “Lord, turn the
counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness.” And how remarkably
has he heard this prayer with regard to the French Ahithophels!
Wed. 8.--I preached at Paulton, where the people are still
all alive, and the society is still as one family; consequently it
increases both in grace and number. At six I preached at
Pensford, and spent a pleasant evening with the lovely family
at Publow. Where is there such another? I cannot tell: I
doubt, not in Great Britain or Ireland.
Sun. 12.--I found it work enough to read Prayers, and
preach, and administer the sacrament to several hundred
people. But it was comfortable work; and I was no more
tired at the end than at the beginning.
Mon. 13.--I preached at Bath and Bradford; on Tuesday,
at the end of the new House, in Frome. Wednesday, 15. I
Oct. 1779.] JOURNALs 167
preached at Malcolm and Shaftesbury; Thursday, 16, at
Shepton-Mallet. Here also, as well as at Paulton, (the two
most unlikely places in the Circuit,) a spreading flame is
kindled. I preached at Coleford in the evening. Among
this plain, simple people, the power of God is always present.
Sun. 19.--The rain would not suffer me to preach abroad.
On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I examined the society,
and found a large number had been called home this year. A
few are still tottering over the grave; but death hath lost its
sting.
Thur. 23.--I preached in the afternoon near the fish-ponds.
The people here had been remarkably dead for many years;
but since that saint of God, Bathsheba Hall, with her husband,
came among them, a flame is broke out. The people flock
together in troops, and are athirst for all the promises of God.
In the evening one sat behind me in the pulpit at Bristol,
who was one of our first Masters at Kingswood. A little after
he left the school, he likewise left the society. Riches then
flowed in upon him; with which, having no relations, Mr.
Spencer designed to do much good--after his death. “But
God said unto him, Thou fool!” Two hours after, he died
intestate, and left all his money to--be scrambled for "
Reader l if you have not done it already, make your Will
before you sleep !
Fri. 24.--James Gerrish, jun., of Roade, near Frome, was
for several years zealous for God: But he too grew rich, and
grew lukewarm, till he was seized with a consumption. At the
approach of death he was “horribly afraid; " he was “in the
lowest darkness, and in the deep.” But “he cried unto God in
his trouble,” and was “delivered out of his distress.” He was
filled with peace and joy unspeakable, and so continued till he
went to God. His father desired I would preach his funeral
sermon; which Iaccordingly did this day, at Roade. I concluded
the busy day with a comfortable watch-night at Kingswood.
Mon. 27.--I preached at Pill. On Wednesday I opened the
new chapel in Guinea-Street. Thursday, 30. I preached at
Amesbury, on Communion with God, while deep awe sat on
the face of all the people. Friday, October 1. I took a
solemn leave of the children at Kingswood. Several of them
have been convinced of sin again and again; but they soon
trifled their convictions away.
168 Rev. J. wesley’s [Oct. 1779.
Sun. 3.-I preached once more in the Square, to a mul
titude of people; and afterwards spent a solemn hour with the
society, in renewing our covenant with God.
Mon. 4.--I left Bristol, preached at the Devizes at eleven,
and in the evening at Sarum. Tuesday, 5. I preached at
Whitchurch, where many, even of the rich, attended, and
behaved with much seriousness. Wednesday, 6. At eleven I
preached in Winchester, where there are four thousand five
hundred French prisoners. I was glad to find they have
plenty of wholesome food; and are treated, in all respects,
with great humanity.
In the evening I preached at Portsmouth-Common. Thurs
day, 7. I took a view of the camp adjoining to the town, and
wondered to find it as clean and meat as a gentleman’s garden.
But there was no Chaplain. The English soldiers of this age
have nothing to do with God!
Fri. 8.--We took chaise, as usual, at two, and about eleven
came to Cobham. Having a little leisure, I thought I could
not employ it better than in taking a walk through the gardens.
They are said to take up four hundred acres, and are admirably
well laid out. They far exceed the celebrated gardens at
Stow ; and that in several respects:--1. In situation; lying on
a much higher hill, and having a finer prospect from the house.
2. In having a natural river, clear as crystal, running beneath
and through them. 3. In the buildings therein; which are
fewer indeed, but far more elegant; yea, and far better kept,
being nicely clean, which is sadly wanting at Stow. And,
lastly, In the rock-work; to which nothing of the kind at
Stow is to be compared.
This night I lodged in the new house at London. How
many more nights have I to spend there?
Mon. 11.--I began my little tour into Northamptonshire.
In the evening I preached at Stony-Stratford; the next day at
Honslip, and at Morton, a little mile from Buckingham. Wed
nesday, 13. Having so lately seen Stourhead and Cobham
gardens, I was now desired to take a view of the much more
celebrated gardens at Stow. The first thing I observed was
the beautiful water which runs through the gardens, to the
front of the house. The tufts of trees, placed on each side of
this, are wonderfully pleasant; and so are many of the walks
and glades through the woods, which are disposed with a fine
Oct. 1779.] JOURNAL. 169
variety. The large pieces of water interspersed give a fresh
beauty to the whole. Yet there are several things which must
give disgust to any person of common sense:--1. The build
ings, called Temples, are most miserable, many of them both
within and without. Sir John Vanbrugh's is an ugly, clumsy
lump, hardly fit for a gentleman’s stable. 2. The temples of
Venus and Bacchus, though large, have nothing elegant in the
structure; and the paintings in the former, representing a lewd
story, are neither well designed nor executed. Those in the
latterare quite faded, and most of theinscriptions vanishedaway.
3. The statues are full as coarse as the paintings, particularly
those of Apollo and the Muses, whom a person, not otherwise
informed, might take to be nine cook-maids. 4. Most of the
water in the ponds is dirty, and thick as puddle. 5. It is childish
affectation to call things here by Greek or Latin names, as
Styx, and the Elysian Fields. 6. It was ominous for My Lord
to entertain himself and his noble company in a grotto built on
the bank of Styx; that is, on the brink of hell. 7. The river
on which it stands is a black, filthy puddle, exactly resembling
a common sewer. 8. One of the stateliest monuments is taken
down, the Egyptian Pyramid; and no wonder, considering
the two inscriptions, which are still legible; the one,--
Linquenda tellus, et domus, et placems
Uror : Neque harum, quas colus, arborum
Te praeter invisas cupressos,
Ulla brevem dominum sequetur !
The other,
I,usisti satis, edisti satis, atque bibisti :
Tempus abire tibi est: Ne potum largius acquo
Rideat, et pulset lasciva decentius attas. *
Upon the whole, I cannot but prefer Cobham gardens to those
at Stow : For, 1. The river at Cobham shames all the ponds at
* The following is Boscawen's translation of these verses from Horace :--
Thy lands, thy dome, thy pleasing wife,
These must thou quit; 'tis nature's doom :
No tree, whose culture charms thy life,
Save the sad cypress, waits thy tomb.
Of meat and drink, of pleasure and of play,
You've had your fill : 'Tis time you steal away,
Lest you be jostled off by that brisk race
Whom sports become, and wanton revels grace.--EDIT,
170 REv. J. Wesley’s [Nov. 1779.
Stow. 2. There is nothing at Stow comparable to the walk
near the wheel which runs up the side of a steep hill, quite
grotesque and wild. 3. Nothing in Stow gardens is to be
compared to the large temple, the pavilion, the antique temple,
the grotto, or the building at the head of the garden; nor to
the neatness which runs through the whole.
But there is nothing even at Cobham to be compared, 1. To
the beautiful cross at the entrance of Stourhead gardens. 2.
To the vast body of water. 3. The rock-work grotto. 4. The
temple of the sun. 5. The hermitage. Here too every thing
is nicely clean, as well as in full preservation. Add to this, that
all the gardens hang on the sides of a semicircular mountain.
And there is nothing either at Cobham or Stow which can
balance the advantage of such a situation.
On this and the two following evenings I preached at
Whittlebury, Towcester, and Northampton. On Saturday I
returned to London.
Mon. 18.--I set out for Sussex; and after visiting the
societies there, returned to London on Saturday, 23. I was
in hopes, by bringing her with me, to save the life of Miss A.,
of Ewhurst, far gone in a consumption. But she was too far
gone: So that though that journey helped her for awhile, yet
she quickly relapsed, and soon after died in peace.
Sun. 24.--I preached a charity sermon in Shadwell church.
I spoke with all possible plainness. And surely some, out
of an immense multitude, will receive the truth, and bring
forth fruit with patience.
Mon. 25.-I set out for Norwich. Tuesday, 26. I went on
to Yarmouth; on Wednesday to Lowestoft; on Friday to
Loddon. Saturday, 30. I came to Norwich again.
Mon. November 1.--I crossed over to Lynn, and settled the
little affairs there ; on Wednesday, 3, went on to Colchester;
and on Friday, to London. Saturday, 6. I began examining
the society, which usually employs me eleven or twelve days.
Sat. 13.--I had the pleasure of an hour's conversation with
Mr. G., one of the members of the first Congress in America.
He unfolded a strange tale indeed! How has poor K. G. been
betrayed on every side! But this is our comfort: There is
One higher than they. And He will command all things to
work together for good.
The following week I examined the rest of our society; but
Nov. 1779.] JOURNAL. 17]
did not find such an increase as I expected. Nay, there was a
considerable decrease, plainly owing to a senseless jealousy
that had crept in between our Preachers; which had grieved
the Holy Spirit of God, and greatly hindered his work.
Mon. 22.--My brother and I set out for Bath, on a very
extraordinary occasion. Some time since Mr. Smyth, a
Clergyman, whose labours God had greatly blessed in the
north of Ireland, brought his wife over to Bath, who had
been for some time in a declining state of health. I desired
him to preach every Sunday evening in our chapel, while he
remained there. But as soon as I was gone, Mr. M'Nab,
one of our Preachers, vehemently opposed that; affirming it
was the common cause of all the Lay Preachers; that they
were appointed by the Conference, not by me, and would not
suffer the Clergy to ride over their heads; Mr. Smyth in
particular, of whom he said all manner of evil. Others
warmly defended him. Hence the society was torn in pieces,
and thrown into the utmost confusion.
Tues. 23.--I read to the society a paper which I wrote near
twenty years ago on a like occasion. Herein I observed, that
“the rules of our Preachers were fixed by me, before any Con
ference existed,” particularly the twelfth : “Above all, you are
to preach when and where I appoint.” By obstimately opposing
which rule, Mr. M'Nab has made all this uproar. In the morn
ing, at a meeting of the Preachers, I informed Mr. M'Nab,
that, as he did not agree to our fundamental rule, I could not
receive him as one of our Preachers, till he was of another mind.
Wed. 24.--I read the same paper to the society at Bristol,
as I found the flame had spread thither also. A few at
Bath separated from us on this account: But the rest were
thoroughly satisfied. So on Friday, 26, I took coach again, and
on Saturday reached London.
In this journey Iread Dr. Warner's History of Ireland, from
its first settlement to the English Conquest; and, after calm
deliberation, I make no scruple to pronounce it a meresenseless
romance. I do not believe one leaf of it is true, from the begin
ning to the end. I totally reject the authorities on which he
builds: I will not take Flagherty’s or Keating’s word for a far
thing. I doubt not, Ireland was, before the Christian era, full
as barbarous as Scotland or England. Indeed it appears from
their own accounts, that the Irish in general were continually
172 REv. J. wesley’s [Dec. 1779.
plundering and murdering each other from the earliest ages to
that period: And so they were ever since, by the account of
Dr. Warner himself, till they were restrained by the English.
How then were they converted by St. Patrick? Cousin-german
to St. George To what religion? Not to Christianity.
Neither in his age, nor the following, had they the least savour
of Christianity, either in their lives or their tempers.
Sun. 28.--I preached a charity sermon at St. Peter’s,
Cornhill. Monday, 29. I visited the societies in Kent, and
returned on Saturday.
Sunday, DEcEMBER 5.-In applying those words, “What
could I have done for my vineyard which I have not done !” I
found such an uncommon pouring out of the convincing Spirit,
as we have not known for many years. In the evening the
same Spirit enabled me strongly to exhort a numerous congre
gation, to “come boldly to the throne of grace;” and to
“make all their requests known unto God with thanksgiving.”
Tues. 7.--I preached in Redriff chapel, a cold, uncomfortable
place, to a handful of people, who appeared to be just as much
affected as the benches they sat upon.
Thur. 9.--In speaking on those words, “Set thy house
in order; for thou shalt die and not live,” I took occasion
to exhort all who had not done it already, to settle their
temporal affairs without delay. Let not any man who reads
these words put it off a day longer
Mon. 13.--I retired to Lewisham, and settled the society
book. Fifty-seven members of the society have died this
year; and none of them “as a fool dieth.” An hundred
and seventy have left the society. Such are the fruits of
senseless prejudice.
Sat. 25.--We began the service at the new chapel, as usual,
at four in the morning. Afterwards Iread prayers and preached
and administered the Lord's Supper at West-Street. In the
afternoon I preached at the new chapel again; then met the
society; and afterwards, the married men and women. But
after this I was no more tired than when I rose in the morning.
Wed. 29.--Mr. Hatton, lately come from America, gave us
an account of his strange deliverance. He was Collector of the
Customs for the eastern ports of Maryland, and zealous for King
George. Therefore the rebels resolved to dispatch him ; and a
party was sent for that purpose under one Simpson, who owed
Dec. 1779.] JOURNAL. 173
him five hundred pounds. But first he sent him the following
note :--
“WE are resolved to have you dead or alive. So we advise
you to give yourself up, that you may give us no more to able.
“I am, Sir,
“Your obedient servant.”
Mr. Hatton not complying with this civil advice, a party of
rifle-men were sent to take him. He was just going out, when
a child told him they were at hand, and had only time to run
and get into a hollow which was under the house. The maid
clapped to the trap-door, and covered it over with flax. They
searched the house from top to bottom, opened all the closets,
turned up the beds, and, finding nothing, went away. He
was scarce come out, when another party beset the house, and
came so quick, that he had but just time to get in again;
and the maid, not having flax enough at hand, covered the
door with foul linen. When these also had wearied them
selves with searching, and went away, he put on his boots
and great coat, took a gun and a rug, (it being a sharp frost,)
and crept into a little marsh near the house. A third party
came quickly, swearing he must be about the house, and they
would have him if he was alive. Hearing this, he stole away
with full speed, and lay down near the sea-shore, between two
hillocks, covering himself with sea-weeds. They came so
near that he heard one of them swear, “If I find him, I will
hang him on the next tree.” Another answered, “I will not
stay for that: I will shoot him the moment I see him.”
After some time, finding they were gone, he lifted up his
head, and heard a shrill whistle from a man fifty or sixty yards
off. He soon knew him to be a deserter from the rebel army.
He asked Mr. H. what he designed to do; who answered,
“Go in my boat to the English ships, which are four or five
and twenty miles off.” But the rebels had found and burnt the
boat. So, knowing their life was gone if they stayed till the
morning, they got into a small canoe, (though liable to overset
with a puff of wind,) and set off from shore. Having rowed two
or three miles, they stopped at a little island, and made a fire,
being almost perished with cold. But they were quickly alarmed,
by a boat rowing toward the shore. Mr. Hatton, standing up,
said, “We have a musket and a fusee. If you load one, as
fast as I discharge the other, I will give a good account of them
w
174 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Feb. 1780.
all.” He then stepped to the shore, and bade the rowers stop,
and tell him who they were; declaring he would fire among
them, if any man struck another stroke. Upon their answering,
he found they were friends, being six more deserters from the
rebel army. So they gladly came on shore, and brought
provisions with them to those who before had neither meat
nor drink. After refreshing themselves, they all went into
the boat, and cheerfully rowed to the English ships.
Fri. 31.--We concluded the year at West-Street, with a
solemn watch-night. Most of the congregation stayed till the
beginning of the year, and cheerfully sang together,<
Glory to God, and thanks, and praise,
Who kindly lengthens out our days, &c.
Sun. JANUARY 2, 1780.-We had the largest congregation
at the renewal of our covenant with God, which ever met upon
the occasion; and we were thoroughly convinced, that God
was not departed from us. He never will, unless we first
depart from him.
Tues. 18.--Receiving more and more accounts of the
increase of Popery, I believed it my duty to write a letter
concerning it, which was afterwards inserted in the public
papers. Many were grievously offended; but I cannot help
it: I must follow my own conscience.
Sat. 22.--I spent an hour or two very agreeably in Sir Ashton
Tever's museum. It does not equal the British Museum in
size; nor is it constructed on so large a plan; as it contains no
manuscripts, no books, no antiquities, nor any remarkable works
of art. But I believe, for natural curiosities, it is not excelled
by any museum in Europe; and all the beasts, birds, reptiles,
and insects, are admirably well ranged and preserved: So that
if you saw many of them elsewhere, you would imagine they
were alive! The hippopotamus, in particular, looks as fierce as
if he was just coming out of the river; and the old lion appears
as formidable now as when he was stalking in the Tower.
Sun. 23.−In the evening I retired to Lewisham, to prepare
matter (who would believe it?) for a Monthly Magazine. Fri
day, FEBRUARY 4, being the National Fast, I preached first
at the new chapel, and then at St. Peter's, Cornhill. What
a difference in the congregation 1 Yet out of these stones
God can raise up children to Abraham.
Thur. 17.-I preached at Dorking, and could not but
March, 1780.] . JOURNAL. 175
reflect, in this room I lodged the first time I saw poor Mr.
Ireland: Emphatically poor Poor beyond expression;--
though he left fourscore thousand pounds behind him
Thur. 24.--I met the building Committee; according to
whose representation, our income at last nearly answers our
expenses. If so, it will clear itself in a few years.
Mon. 28.--Taking the post-coach, I reached Newbury time
enough to preach to a crowded audience. Tuesday, 29, and
Wednesday, I preached at Bath, where brotherly love is now
restored. Thursday, MARch 2. I went into Bristol, and
enjoyed much peace among a quiet, loving people. On Mon
day, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I examined the society, and
had reason to rejoice over them.
Mon. 13.--I set out for the north, and in the evening
preached at Stroud, where is a considerable increase of the
work of God. Tuesday, 14. I preached in the church at
Pitchcomb; but it would by no means contain the congregation.
In the evening I preached at Tewkesbury, and on Wednesday,
15, at Worcester, to a very serious congregation. Thursday,
16. About noon I began preaching at Bewdley, in an open
space at the head of the town. The wind was high and
exceeding sharp; but no one seemed to regard it. In the
middle of the sermon came a man beating a drum; but a
gentleman of the town soon silenced him. Friday, 17.
About noon I preached at Bengeworth church, to the largest
congregation I ever saw there; and in Pebworth church about
six, to a larger congregation than I had seen there before. I
found uncommon liberty in applying those words, (perhaps
a last warning to the great man of the parish, Mr. Martin,)
“Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might.”
Sat. 18.-I went on to Birmingham; and, Sunday, 19,
preached at eight in the morning, and at half-past one in the
afternoon; in the evening, at Wednesbury. Monday, 20. I
reached Congleton, and preached to a lively congregation on
our Lord's words: “Lazarus, come forth !” Tuesday, 21. I
preached in the new chapel at Macclesfield; Thursday, 23, at
Stockport and Manchester.
On Good-Friday I preached, at seven, in Manchester;
about one, in Oldham; and in Manchester, at six. Saturday,
25. I went on to Bolton, where the work of God is continually
increasing. On Easter-Day I set out for Warrington. Mr.
176 REv. J. Wesley’s [April, 1780.
Harmer read Prayers both morning and afternoon. We had
a large congregation in the morning; as many as the church
could well contain in the afternoon; and more than it could
contain in the evening. At last there is reason to hope, that
God will have a steady people even in this wilderness.
The next evening, when a few of the society were met
together, the power of God came mightily upon them. Some
fell to the ground; some cried aloud for mercy; some rejoiced
with joy unspeakable. Two or three found a clear sense of the
love of God; one gay young woman, in particular, who was
lately much prejudiced against this way, but is now filled
with joy unspeakable.
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I spent at Liverpool,
being undetermined whether to proceed or not. At length I
yielded to the advice of my friends, and deferred my journey
to Ireland. So I preached at Northwich about noon, and
in the evening at Alpraham, in the midst of all the old
Methodists. We had a very different congregation at
Nantwich in the evening. But as many as could get into
the House, or near the door, behaved very seriously.
Sat. APRIL 1.--I returned to Chester, and found many alive
to God, but scarce one that retained his pure love. Sunday, 2.
I reached Warrington about ten. The chapel was well filled
with serious hearers; and I believe God confirmed the word
of his grace. Hastening back to Chester, I found a numerous
congregation waiting, and immediately began, “This is the
victory that overcometh the world, even our faith.”
Mon. 3.-I returned to Manchester, and, Tuesday, 4,
strongly applied, “What could I have done more to my
vineyard, that I have not done?” At present there are
many here that “bring forth good grapes:” But many swiftly
increase in goods; and I fear very few sufficiently watch and
pray that they may not set their hearts upon them.
Wed. 5.--I preached at Bolton; Thursday, 6, about noon,
at Bury; and at Rochdale in the evening. Friday, 7. I went
to Delph, a little village upon the mountains, where a remarkable
work of God is just broke out. I was just set down, when the
Minister sent me word, I was welcome to preach in his church.
On hearing this, many people walked thither immediately, near
a mile from the town; but in ten minutes he sent me word, his
mind was changed. We knew not then what to do, till the
April, 1780.] JOURNAL. 177
Trustees of the Independent meeting offered us the use of their
House. It was quickly filled, and truly God bore witness to
his word. In the evening I preached at Huddersfield. Satur
day, 8. About moon I opened the new House at Mirfield, and
in the evening preached at Daw-Green. Sunday, 9. I went
on to Birstal, and took my stand at the front of the House,
though the north-east wind whistled round about. I preached
again between four and five, pointing them to the Great
Shepherd and Bishop of their souls.
Mon. 10.--I preached in the prison at Whitelee ; in the
evening at Morley; and on Tuesday morning at Cross-Hall.
The family here are much grown in grace since I saw them
last. Most of them now enjoy the great salvation, and walk
worthy of their vocation; and all around them “see their good
works, and glorify their Father which is in heaven.”
In the evening I preached to a very genteel congregation at
Wakefield. Wednesday, 12. After preaching at Rothwell, I
inquired what was become of that lovely class of little girls,
most of them believers, whom I met here a few years since.
I found those of them that had pious parents remain to this
day: But all of them whose parents did not fear God are
gone back into the world.
In the evening I preached in the new House at Leeds.
Thursday, 13. I opened the new House at Hunslet. On Fri
day, I preached at Woodhouse. Sunday, 16. Our House at
Leeds was full at eight; yet every one heard distinctly. In the
afternoon I preached at the old church; but a considerable part
of the people could not hear. Indeed the church is remarkably
ill constructed. Had it been built with common sense, all that
were in it, and even more, might have heard every word.
Mon. 17.--I left Leeds in one of the roughest mornings I
have ever seen. We had rain, hail, snow, and wind, in abun
dance. About nine I preached at Bramley; between one and
two at Pudsey. Afterwards I walked to Fulneck, the German
settlement. Mr. Moore showed us the house, chapel, hall,
lodging-rooms, the apartments of the widows, the single men,
and single women. He showed us likewise the workshops of
various kinds, with the shops for grocery, drapery, mercery,
hardware, &c., with which, as well as with bread from their
bakehouse, they furnish the adjacent country. I see not
what but the mighty power of God can hinder them from
178 REv. J. wesley’s [April, 1780.
acquiring millions; as they, 1. Buy all materials with ready
money at the best hand ; 2. Have above a hundred young
men, above fifty young women, many widows, and above a
hundred married persons; all of whom are employed from
morning to night, without any intermission, in various kinds
of manufactures, not for journeymen's wages, but for no
wages at all, save a little very plain food and raiment: As
they have, 3. A quick sale for all their goods, and sell them
all for ready money. But can they lay up treasure on earth,
and at the same time lay up treasure in heaven 2
In the evening I preached at Bradford, where I was well
pleased to find many, both men and women, who had never
suffered any decay since they were perfected in love.
Wednesday, 19. I went to Otley; but Mr. Ritchie was dead
before I came. But he had first witnessed a good confession.
One telling him, “You will be better soon;” he replied, “I
cannot be better; for I have God in my heart. I am happy,
happy, happy in his love.”
Mr. Wilson, the Vicar, after a little hesitation, consented
that I should preach his funeral sermon: This I did to-day.
The text he had chosen was, “To you that believe, he is
precious.” Perhaps such a congregation had hardly been in
Otley church before. Surely the right hand of the Lord
bringeth mighty things to pass |
Sun. 23.--Mr. Richardson being unwilling that I should
preach any more in Haworth church, Providence opened
another: I preached in Bingley church, both morning and
afternoon. This is considerably larger than the other. It
rained hard in the morning: This hindered many; so that
those who did come, got in pretty well in the forenoon; but
in the afternoon very many were obliged to go away.
After preaching at several other places on Monday and
Tuesday, Wednesday, 26, I preached in Heptonstall church,
well filled with serious hearers. In the evening I preached
near Todmorden, in the heart of the mountains. One would
wonder where all the people came from. Thursday, 27. I
preached in Todmorden church, with great enlargement
of heart. In the afternoon we went on to Blackburn. It
seemed, the whole town was moved. But the question was,
where to put the congregation. We could not stand abroad,
because of the sun : So as many as could, squeezed into the
May, 1780.] JourtsAL. 179
preaching-house. All the chief men of the town were there.
It seems as if the last will be first.
Sun. 30.--We had a lovely congregation at Colne ; but a
much larger at one and at five. Many of them came ten or
twelve miles; but I believe not in vain : God gave them a
good reward for their labour.
Mon. MAY 1.--We reached Grassington about ten. The
multitude of people constrained me to preach abroad. It was
fair all the time I was preaching; but afterwards rained
much. At Pateley-Bridge, the Vicar offered me the use
of his church. Though it was more than twice as large as our
preaching-house, it was not near large enough to contain the
congregation. How vast is the increase of the work of God
Particularly in the most rugged and uncultivated places !
How does he “send the springs” of grace also “into the
valleys, that run among the hills.”
Tues. 2.-We came to Ripon, and observed a remarkable
turn of Providence: The great hinderance of the work of God
in this place has suddenly disappeared; and the poor people,
being delivered from their fear, gladly flock together to hear
His word. The new preaching-house was quickly more than
filled. Surely some of them will not be forgetful hearers'
In the afternoon we travelled through a delightful country;
the more so when contrasted with the horrid mountains.
The immense ruins of Garvaix Abbey show what a stately pile
it was once. Though we were at a lone house, a numerous
congregation assembled in the evening; on whom I enforced,
“This is life eternal, to know thee, the only true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.”
Wed. 3.-Judging it impracticable to pass the mountains in
a carriage, I sent my chaise round, and took horse. At twelve
I preached at Swaledale, to a loving people, increasing both in
grace and number. Thence we crossed over another range
of dreary mountains, and in the evening reached Barnard
Castle. Not being yet inured to riding, I now felt something
like weariness. But I forgot it in the lively congregation,
and in the morning it was gone.
Thur. 4.--About eight I preached to a serious congregation
at Cuthbedson; and about one at Newbiggin, in Teesdale.
We doubted how we should get over the next mountain, the
famous Pikelow, after so long and heavy rains; but I scarce
180 REv. J. WESLEY’s [May, 1780.
ever remember us getting over it so well. We found the
people in Weardale, as usual, some of the liveliest in the
kingdom; knowing nothing, and desiring to know nothing,
save Jesus Christ and him crucified.
Fri. 5.--Notice having been given, without my knowledge,
of my preaching at Ninthead, all the lead-miners that could,
got together; and I declared to them, “All things are ready.”
After riding over another enormous mountain, I preached
at Gamblesby (as I did about thirty years ago) to a large
congregation of rich and poor. The chief man of the town
was formerly a Local Preacher, but now keeps his carriage.
Has he increased in holiness as well as in wealth 2 If not, he
has made a poor exchange.
In the evening, a large upper room, designed for an
assembly, was procured for me at Penrith; but several of the
poor people were struck with a panic, for fear the room should
fall. Finding there was no remedy, I went down into the
court below, and preached in great peace to a multitude of well
behaved people. The rain was suspended while I preached,
but afterwards returned, and continued most of the night.
Saturday, 6. I went on to Whitehaven; and, in the evening,
exhorted all who knew in whom they had believed, to “walk
worthy of the Lord in all well-pleasing, being fruitful in
every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God.”
Sun. 7.-I preached at eight, at two, and at five; but could
not preach abroad because of the rain. We were in hopes of
sailing for the Isle of Man the next morning, as a little vessel
was waiting for us; but the wind then turned full against us.
By this means I had an opportunity given me of meeting the
select society. I was pleased to find, that none of them have
lost the pure love of God, since they received it first. I was
particularly pleased with a poor Negro. She seemed to be fuller
of love than any of the rest. And not only her voice had an
unusual sweetness, but her words were chosen and uttered with
a peculiar propriety. I never heard, either in England or
America, such a Negro speaker (man or woman) before.
Tues. 9.--Finding no hopes of sailing, after preaching
morning and evening, I went to Cockermouth. Wednesday,
10. At eight I preached in the Town-Hall; but to the poor
only: The rich could not rise so soon. In the evening I
preached in the Town-Hall at Carlisle; and from the number
May, 1780.] JOURNAL. 181
and seriousness of the hearers, I conceived a little hope, that
even here some good will be done.
Thur. 11.--I reached Newcastle; and on Friday, 12, went
to Sunderland. Many of our friends prosper in the world. I
wish their souls may prosper also. Sunday, 14. I preached
at Gateshead-Fell at two o'clock, and hoped to preach at the
Garth-Heads at five ; but the rain drove us into the House.
But all was well; for many found God was there.
Mon. 15.--I set out for Scotland; and Tuesday, 16, came
to Berwick-upon-Tweed. Such a congregation I have not
seen there for many years. Perhaps the seed which has so
long seemed to be sown in vain, may at length produce a
good harvest. Wed. 17.--I went on to Dunbar. I have seldom seen such
a congregation here before. Indeed some of them seemed at
first disposed to mirth; but they were soon as serious as death.
And truly the power of the Lord was present to heal those
that were willing to come to the throne of grace. Thursday,
18. I read, with great expectation, Dr. Watts’s “Essay on
Liberty;” but I was much disappointed. It is abstruse and
metaphysical. Surely he wrote it either when he was very
young or very old. In the evening I endeavoured to preach
to the hearts of a large congregation at Edinburgh. We
have cast much “bread upon the waters” here. Shall we
not “find it again,” at least “after many days?”
Fri. 19.--I preached at Joppa, a settlement of colliers, three
miles from Edinburgh. Some months ago, as some of them
were cursing and swearing, one of our Local Preachers going by,
reproved them. One of them followed after him, and begged
he would give them a sermon. He did so several times.
Afterwards the Travelling Preachers went, and a few quickly
agreed to meet together. Some of these now know in whom
they have believed, and walk worthy of their profession.
Sat. 20.--I took one more walk through Holyrood House,
the mansion of ancient Kings. But how melancholy an
appearance does it make now ! The stately rooms are dirty
as stables; the colours of the tapestry are quite faded;
several of the pictures are cut and defaced. The roof of
the royal chapel is fallen in ; and the bones of James the
Fifth, and the once beautiful Lord Darnley, are scattered
about like those of sheep or oxen. Such is human greatness |
Is not “a living dog better than a dead lion ?”
182 REv. J. WESLEY’s [May, 1780.
Sun. 21.--The rain hindered me from preaching at noon
upon the Castle-Hill. In the evening the House was well filled,
and I was enabled to speak strong words. But I am not a
Preacher for the people of Edinburgh. Hugh Saunderson
and Michael Fenwick are more to their taste.
Tues. 23.−A gentleman took me to see Roslyn Castle, eight
miles from Edinburgh. It is now all in ruins, only a small
dwelling-house is built on one part of it. The situation of it is
exceeding fine, on the side of a steep mountain, hanging over a
river, from which another mountain rises, equally steep, and
clothed with wood. At a little distance is the chapel, which is
in perfect preservation, both within and without. Ishould never
have thought it had belonged to any one less than a sovereign
Prince 1 the inside being far more elegantly wrought with
variety of Scripture histories in stone-work, than I believe can
be found again in Scotland; perhaps not in all England.
Hence we went to Dunbar. Wednesday, 24. In the after
noon I went through the lovely garden of a gentleman in the
town, who has laid out walks hanging over the sea, and winding
among the rocks. One of them leads to the Castle, wherein
that poor injured woman, Mary Queen of Scots, was confined.
But time has well nigh devoured it : Only a few ruinous walls
are now standing.
Thur. 25.-We went on to Berwick. Friday, 26. In
returning to Alnwick we spent an hour at H., an ancient
monastery. Part of it the Duke of Northumberland has
repaired, furnished it in a plain manner, and surrounded it with
a little garden. An old inscription bears date 1404, when
part of it was built by the fourth Earl of Northumberland.
How many generations have had their day since that time,
and then passed away like a dream | We had a happy season
at Alnwick with a large and deeply attentive congregation.
Sat. 27.--At noon I preached in the Town-Hall at
Morpeth; and God applied his word to many hearts. In
the afternoon I preached to the loving colliers at Placey, and
then went on to Newcastle.
Sun. 28.--Between eight and nine in the morning I
preached at Gateshead-Fell, on Fellowship with God; a
subject which not a few of them understand by heart-felt
experience. The congregation at Sheephill about noon was
far too large for any House to contain. Such was the power
of God that I almost wondered any could help believing. At
June, 1780.] JOURNAL. 183
five I preached at the Garth-Heads, to a still more numerous
congregation; but there were few among them whoremembered
my first preaching near that place in the Keelman’s Hospital.
For what reason the wise managers of that place forbade my
preaching there any more, I am yet still to learn.
Wed. 31.-Taking my leave of this affectionate people, I
went to Mr. Parker's, at Shincliff, near Durham. The
congregation being far too large to get into the House, I
stood near his door. It seemed as if the whole village were
ready to receive the truth in the love thereof. Perhaps their
earnestness may provoke the people of Durham to jealousy.
In the afternoon we took a view of the Castle at Durham,
the residence of the Bishop. The situation is wonderfully
fine, surrounded by the river, and commanding all the
country; and many of the apartments are large and stately;
but the furniture is mean beyond imagination' I know not
where I have seen such in a gentleman's house, or a man
of five hundred a year, except that of the Lord-Lieutenant
in Dublin. In the largest chambers, the tapestry is quite
faded; beside that, it is coarse and ill-judged. Take but
one instance:--In Jacob's vision you see, on the one side,
a little paltry ladder, and an angel climbing it, in the attitude
of a chimney-sweeper; and on the other side Jacob staring at
him, from under a large silver-laced hat
Thur. JUNE 1.--About ten I preached at Aycliff, a large
village, twelve miles from Durham; all the inhabitants whereof
seem now as full of good-will, as they were once of prejudice.
I preached at Darlington in the evening. It is good to
be here; the liveliness of the people animates all that come
near them. On Friday evening, we had a love-feast, at which
many were greatly comforted, by hearing such artless, simple
accounts of the mighty works of God.
Sat. 3.−At moon I preached to a large congregation at
Northallerton. The sun shone full in my face when I began;
but it was soon overcast; and I believe this day, if never
before, God gave a general call to this careless people. In
the evening I preached at Thirsk. When I was here last,
a few young women behaved foolishly; but all were deeply
serious now, and seemed to feel that God was there.
Sun. 4.--The service began about ten at Staveley, near
Boroughbridge. Mr. Hartley, the Rector, read Prayers. But
J84 REv. J. wesley’s [June, 1780.
the church would scarce contain half the congregation; so that
I was obliged to stand upon a tombstone, both morning and
afternoon. In the evening I preached at Boroughbridge, to a
numerous congregation; and all were attentive, except a few
soldiers, who seemed to understand nothing of the matter.
Mon. 5.--About noon I preached at Tockwith, and then
went on to York. I was surprised to find a general faintness
here; one proof of which was, that the morning preaching was
given up. Tuesday, 6, was the Quarterly Meeting, the most
numerous I ever saw. At two was the love-feast, at which
several instances of the mighty power of God were repeated;
by which it appears that his work is still increasing in several
parts of the Circuit.
An arch news-writer published a paragraph to-day, probably
designed for wit, concerning the large pension which the
famous Wesley received for defending the King. This so
increased the congregation in the evening, that scores were
obliged to go away. And God applied that word to many
hearts, “I will not destroy the city for ten’s sake l’”
Wed, 7.-I preached at Pocklington and Swinfleet. Thurs
day, 8. I preached on the Green at Thorne, to a listening multi
tude. Only two or three were much diverted at the thought
of seeing the dead, small and great, standing before God
Fri. 9.-About noon I preached at Crowle; and in the even
ing at Epworth, on, “I will not let thee go, except thou bless
me.” Saturday, 10. In the evening I preached at Owstone; and,
passing the Trent early in the morning, on Sunday, 11, preached
at Kirton, about eight, to a very large and very serious congre
gation. Only before me stood one, something like a gentleman,
with his hat on even at prayer. I could scarce help telling him
a story:--In Jamaica, a Negro passing by the Governor, pulled
off his hat; so did the Governor; at which one expressing his
surprise, he said, “Sir, I should be ashamed if a Negro had
more good manners than the Governor of Jamaica.”
About two I preached at Gainsborough, and again at five, to
a very numerous congregation. We had then a love-feast, and
one of the most lively which I have known for many years.
Many spoke, and with great fervour, as well as simplicity; so
that most who heard blessed God for the consolation.
Mon. 12.--About eleven I preached at Newton-upon-Trent,
to a large and very genteel congregation. Thence we went to
June, 1780.] JOURNAL. 185
Newark: But our friends were divided as to the place where I
should preach. At length they found a convenient place,
covered on three sides, and on the fourth open to the street.
It contained two or three thousand people well, who appeared to
hear as for life. Only one big man, exceeding drunk, was very
noisy and turbulent, till his wife (fortissima Tyndaridarum. /*)
seized him by the collar, gave him two or three hearty boxes
on the ear, and dragged him away like a calf. But, at length,
he got out of her hands, crept in among the people, and stood
as quiet as a lamb.
Tues. 13.--I accepted of an invitation from a gentleman at
Lincoln, in which I had not set my foot for upwards of fifty
years. At six in the evening I preached in the Castle-yard, to
a large and attentive congregation. They were all as quiet as
if I had been at Bristol. Will God have a people here also?
Wed. 14.--I preached again at ten in the morning. In
the middle of the sermon a violent storm began; on which
Mr. Wood, the keeper, opened the door of the Court-House,
which contained the whole of the congregation. I have great
hope some of these will have their fruit unto holiness, and in
the end everlasting life.
Heavy rain drove us into the House at Horncastle in the
evening. Thursday, 15. I preached at Raithby. Two of Mr.
Brackenbury's brothers spent the evening with us. Friday, 16.
We went on to Boston, the largest town in the county, except
Lincoln. From the top of the steeple (which I suppose is by
far the highest tower in the kingdom) we had a view not only
of all the town, but of all the adjacent country. Formerly this
town was in the fens; but the fens are vanished away: Great
part of them is turned into pasture, and part into arable land.
At six the House contained the congregation, all of whom
behaved in the most decent manner. How different from those
wild beasts with whom Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Mather had to do |
Saturday, 17. The House was pretty well filled in the morn
ing, and many were much affected. A gentleman who was there
invited me to dinner, and offered me the use of his paddock;
but the wind was so exceeding high, that I could not preach
abroad, as I did when I was here before, just six-and-twenty
years ago; and Mr. Thompson, a friendly Anabaptist, offering
* The bravest Amazonian of her race.--EDIT.
186 REv. J. WESLEY’s [June, 1780.
me the use of his large meeting-house, I willingly accepted the
offer. I preached to most of the chief persons in the town, on
1 Cor. xiii. 1-3; and many of them seemed utterly amazed.
“Open their eyes, O Lord, that they sleep not in death !”
Sun. 18.--I gave them a parting discourse at seven; and
after adding a few members to the little society, and exhorting
them to cleave close to each other, I left them with a comfort
able hope that they would not be scattered any more.
About noon I preached in the market-place at Wainfleet,
once a large sea-port town, till the harbour was blocked up by
sand. The congregation behaved exceeding well. We now
passed into Marshland, a fruitful and pleasant part of the
county. Such is Langham-Row in particular, the abode of
honest George Robinson and his fourteen children. Although
it was a lone house, yet such a multitude of people flocked
together, that I was obliged to preach abroad. It blew a
storm, and we had several showers of rain; but no one went
away. I do not wonder that this society is the largest, as
well as the liveliest, in these parts of Lincolnshire.
Mon. 19.--I preached at Louth, where the people used to be
rough enough; but now were serious and calmly attentive.
Such a change in a whole town, I have seldom known in the
compass of one year.
Tues. 20.-After preaching at Tealby, I went on to Grimsby,
where I am still more at home than at any place in the east of"
Lincolnshire; though scarce any of our first members remain:
They are all safe lodged in Abraham's bosom. But here is
still a loving people, though a little disturbed by the Calvinists,
who seize on every halting soul as their own lawful prey.
Wed. 21.-I preached at Scotter, to a lovely, simple-hearted
people; and at Epworth in the evening.
Thur. 22.--I preached once more at Crowle, to a numerous
and deeply serious congregation. Every one thought, “Can
any good come out of Crowle?” But God's thoughts were
not as our thoughts. There is now such a work of God in
this, as is in few of the places round about it.
Sat. 24.--I preached about noon at Belton. There was the
dawn of a blessed work here; but “My Lady’s Preachers,” so
called, breaking in, set every one's sword against his brother.
Some of them revive a little; but I doubt whether they will
ever recover their first love.
July, 1780.] JOURNAL. 187
Sun. 25.--Sir William Anderson, the Rector, having sent
an express order to his Curate, he did not dare to gainsay.
So at ten I began reading Prayers to such a congregation as
I apprehend hardly ever assembled in this church before. I
preached on Luke viii. 18, part of the Second Lesson. Not
a breath was heard; all was still “as summer's moontide air;”
and I believe our Lord then sowed seed in many hearts, which
will bring forth fruit to perfection.
After dinner I preached at Westwood-side. The high wind
was a little troublesome; but the people regarded it not. We
concluded the day with one of the most solemn love-feasts I
have known for many years.
Mon. 26.--Finningley church was well filled in the even
ing; and many seemed much affected. Tuesday, 27. I
preached at Doncaster about noon, and to a larger congrega
tion at Rotherham in the evening. Wednesday, 28. I went
to Sheffield: But the House was not ready; so I preached
in the Square.
I can hardly think I am entered this day into the seventy
eighth year of my age. By the blessing of God, I am just
the same as when I entered the twenty-eighth. This hath
God wrought, chiefly by my constant exercise, my rising early,
and preaching morning and evening.
Thur. 29.--I was desired to preach at Worksop; but when
I came, they had not fixed on any place. At length they chose
a lamentable one, full of dirt and dust, but without the least
shelter from the scorching sun. This few could bear: So we
had only a small company of as stupid people as ever I saw.
In the evening I preached in the old House at Sheffield; but
the heat was scarce supportable. I took my leave of it at
five in the morning, and in the evening preached in the new
House, thoroughly filled with rich and poor; to whom I
declared, “We preach Christ crucified:” And He bore
witness to his word in a very uncommon manner. Saturday,
JULY 1. I preached once more at Rotherham. Sunday, 2.
At eight I preached at Sheffield. There was afterwards such
a number of communicants as was never seen at the old
church before. I preached again at five; but very many
were constrained to go away. We concluded our work by
visiting some that were weak in body, but strong in faith,
desiring nothing but to do and suffer the will of God.
188 REv. J. Wesley’s [July, 1780.
Monday, 3, and Tuesday, 4, I preached at Derby; Wed
nesday, 5, at a church eight miles from it. In the afternoon,
as I was going through Stapleford, in my way to Nottingham,
I was stopped by some who begged me to look into their new
preaching-house. Many following me, the House was soon
filled; and we spent half an hour together, to our mutual
comfort. In the evening I preached at Nottingham. Wed
nesday, 5. I preached in Loughborough about eleven, and in
the evening at Leicester. I know not how it is that I
constantly find such liberty of spirit in this place.
Thur. 6.--The Room at five, according to custom, was fille."
from end to end. I have not spent a whole day in Leicester
for these fifty-two years: Surely I shall before I die. This
night we spent in Northampton; then went on to London.
Sun. 9.--We had a full congregation at the new chapel,
and found God had not forgotten to be gracious. In the
following days I read over, with a few of our Preachers, the
large Minutes of the Conference, and considered all the articles,
one by one, to see whether any should be omitted or altered.
Sunday, 16, was a day of much refreshment and strong
consolation to many, who are persuaded that God will revive
his work, and bind up the waste places. Monday, 17. My
brother and I set out for Bath. I preached at Reading in
the evening. On Tuesday evening I preached at Rainsbury
Park. On Wednesday, we reached Bath.
A year ago, there was such an awakening here as never had
been from the beginning; and, in consequence of it, a swift and
large increase of the society. Just then Mr. M'Nab, quarrel
ling with Mr. Smyth, threw wildfire among the people, and
occasioned anger, jealousies, judging each other, backbiting
and tale-bearing without end; and, in spite of all the pains
which have been taken, the wound is not healed to this day.
Both my brother and I now talked to as many as we could,
and endeavoured to calm and soften their spirits; and on
Friday and Saturday I spoke severally to all the members
of the society that could attend. On Friday evening, both in
the preaching, and at the meeting of the society, the power of
God was again present to heal; as also on Saturday, both
morning and evening: And a few are added to the society.
Sun. 23.--I preached (after reading Prayers) at ten, at half
hour past two, and in the evening. Very many heard; I hope
Aug. 1780.] JOURNAL. 189
\
some felt what was spoken. We have sown : O may God give
the increase !
Mon. 24.--I went on to Bristol. While I was at Bath, I
narrowly observed and considered the celebrated Cartoons;
the three first in particular. What a poor designer was one
of the finest painters in the world ! 1. Here are two men in
a boat; each of them more than half as long as the boat itself.
2. Our Lord, saying to Peter, “Feed my sheep,” points to
three or four sheep standing by him. 3. While Peter and
John heal the lame man, two naked boys stand by them.
For what? O pity that so fine a painter should be utterly
without common sense !
In the evening I saw one of the greatest curiosities in the
vegetable creation,-the Nightly Cereus. About four in the
afternoon, the dry stem began to swell; about six, it gradually
opened; and about eight, it was in its full glory. I think the
inner part of this flower, which was snow-white, was about five
inches diameter; the yellow rays which surrounded it, Ijudged,
were in diameter nine or ten inches. About twelve it began
to droop, being covered with a cold sweat; at four it died
away.
The people at Bath were still upon my mind: So on
Thursday, 27, I went over again; and God was with us
of a truth, whenever we assembled together. Surely God is
healing the breaches of this poor, shattered people.
Sun. 30.--Forty or fifty of our Preachers being come, we
had a solemn opportunity in the morning. We had the most
numerous congregation in the afternoon which has been seen
here for many years. And will not the Lord be glorified in
our reformation, rather than our destruction ?
Tues. AUGUST 1.--Our Conference began. We have been
always, hitherto, straitened for time. It was now resolved, “For
the future we allow nine or ten days for each Conference; that
every thing, relative to the carrying on the work of God, may
be maturely considered.”af
Fri. 4.--I preached on a convenient piece of ground, at one
end of Radcliff-Parade. Great part of the immense congrega
tion had never heard this kind of preaching before ; yet they
were deeply attentive, while I opened and applied those awful
words, “I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God.”
Sun. 6.--We had the largest numbers of communicants that
had ever met at the new Room; and the largest congregation at
190 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Aug. 1780.
five, that had ever met near King's Square. Wednesday, 9.
We concluded the Conference in much peace and love.
Fri. 11.--The sultry heat continuing, I would not coop
myself up in the chapel, but preached again near Radcliff
Parade, with much comfort and peace.
Mon. 14.--For fear of the violent heat, we set out for
Cornwall very early in the morning. But we feared where
no fear was ; for that very day the heat was at an end, and a
mild rain began ; which, at intervals, followed us almost to
the Land’s End.
After preaching at South-Brent, Taunton, and Collumpton,
on Wednesday, 16, we came to Exeter. It is still a day of small
things here, for want of a convenient preaching-house. Thurs
day, 17. I went on to Plymouth. Here I expected little com
fort. A large preaching-house was built; but who was to pay
for it? I preached in it at six, at five in the morning, and
on Friday evening; and, from the number and spirit of the
hearers, could not but hope that good will be done here also.
Sat. 19.--I snatched the opportunity of a fair evening, to
preach in the Square at Plymouth-Dock. Sunday, 20. At
seven in the morning, and at five in the evening, I preached
at the Dock; in the afternoon in Plymouth House. It was
crowded sufficiently. After preaching I made a collection for
the House, which amounted to above five-and-twenty pounds.
When I had done, Mr. Jane said, “This is not all. We must
have a weekly collection both here and at the Dock. Let as
many as can subscribe sixpence a week for one year. I will
subscribe five shillings a week. And let this be reserved for
the payment of the debt.” It was done : And by this simple
method, the most pressing debts were soon paid.
Mon. 21.-I preached to a large and quiet congregation in
the main street at St. Austle. Tuesday, 22. I preached at
Mevagissey; in the evening at Helstone. Wednesday, 23.
I went on to Penzance. It is now a pleasure to be here;
the little flock being united together in love. I preached at
a little distance from the preaching-house. A company
of soldiers were in town; whom, toward the close of the sermon,
the good Officer ordered to march through the congregation.
But as they readily opened and closed again, it made very
little disturbance.
Thur. 24.--I preached near the preaching-house at St. Just.
God applied his word with power: More especially at the
Sept. 1780.] JOURNAL. 191
meeting of the society, when all our hearts were as melting
wax. Friday, 25. I preached in the market-place at St. Ives, to
most of the inhabitants of the town. Here is no opposer now.
Rich and poor see, and very many feel, the truth.
I now looked over a volume of Mr. K-’s Essays. He is a
lively writer, of middling understanding. But I cannot admire
his style at all. It is prim, affected, and highly Frenchified.
I object to the beginning so many sentences with participles.
This does well in French, but not in English. I cannot admire
his judgment in many particulars. To instance in one or
two: He depresses Cowley beyond all reason; who was far
from being a mean poet. Full as unreasonably does he
depress modern eloquence. I believe I have heard speakers
at Oxford, to say nothing of Westminster, who were not
inferior to either Demosthenes or Cicero.
Sat. 26.--We had our Quarterly Meeting at Redruth,
where all was love and harmony. Sunday, 27. It was sup
posed, twenty thousand people were assembled at the amphi
theatre in Gwennap. And yet all, I was informed, could
hear distinctly, in the fair, calm evening.
Mon. 28.--I preached at Wadebridge and Port-Isaac ; Tues
day, 29, at Camelford and Launceston. Hence we hastened
toward Bristol, by way of Wells; where (the weather being
intensely hot, so that we could not well bear the Room) I
preached on the shady side of the market-place, on, “By grace
are ye saved, through faith.” As I was concluding, a Serjeant
of Militia brought a drum. But he was a little too late. I
pronounced the blessing, and quietly walked away. I know
not that ever I felt it hotter in Georgia than it was here this
afternoon.
Sun. SEPTEMBER 3.--I preached three times at Bath; and,
I believe, not without a blessing. Wednesday, 6. I preached
at Paulton. The flame, kindled last year, still continues to
burn here: And, (what is strange,) though so many have set
their hand to the plough, there are none that look back. In
all the number, I do not find so much as one backslider.
Thur. 7.-I spent an hour with the children, the most diffi
cult part of our work. About noon I preached to a large and
serious congregation at Chew-Magna; in the evening, to a still
more serious company at Stoke; where Mr. Griffin is calmly
waiting for the call that summons him to Abraham’s bosom.
192 Rev. J. Wesley’s [Oct. 1780.
Mon. 11.--As I drew near Bath, I wondered what had drawn
such a multitude of people together, till I learnt, that one of the
Members for the city had given an ox to be roasted whole. But
their sport was sadly interrupted by heavy rain, which sent
them home faster than they came; many of whom dropped in
at our chapel, where I suppose they never had been before.
Tues. 12.-At the invitation of that excellent woman, Mrs.
Turner, I preached about noon in her chapel in Trowbridge.
As most of the hearers were Dissenters, I did not expect to do
much good. However, I have done my duty : God will look to
the event.
Thur. 14.--I read Prayers and preached in Clutton church:
But it was with great difficulty, because of my hoarseness;
which so increased, that in four-and-twenty hours I could
scarce speak at all. At night I used my never-failing remedy,
bruised garlick applied to the soles of the feet. This cured
my hoarseness in six hours: In one hour it cured my lumbago,
the pain in the small of my back, which I had had ever since
I came from Cornwall.
Wed. 20.--I preached in the market-place at Pill, to the
most stupid congregation I have lately seen. Thursday, 21. I
married Mr. Horton and Miss Durbin. May they be patterns
to all around them | Sunday, 24. I preached in Temple
church, the most beautiful and the most ancient in Bristol.
Sun. OCTOBER 1.-I preached, as usual, morning and
evening at the Room. About two I preached a funeral sermon
at Kingswood, for that blessed saint, Bathsheba Hall, a
pattern for many years of zealously doing and patiently
suffering the will of God. In the evening about seven hundred
of us joined in solemnly renewing our covenant with God.
Mon. 2.--After preaching at the Devizes, I went on to Sarum.
Tuesday, 3. I walked over to Wilton, and preached to a very
serious congregation in the new preaching-house. I found at
Sarum the fruit of Captain Webb's preaching: Some were
awakened, and one perfected in love. Yet I was a little
surprised at the remark of some of our eldest brethren, that
they had never heard Perfection preached before.
Wed. 4.--The preaching-house at Whitchurch, though much
enlarged, could not contain the congregation in the evening.
Some genteel people were inclined to smile at first ; but their
mirth was quickly over. The awe of God fell upon the whole
Nov. 1780.] JOURNAL. 193
congregation, and many “rejoiced unto him with reverence.”
Saturday, 7. I returned from Portsmouth to London.
Mon. 16.--I went to Tunbridge-Wells, and preached to a
serious congregation, on Rev. xx. 12. Tuesday, 17. I came
back to Sevenoaks, and in the afternoon walked over to the
Duke of Dorset's seat. The park is the pleasantest I ever
saw ; the trees are so elegantly disposed. The house, which
is at least two hundred years old, is immensely large. It
consists of two squares, considerably bigger than the two
Quadrangles in Lincoln College. I believe we were shown
above thirty rooms, beside the hall, the chapels, and three
galleries. The pictures are innumerable; I think, four times
as many as in the Castle at Blenheim. Into one of the
galleries opens the King's bed-chamber, ornamented above all
the rest. The bed-curtains are cloth-of-gold; and so richly
wrought, that it requires some strength to draw them. The
tables, the chairs, the frames of the looking-glasses, are all
plated over with silver. The tapestry, representing the
whole history of Nebuchadnezzar, is as fresh as if newly
woven. But the bed-curtains are exceeding dirty, and look
more like copper than gold. The silver on the tables, chairs,
and glass, looks as dull as lead. And, to complete all, King
Nebuchadnezzar among the beasts, together with his eagle's
claws, has a large crown upon his head, and is clothed in
scarlet and gold.
Mon. 23.--I visited, for a few days, the societies in
Northamptonshire. Monday, 30. I went to High-Wycomb,
where the new preaching-house was well filled in the evening.
Tuesday, 31. We had such a congregation at noon in Oxford
as I never saw there before ; and, what I regarded more than
their number, was their seriousness: Even the young gentle
men behaved well; nor could I observe one smiling counte
nance, although I closely applied these words, “I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.”
Sun. November 5.--I preached at the new chapel, on Luke
ix. 55: “Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of;” and
showed, that, supposing the Papists to be heretics, schismatics,
wicked men, enemies to us, and to our Church and nation; yet
we ought not to persecute, to kill, hurt, or grieve them, but
barely to prevent their doing hurt.
In the ensuing week I finished visiting the classes, and had
194 REv. J. Wesley’s [Dec. 1780.
the satisfaction to find that the society isconsiderably increased,
both in number and strength, since the Conference.
Mon. 20.-I went on to Chatham, and finding the society
groaning under a large debt, advised them to open a weekly sub
scription. The same advice I gave to the society at Sheerness.
This advice they all cheerfully followed, and with good effect.
On Friday, 24, we agreed to follow the same example at
London; and in one year we paid off one thousand four
hundred pounds.
Mon. 27.--I went to Bedford, and preached in the evening.
Tuesday, 28. I preached at St. Neot's. Wednesday, 29. At
ten I preached in Godmanchester; and about six in the new
House at Huntingdom. I have seldom seen a new congregation
behave with such seriousness. Thursday, 30. I came to Luton,
and found that child of sorrow and pain, Mrs. Cole, was gone to
rest. For many years she had not known an hour's ease; but
she died in full, joyous peace. And how little does she regret
all that is past, now the days of her mourning are ended !
Mon. DECEMBER. 4.--I visited the eastern societies in Kent,
and on Friday returned to London. Sunday, 10. I began
reading and explaining to the society, the large Minutes of the
Conference. I desire to do all things openly and above-board.
I would have all the world, and especially all of our society, see
not only all the steps we take, but the reasons why wetake them.
Sat. 16.--Having a second message from Lord George
Gordon, earnestly desiring to see me, I wrote a line to Lord
Stormont, who, on Monday, 18, sent me a warrant to see him.
On Tuesday, 19, I spent an hour with him, at his apartment
in the Tower. Our conversation turned upon Popery and
religion. He seemed to be well acquainted with the Bible;
and had abundance of other books, enough to furnish a study.
I was agreeably surprised to find he did not complain of any
person or thing; and cannot but hope, his confinement will
take a right turn, and prove a lasting blessing to him.
Fri. 22.-At the desire of some of my friends, I accompanied
them to the British Museum. What an immense field is here
for curiosity to range in One large room is filled from top to
bottom with things brought from Otaheite; two or three more
with things dug out of the ruins of Herculaneum ! Seven huge
apartments are filled with curious books; five with manu
scripts; two with fossils of all sorts, and the rest with various
Jan. 1781.] Joust NAL. 195
r
animals. But what account will a man give to the Judge
of quick and dead for a life spent in collecting all these ?
Sun. 24.--Desiring to make the most of this solemn day, I
preached early in the morning, at the new chapel; at ten and
four I preached at West-Street; and in the evening met the
society at each end of the town.
Fri. 29.--I saw the indictment of the grand Jury against
Lord George Gordon. I stood aghast! What a shocking
insult upon truth and common sensel But it is the usual form.
The more is the shame. Why will not the Parliament
remove this scandal from our nation ?
Sat. 30.-Waking between one and two in the morning, I
observed a bright light shine upon the chapel. I easily con
cluded there was a fire near; probably in the adjoining timber
yard. If so, I knew it would soon lay us in ashes. I first
called all the family to prayer; then going out, we found the
fire about an hundred yards off, and had broke out while the
wind was south. But a sailor cried out, “Avast ! Avast ! the
wind is turned in a moment l” So it did to the west, while we
were at prayer, and so drove the flame from us. We then
thankfully returned, and I rested well the residue of the night.
Sun. 31.--We renewed our covenant with God. We had
the largest company that I ever remember; perhaps two hun
dred more than we had last year. And we had the greatest
blessing. Several received either a sense of the pardoning love
of God, or power to love him with all their heart.
Mon. JANUARY 1, 1781.-We began, as usual, the service
at four, praising Him who, maugre all our enemies, had
brought us safe to the beginning of another year.
Sun. 7.--Much of the power of God rested on the
congregation, while I was declaring how “the Son of God
was manifested, to destroy the works of the devil.”
Sun. 14.--I preached at St. John’s, Wapping. Although
the church was extremely crowded, yet there was not the least
noise or disorder, while I besought them all, by the mercies
of God, to present themselves a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable
to God.
ZZzzr. 18.--Hearing Mr. Holmes was extremely weak, I
went down to Burling, and found him very near worn out,
'ust tottering over the grave. However, he would creep with
me to the church, which was well filled, though the night
196 REv. J. Wesley’s [Feb. 1781.
was exceeding dark. I preached on, “Repent, and believe
the Gospel.” The congregation appeared to be quite stunned.
In the morning I returned to London.
Tues. 23.--I went to Dorking, and buried the remains
of Mrs. Attersal; a lovely woman, snatched away in the bloom
of youth. I trust it will be a blessing to many, and to her
husband in particular.
Thur. 25.--I spent an agreeable hour at a concert of my
nephews. But I was a little out of my element among Lords
and Ladies. I love plain music and plain company best.
Mon. FEBRUARY 12.-I went to Norwich. The House was
extremely crowded in the evening, and the whole congregation
appeared to be wounded; consequently, many attended in the
morning. Tuesday, 13. I was desired to preach that evening,
on, “Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling;
for it is God that worketh in you both to will and to do of his
good pleasure.” Even the Calvinists were satisfied for the
present; and readily acknowledged that we did not ascribe our
salvation to our own works, but to the grace of God.
Wed. 14.--To awaken, if possible, the careless ones at
Loddon, at two in the afternoon, I opened and enforced those
awful words, “Where their worm dieth mot, and the fire is
not quenched.” In the evening, I applied those gracious
words, “All things are ready; come unto the marriage.”
After spending Thursday and Friday with the affectionate
people at Lowestoft, on Saturday I returned to Norwich.
Here I found about fifty missing out of the two hundred and
sixteen whom I left in the society a year ago. Such fickleness
I have not found any where else in the kingdom; no, nor even
in Ireland.
Sun. 18.--The chapel was full enough, both in the after
noon and the evening. I declared to them the whole counsel
of God, and on Monday returned to London.
Wednesday, 21, being the National Fast, I preached in the
new chapel in the morning, and atWest-Street in theafternoon.
At this, as well as the two last Public Fasts, all places of public
worship were crowded: All shops were shut up; all was quietin
the streets, and seriousness seemed to spreadthrough the whole
city. And one may hope even this outward acknowledgment
of God is in a measure acceptable to him.
Sun. 25.-My brother, Mr. Richardson, and Mr. Bucking
March, 1781.] JOURNAL 197
ham being ill, I went through the Service at Spitalfields alone.
The congregation was much larger than usual; but my strength
was as my day, both here, the new chapel, and afterwards at
St. Antholin’s church: The Service lasted till near nine; but
I was no more tired than at nine in the morning.
Fri. MARCH 2.--We had our General Quarterly Meeting,
and found the money subscribed this year for the payment of the
public debt was between fourteen and fifteen hundred pounds.
Sun. 4.--At eight in the evening I took coach for Bristol,
with Mr. Rankin and two other friends. We drove with two
horses as far as Reading. Two more were then added, with a
postilion, who knowing little of his business, instead of going
forward, turned quite round on a sloping ground, so that we
expected the coach to overturn every moment. So it must
have dome, but that the coachman instantly leaped off, and
with some other men held it up, till we got out at the opposite
door. The coach was then soon set right, and we went on
without let or hinderance.
After spending two or three days at Bath, on Thursday, 8,
I went forward to Bristol. On Monday, 12, and the following
days, I visited the society; but was surprised to find no
greater increase, considering what Preachers they had had.
Sun. 18.-I preached morning and evening at the Room;
in the afternoon at Temple church. The congregation here is
remarkably well-behaved; indeed so are the parishioners in
general. And no wonder, since they have had such a succession
of Rectors as few parishes in England have had. The present
incumbent truly fears God. So did his predecessor, Mr. Catcott,
who was indeed as eminent for piety as most Clergymen in
England. He succeeded his father, a man of the same spirit,
who I suppose succeeded Mr. Arthur Bedford; a person greatly
esteemed, fifty or sixty years ago, for piety as well as learning.
Mon. 19.--For several years the severe weather has begun
the very day I set out from Bristol. But the mild weather now
continued seven or eight days longer. This evening I preached
at Stroud; Tuesday, 20, at Stroud, Gloucester, Tewkesbury,
and Worcester. Wednesday, 21. At noon I preached in
Bewdley; and at Worcester in the evening. Thursday, 22.
I preached in Bengeworth church, and had some conversation
with that amiable man, Mr. B. I preached in the evening at
Pebworth church, on those words in the Lesson, “Godliness
with contentment is great gain.”
198 REv. J. weslEY’s [March, 1781.
Sat. 24.--I was invited to preach at Quinton, five miles from
Birmingham. I preached there at noon in the open air, to a
serious and attentive congregation. Some of them appeared
to be very deeply affected. Who knows but it may continue?
In the evening I had another comfortable opportunity with
our friends at Birmingham.
Sun. 25.--I preached at Birmingham, Dudley, and
Wednesbury. Monday, 26. I preached at noon in Mr.
Barker's large parlour, at Congreve, near Penkridge. Many
stood in the next room, and many in the garden, near the
windows: And I believe all could hear. I brought strange
things to the ears of those that had been used to softer
doctrines. And I believe not in vain. They seemed to
receive the truth in the love thereof.
In the evening I preached at Newcastle-under-Lyne. Mr.
Scott and two or three of his Preachers were present. They
have lately begun to preach both here and at Burslem. If
they would go and break up fresh ground, we should rejoice;
out we cannot commend them for breaking in upon our
labours, after we have borne the burden and heat of the day.
Tues. 27.--I went a little out of my way in order to open
the new preaching-house at Shrewsbury. I did not so much
wonder at the largeness, as at the seriousness, of the congre
gation. So still and deeply attentive a congregation I did not
expect to see here. How apt are we to forget that important
truth, that “all things are possible with God!”
Wed. 28.--I returned to Burslem. How is the whole face
of this country changed in about twenty years' Since the
potteries were introduced, inhabitants have continually flowed
in from every side. Hence the wilderness is literally become
a fruitful field. Houses, villages, towns have sprung up.
And the country is not more improved than the people.
The word of God has had free course among them. Sinners
are daily awakened and converted to God; and believers grow
in the knowledge of Christ. In the evening the House was
filled with people, and with the presence of God. This
constrained me to extend the service a good deal longer than
I am accustomed to do. Likewise at the meeting of the
society, many were filled with strong consolation.
After preaching at Congleton, Macclesfield, and Stockport,
in my way, on Friday, 30, I opened the new chapel at
Manchester, about the size of that in London. The whole
April, 1781.] JOURNAL. 199
congregation behaved with the utmost seriousness. I trust
much good will be done in this place.
Sun. APRIL 1-I began reading Prayers at ten o'clock.
Our country friends flocked in from all sides. At the
Communion was such a sight as I am persuaded was never
seen at Manchester before: Eleven or twelve hundred
communicants at once; and all of them fearing God.
Tues. 3.−1 took a solemn leave of our affectionate friends
here, and went on to Bolton. The society here are true,
original Methodists. They are not conformed to the world,
either in its maxims, its spirit, or its fashions; but are simple
followers of the Lamb : Consequently they increase both in
grace and number.
Wed. 4.--I went over to Wigan, and preached a funeral
sermon for Betty Brown, one of the first members of this
society; one of whom, John Layland, gave me the following
artless account of her:--“She met with us in a class about
twenty years, even to the Sunday before her death, which was
on Friday, March 2. Going to market that day in good health,
she returned (as she often did) without her husband, ate her
supper, and went to bed. About midnight, he came, and found
her body; but the spirit was fled ! Her love for God, for his
cause, and for her brethren and sisters, was truly remarkable.
So was her pity for backsliders. At home and abroad she
was continually intent on one thing. We cannot forget her
tears and prayers, which we doubt not the Lord hath heard.
“A little before her death, sitting with my sisters, she
seemed in deep thought, and broke out , ‘I will go to God!’
One of them being surprised, said, ‘Pray, Betty, what do you
mean?” She only replied, ‘I will go to God.” So that, if I
think right, she was the beloved of God, the delight of his
children, a dread to wicked men, and a torment to devils.”
Thur. 5.-I went to Chester. The House was well filled
with deeply attentive hearers. I perceived God had exceedingly
blessed the labours of Jonathan Hern and William Boothby.
The congregations were much larger than they used to be.
The society was increased; and they were not only agreed
among themselves, but in peace with all round about them.
Fri. 6.--I went to Alpraham, and preached the funeral
sermon of good old sister Cawley. She has been indeed a
mother in Israel; a pattern of all good works. Saturday, 7.
At noon, I preached at Preston-on-the-Hill; and in the
200 REv. J. Wesley’s [April, 1781.
evening at Warrington. Sunday, 8. The service was at the
usual hours. I came just in time to put a stop to a bad
custom, which was creeping in here: A few men, who had fine
voices, sang a Psalm which no one knew, in a tune fit for an
opera, wherein three, four, or five persons, sung different words
at the same time ! What an insult upon common sense!
What a burlesque upon public worship ! No custom can
excuse such a mixture of profaneness and absurdity.
Mon. 9.--Desiring to be in Ireland as soon as possible, I
hastened to Liverpool, and found a ship ready to sail; but the
wind was contrary, till on Thursday morning, the Captain
came in haste, and told us, the wind was come quite fair. So
Mr. Floyd, Snowden, Joseph Bradford, and I, with two of our
sisters, went on board. But scarce were we out at sea, when
the wind turned quite foul, and rose higher and higher. In
an hour I was so affected, as I had not been for forty years
before. For two days I could not swallow the quantity of a
pea of any thing solid, and very little of any liquid. I was
bruised and sore from head to foot, and ill able to turn me
on the bed. All Friday, the storm increasing, the sea of
consequence was rougher and rougher. Early on Saturday
morning, the hatches were closed, which, together with the
violent motion, made our horses so turbulent, that I was
afraid we must have killed them, lest they should damage the
ship. Mrs. S. now crept to me, threw her arms over me, and
said, “O Sir, we will die together l’” We had by this time
three feet water in the hold, though it was an exceeding light
vessel. Meantime we were furiously driving on a lee-shore;
and when the Captain cried, “Helm a lee,” she would not
obey the helm. I called our brethren to prayers; and we
found free access to the throne of grace. Soon after we got, I
know not how, into Holyhead harbour, after being sufficiently
buffeted by the winds and waves, for two days and two nights.
The more I considered, the more I was convinced, it was
not the will of God I should go to Ireland at this time. So
we went into the stage-coach without delay, and the next
evening came to Chester.
I now considered in what place I could spend a few days to
the greatest advantage. I soon thought of the Isle of Man,
and those parts of Wales which I could not well see in my
ordinary course. I judged it would be best to begin with the
latter. So, after a day or two's rest, on Wednesday, 18, I
April, 1781.] J() URNAL. 201
set out for Brevva, purposing to take Whitchurch (where I
had not been for many years) and Shrewsbury in my way. At
noon I preached in Whitchurch, to a numerous and very
serious audience; in the evening at Shrewsbury; where, seeing
the earnestness of the people, I agreed to stay another day.
*Here I read over Sir Richard Hill’s Letter to Mr. Madan,
on his Defence of Polygamy. I think it is home to the point;
and wish always to write (if I must write controversy) in just
such a spirit.
Not knowing the best way from hence to Brecon, I thought
well to go round by Worcester. I took Broseley in my way,
and thereby had a view of the iron bridge over the Severn :
I suppose the first and the only one in Europe. It will not
soon be imitated.
In the evening I preached at Broseley; and on Saturday, 21,
went on to Worcester. I found one of our Preachers, Joseph
Cole, there; but unable to preach through his ague. So that
I could not have come more opportunely. Sunday, 22. I
preached at seven in our own Room. At three the Service
began at St. Andrew’s. As no notice had been given of my
preaching there, only as we walked along the street, it was
supposed the congregation would be small; but it was far
otherwise. High and low, rich and poor, flocked together
from all parts of the city; and truly God spoke in his word;
so that I believe most of them were almost persuaded to
be Christians. Were it only for this hour alone, the pains
of coming to Worcester would have been well bestowed.
Mon. 23.−Being informed it was fifty miles to Brecknock,
we set out early : But, on trial, we found they were computed
miles. However, taking fresh horses at the Hay, I just reached
it in time, finding a large company waiting. Wednesday, 25.
I set out for Carmarthen. But Joseph Bradford was so ill,
that, after going six miles, I left him at a friend’s house, and
went only myself. I came in good time to Carmarthen, and
enforced those solemn words on a serious congregation, “Now
he commandeth all men everywhere to repent.”
Thur. 26.--I went on to Pembroke, and in the evening
preached in the Town-Hall. Friday, 27. I preached at Jeffer
son, seven miles from Pembroke, to a large congregation of
honest colliers. In the evening I preached in Pembroke Town
Hall again, to an elegant congregation; and afterwards met the
202 REv. J. W. Esley’s [May, 1781.
society, reduced to a fourth part of its ancient number. But
as they are now all in peace and love with each other, I trust
they will increase again. Saturday, 28. We had, in the
evening, the most solemn opportunity which I have had since
we came into Wales: And the society seemed all alive, and
resolved to be altogether Christians.
Sun. 29.--At seven I preached in the Room, on, “Lazarus,
come forth; ” and about ten, began at St. Daniel’s. The
church was filled as usual; and the Second Lesson gave me a
suitable text, “Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.”
I applied the words as closely as possible; and I doubt not,
some were more than almost persuaded. In the evening I
preached at Haverfordwest, to the liveliest congregation I
have seen in Wales.
Mon. 30.--I met about fifty children; such a company as
I have not seen for many years. Miss Warren loves them,
and they love her. She has taken true pains with them, and
her labour has not been in vain. Several of them are much
awakened; and the behaviour of all is so composed, that they
are a pattern to the whole congregation.
Tues. MAY 1.-I rode to St. David’s, seventeen measured
miles from Haverford. I was surprised to find all the land, for
the last nine or ten miles, so fruitful and well cultivated. What
a difference is there between the westernmost parts of England,
and the westernmost parts of Wales | The former (the west of
Cornwall) so barren and wild; the latter, so fruitful and well
improved. But the town itself is a melancholy spectacle. I
saw but one tolerable good house in it. The rest were misera
ble huts indeed. I do not remember so mean a town even in
Ireland. The cathedral has been a large and stately fabric, far
superior to any other in Wales. But a great part of it is fallen
down already; and the rest is hastening into ruin: One blessed
fruit (among many) of Bishops residing at a distance from their
See. Here are the tombs and effigies of many ancient worthies:
Owen Tudor in particular. But the zealous Cromwellians
broke off their noses, hands, and feet; and defaced them as
much as possible. But what had the Tudors dome to them?
Why, they were progenitors of Kings.
Thur. 3.-About ten I preached at Spittal, a large village
about six miles from Haverford. Thence we went to Tracoon,
and spent a few hours in that lovely retirement, buried from all
May, 1781.] JOURNAL. 203
the world, in the depth of woods and mountains. Friday, 4.
About eleven I preached in Newport church, and again at four
in the evening. Saturday, 5. I returned to Haverford.
Sun. 6.--I preached in St. Thomas's church, on, “We
preach Christ crucified.” It was a stumbling-block to some
of the hearers. So the Scripture is fulfilled. But I had
amends when I met the society in the evening.
Mon. 7.--About ten I preached near the market-place in
Nerbeth, a large town ten miles east from Haverford. Abun
dance of people flocked together. And they were all still as
might. In the evening I preached to an equally attentive
congregation at Carmarthen.
Tues. 8.--I had a large congregation at Llanelly and at
Swansea. Some months since, there were abundance of hearers
at Neath : But, on a sudden, one lying tongue set the society
on fire, till almost half of them were scattered away. But as
all, offended, or not offended, were at the Town-Hall, I took
the opportunity of strongly enforcing the Apostle's words,
“Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and
evil-speaking, be put away from you, with all malice.” I
believe God sealed his word on many hearts; and we shall
have better days at Neath.
About three I preached in the church near Bridge-End,
and at six in the Town-Hall at Cowbridge. Thursday, 10. I
preached in our Room about ten, on, “I am not ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ.” May God deliver us from this evil
disease, which eats out all the heart of religion | In the
evening I preached in the Town-Hall, at Cardiff: But the
congregation was almost wholly new. The far greater part
of the old society, Ann Jenkins, Thomas Glascot, Arthur
Price, Jane Haswell, Nancy Newell, and a long train, are
gone hence, and are no more seen. And how few are
followers of them, as they were of Christ
Mon, 14.--Before I reached Monmouth, one met and
informed me, that Mr. C., a Justice of the Peace, one of the
greatest men in the town, desired I would take a bed at his
house. Of consequence, all the rabble of the town were as
quiet as lambs; and we had a comfortable opportunity both
night and morning. Surely this is the Lord’s doing !
Tues. 15.-We went through miserable roads to Worcester.
Wednesday, 16. About ten I preached in the large meeting
204 REv. J. W.H.S LEY’s [May, 1781.
at Kidderminster, to a numerous congregation. With much
difficulty we reached Salop in the evening, and found the
people waiting. There has been no tumult since the new
House was built. So far God has helped us.
Thur. 17.--I preached at Whitchurch and Nantwich; Fri
day, 18, at eleven, in the chapel near Northwich ; and in the
evening at Manchester. Sunday, 20. I found much enlarge
ment in applying to a numerous congregation the lovely
account given by St. James of “pure religion and undefiled.”
In the afternoon, I preached a funeral sermon for Mary
Charlton, an Israelite indeed. From the hour that she first
knew the pardoning love of God, she never lost sight of it
for a moment. Eleven years ago, she believed that God had
cleansed her from all sin; and she showed that she had not
believed in vain, by her holy and unblamable conversation.
Mon. 21.-I went over to Warrington, and preached in the
evening. Fearing many of the congregation rested in a false
peace, I endeavoured to undeceive them, by closely applying
those words, “Ye shall know them by their fruits.” Tuesday,
22. About eleven, I preached at Chowbent, and in the evening
at Bolton; where the people seemed to be on the wing, just
ready to take their flight to heaven.
Wed. 23.--Having appointed to preach at Blackburn, I was
desired to take Kabb in my way. But such a road sure no
carriage ever went before. I was glad to quit it, and use my
own feet. About twelve I found a large number of plain,
artless people, just fit for the Gospel. So I applied our Lord’s
words, “If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink.”
In the evening I preached in the new House at Blackburn.
Thur. 24.--I went on to Preston, where the old prejudice
seems to be quite forgotten. The little society has fitted up
a large and convenient House, where I preached to a candid
audience. Every one seemed to be considerably affected: I
hope in some the impression will continue.
Fri. 25.-We went on to Ambleside; and on Saturday, to
Whitehaven. Sunday, 27. I preached, morning and evening,
in the House; in the afternoon, in the market-place. But
abundance of people went away, not being able to bear the
intense heat of the sun.
Wed. 30.--I embarked on board the packet-boat for the Isle
of Man. We had a dead calm for many hours: However, we
June, 1781.] JOURNAL. 205
landed at Douglas on Friday morning. Both the Preachers
met me here, and gave me a comfortable account of the still
increasing work of God.
Before dinner, we took a walk in a garden near the town,
wherein any of the inhabitants of it may walk. It is wonder
fully pleasant; yet not so pleasant as the gardens of the
Nunnery, (so it is still called,) which are not far from it.
These are delightfully laid out, and yield to few places of the
size in England.
At six I preached in the market-place, to a large
congregation; all of whom, except a few children, and two
or three giddy young women, were seriously attentive.
Sat. JUNE 2.-I rode to Castleton, through a pleasant
and (now) well-cultivated country. At six I preached in the
market-place, to most of the inhabitants of the town, on,
“One thing is needful.” I believe the word carried convic
tion into the hearts of nearly all that heard it. Afterwards I
walked to the house of one of our English friends, about two
miles from the town. All the day I observed, wherever I was,
one circumstance that surprised me:--In England we
generally hear the birds singing morning and evening;
but here thrushes, and various other kinds of birds, were
singing all day long. They did not intermit, even during
the noon-day heat, where they had a few trees to shade them.
JUNE 3.−(Being Whit-Sunday.) I preached in the
market-place again about nine, to a still larger congregation
than before, on, “I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.”
How few of the genteel hearers could say so | About four
in the afternoon, I preached at Barewle, on the mountains, to
a larger congregation than that in the morning. The rain
began soon after I began preaching; but ceased in a few
minutes. I preached on, “They were all filled with the Holy
Ghost;” and showed in what sense this belongs to us and to
our children.
Between six and seven I preached on the sea-shore at Peel,
to the largest congregation I have seen in the island: Even the
society nearly filled the House. I soon found what spirit they
were of Hardly in England (unless perhaps at Bolton) have
I found so plain, so earnest, so simple a people.
Mon. 4.--We had such a congregation at five, as might have
been expected on a Sunday evening. We then rode through
and over the mountains to Beergarrow; where I enforced, on
w
206 Rev. J. Wesley’s [June, 1781.
an artless, loving congregation, “If any man thirst, let him
come unto me and drink.” A few miles from thence, we came
to Bishop's Court, where good Bishop Wilson resided near
threescore years. There is something venerable, though not
magnificent, in the ancient palace; and it is undoubtedly
situated in one of the pleasantest spots of the whole island.
At six in the evening I preached at Balleugh ; but the
preaching-house would not contain one half of the congrega
tion; of which the Vicar, Mr. Gilling, with his wife, sister,
and daughter, were a part. He invited me to take a breakfast
with him in the morning, Tuesday, 5; which I willingly did.
He read family-prayers before breakfast, in a very serious
manner. After spending a little time very agreeably, I went
on to Kirk-Andrews.
Here also I was obliged to preach in the open air; the rain
being suspended till I had done. In the afternoon we rode
through a pleasant and fruitful country, to Ramsay, about as
large as Peel, and more regularly built. The rain was again
suspended while I preached to well nigh all the town; but I
saw no inattentive hearers.
Wed. 6.--We had many of them again at five, and they
were all attention. This was the place where the Preachers
had little hope of doing good. I trust they will be happily
disappointed.
This morning we rode through the most woody, and far
the pleasantest, part of the island;--a range of fruitful land,
lying at the foot of the mountains, from Ramsay, through
Sulby, to Kirkmichael. Here we stopped to look at the plain
tomb-stones of those two good men, Bishop Wilson and Bishop
Hildesley; whose remains are deposited, side by side, at the
east end of the church. We had scarce reached Peel before
the rain increased; but here the preaching-house contained
all that could come. Afterwards, Mr. Crook desired me to
meet the singers. I was agreeably surprised. I have not
heard better singing either at Bristol or London. Many,
both men and women, have admirable voices; and they sing
with good judgment. Who would have expected this in the
Isle of Man?
Thur. 7.--I met our little body of Preachers. They were
two-and-twenty in all. I never saw in England so many stout,
well-looking Preachers together. If their spirit be answerable
to their look, I know not what can stand before them. In the
June, 1781.] JOURNAL. 207
afternoon I rode over to Dawby, and preached to a very large
and very serious congregation.
Fri. 8.-Having now visited the island round, east, south,
north, and west, I was thoroughly convinced that we have no
such Circuit as this, either in England, Scotland, or Ireland. It
is shut up from the world; and, having little trade, is visited by
scarce any strangers. Here are no Papists, no Dissenters of any
kind, no Calvinists, no disputers. Here is no opposition, either
from the Governor, (a mild humane man,) from the Bishop, (a
good man,) or from the bulk of the Clergy. One or two of them
did oppose for a time; but they seem now to understand better.
So that we have now rather too little, than too much, reproach;
the scandal of the cross being, for the present, ceased. The
natives are a plain, artless, simple people; unpolished, that is,
unpolluted; few of them are rich or genteel; the far greater
part, moderately poor; and most of the strangers that settle
among them are men that have seen affliction. The Local
Preachers are men of faith and love, knit together in one mind
and one judgment. They speak either Manx or English, and
follow a regular plan, which the Assistant gives them monthly.
The isle is supposed to have thirty thousand inhabitants.
Allowing half of them to be adults, and our societies to
contain one or two and twenty hundred members, what a
fair proportion is this What has been seen like this, in
any part either of Great Britain or Ireland?
Sat. 9.--We would willingly have set sail; but the strong
north-east wind prevented us. Monday, 11. It being moderate,
we put to sea: But it soon died away into a calm ; so I had
time to read over and consider Dr. Johnson’s “Tour through
Scotland.” I had heard that he was severe upon the whole
nation; but I could find nothing of it. He simply mentions
(but without any bitterness) what he approved or disapproved;
and many of the reflections are extremely judicious ; some
of them very affecting.
Tues. 12.--The calm continuing, I read over Mr. Pennant’s
“Tour through Scotland.” How amazingly different from
Dr. Johnson’s He is doubtless a man both of sense and
learning. Why has he then bad English in almost every
page? No man should be above writing correctly.
Having several passengers on board, I offered to give them
a sermon; which they willingly accepted. And all behaved
208 REv. J. W. Es LEY’s [June, 1781.
with the utmost decency, while I showed, “His commandments
are not grievous.” Soon after, a little breeze sprung up,
which, early in the morning, brought us to Whitehaven.
Thur. 14.--I had a design to preach at noon in the Town
Hall at Cockermouth; but Mr. Lothian offering me his
meeting-house, which was far more convenient, I willingly
accepted his offer. By this means I had a much more
numerous audience ; most of whom behaved well.
At seven I preached at Mr. Whyte's, in Ballantyne; a little
village four miles from Cockermouth. Many assembled here
who had hardly seen or heard a Methodist before. I believe
some of them did not hear in vain. After this, I saw Mr.
Whyte no more. God soon called him into a better world.
Friday, 15. In the evening I preached in the Town-Hall, at
Carlisle; and on Saturday, 16, reached Newcastle.
Sun. 17.--In the morning I preached at the Ballast-Hills;
in the afternoon, at Gateshead ; and at five, at the Garth
Heads. To-day I heard a remark at All-Saints' church,
which I never read or heard before, in confirmation of that
assertion of Abraham, “If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets:”--“The thing has been tried. One did rise from
the dead, in the sight of a multitude of people. The namesake
of this Lazarus rose from the dead. The very Pharisees
could not deny it. Yet who of them that believed not
Moses and the Prophets was thereby persuaded to repent?”
Wed. 20.-I went over to Sunderland; and preached
evening and morning to a lovely congregation. Thursday,
21. I read Prayers and preached in Monkwearmouth church;
and Friday, 22, returned to Newcastle.
Sat. 23.--I went overto Hexham, and preached in themarket
place to a numerous congregation, on, “I saw the dead, small
and great, stand before God.” None were rude or uncivil in
any respect; and very few were inattentive. Sunday, 24. I
preached in the morning at Gateshead-Fell; about noon, at a
village called Greenside, ten miles west of Newcastle, to the
largest congregation I have seen in the north ; many of whom
were Roman Catholics. In the evening I preached once more
at the Garth-Heads, (some thought to the largest congregation
that had ever been there,) on those words in the Service,
“Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God.”
After preaching at many places in the way, on Wednesday,
July, 1781.] JOURNAL. 209
27, I preached at York. Many of our friends met me here,
so that in the evening the House would ill contain the
congregation. And I know not when I have found such a
spirit among them; they seemed to be all hungering and
thirsting after righteousness.
Thur. 28.--I preached at eleven in the main street at Selby,
to a large and quiet congregation; and in the evening at Thorne.
This day I entered my seventy-ninth year; and, by the grace
of God, I feel no more of the infirmities of old age, than I did
at twenty-nine. Friday, 29. I preached at Crowle and at
Epworth. I have now preached thrice a day for seven days
following; but it is just the same as if it had been but once.
Sat. 30.-I went over to Owstone, and found the whole town
was moved. One of the chief men of the town had been just
buried, and his wife a few days before. In a course of nature
they might have lived many years, being only middle-aged. He
had known the love of God, but had choked the good seed by
hastening to be rich. But Providence disappointed all his
schemes; and it was thought he died of a broken heart. I took
that opportunity of enforcing, “Whatsoever thy hand findeth
to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device,
nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.”
Sun. JULY 1.--I preached, as usual, at Misterton, at Over
thorpe, and at Epworth. Monday, 2. I preached at Scotter
about eight; at Brigg, at noon; and in the evening, in the old
church-yard, at Grimsby, to almost all the people of the town,
on, “Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.” The late
proof of it is in the glorious death of Robert Wilkinson; and
the behaviour of his widow,
So firm, yet soft, so strong, yet so resign'd,
I believe, will hardly be forgotten by any that were witnesses
of it.
Tues. 3.-I preached at Claythorp, three miles from
Grimsby. Here, likewise, there has been an outpouring of
the Spirit. I was reminded here of what I saw at Cardiff,
almost forty years ago. I could not go into any of the little
houses, but presently it was filled with people; and I was
constrained to pray with them in every house, or they would
not be satisfied. Several of these are clearly renewed in love,
and give a plain, scriptural account of their experience; and
210 Rev. J. Wesley’s [July, 1781.
there is scarce a house in the village, wherein there is not one
or more earnestly athirst for salvation.
Wed. 4.--I called upon an honest man, and, I hope, took
him out of the hands of an egregious quack; who was pouring
in medicines upon him, for what he called “wind in the
nerves l’” In the evening I preached at Louth, now as quiet
as Grimsby. When shall we learn “to despair of none?”
Thur. 5.--I had the pleasure of meeting Mr. Brackenbury
again, though still exceeding weak. His chapel was thoroughly
filled in the evening; I trust, with sincere hearers.
Fri. 6.--I crossed over to Langham-Row; where the high
wind would not suffer me to preach abroad. But the House
tolerably contained the congregation; most of whom attended
again at five in the morning.
To-day I finished the second volume of Dr. Robertson's
“History of America.” His language is always clear and
strong, and frequently elegant; and I suppose his history is
preferable to any history of America which has appeared in the
English tongue. But I cannot admire, First, His intolerable
prolixity in this history, as well as his “History of Charles
the Fifth.” He promises eight books of the History of
America, and fills four of them with critical dissertations.
True, the dissertations are sensible, but they have lost their
way; they are not history: And they are swelled beyond all
proportion; doubtless, for the benefit of the author and
the bookseller, rather than the reader. I cannot admire,
Secondly, A Christian Divine writing a history, with so very
little of Christianity in it. Nay, he seems studiously to avoid
saying any thing which might imply that he believes the Bible.
I can still less admire, Thirdly, His speaking so honourably
of a professed Infidel; yea, and referring to his masterpiece
of Infidelity, “Sketches of the History of Man;” as artful, as
unfair, as disingenuous a book, as even Toland’s “Nazarenus.”
Least of all can I admire, Fourthly, His copying after Dr.
Hawkesworth, (who once professed better things,) in totally
excluding the Creator from governing the world. Was it not
enough, never to mention the Providence of God, where there
was the fairest occasion, without saying expressly, “The for
tune of Certiz,” or “chance,” did thus or thus? So far as
fortune or chance governs the world, God has no place in it.
The poor American, though not pretending to be a Christian,
July, 1781.] JOURNAL. 211
knew better than this. When the Indian was asked, “Why do
you think the beloved ones take care of you?” he answered,
“When I was in the battle, the bullet went on this side, and
on that side; and this man died, and that man died; and I
am alive | So I know, the beloved ones take care of me.”
It is true, the doctrine of a particular Providence (and
any but a particular Providence is no Providence at all) is
absolutely out of fashion in England: And a prudent author
might write this to gain the favour of his gentle readers.
Yet I will not say, this is real prudence; because he may lose
hereby more than he gains; as the majority, even of Britons,
to this day, retain some sort of respect for the Bible.
If it was worth while to mention a little thing, after things
of so much greater importance, I would add, I was surprised
that so sensible a writer, in enumerating so many reasons, why
it is so much colder in the southern hemisphere than it is in
the northern ; why it is colder, for instance, at forty degrees
south, than at fifty north latitude; should forget the main, the
primary reason, namely, the greater distance of the sun For
is it not well known, that the sun (to speak with the vulgar)
is longer on the north side the line than the south ? that he
is longer in the six northern signs than the southern, so that
there is a difference (says Gravesande) of nine days? Now,
if the northern hemisphere be obverted to the sun longer
than the southern, does not this necessarily imply that the
northern hemisphere will be warmer than the southern? And
is not this the primary reason of its being so?
Sat. 7.-I designed to go from hence to Boston; but a
message from Mr. Pugh, desiring me to preach in his church
on Sunday, made me alter my design. So, procuring a guide, I
set out for Rauceby. We rode through Tattershall, where
there are large remains of a stately castle; and there was in the
chancel of the old church, the finest painted glass (so it was
e teemed) in England; but the prudent owner, considering it
brought him in nothing by staying there, lately sold it for a
r und sum of money.
Here I met with such a ferry as I never saw before. The
boat was managed by an honest countryman who knew just
nothing of the matter, and a young woman equally skilful.
However, though the river was fifty yards broad, we got over
it in an hour and a half. We then went on through the fens
212 REv. J. Wesley’s [July, 1781.
in a marvellous road, sometimes tracked, and sometimes not,
till about six we came to Rauceby, and found the people
gathered from all parts. I preached on those words in the
Second Lesson, “There is neither Greek nor Jew, Barbarian,
Scythian, bond nor free: But Christ is all and in all.”
Sun. 8.--The congregation was still larger. Hence I rode
over to Welby, and preached in Mr. Dodwell’s church in
the afternoon and in the evening, to a numerous and serious
congregation. Monday, 9. I preached at Grantham in the
open air, (for no house would contain the congregation,) and
none made the least disturbance, any more than at Newark,
(where I preached in the evening,) or in the Castle-yard at
Lincoln, on Tuesday, 10. Wednesday, 11. I preached at
Newton-upon-Trent, and Gainsborough.
After visiting many other societies, I crossed over into the
West-Riding of Yorkshire. Monday, 23. I preached at Yeadon,
to a large congregation. I had heard, the people there were
remarkably dead: If so, they were now remarkably quickened;
for I know not when I have seen a whole congregation so
moved. Tuesday, 24. We had fifty or sixty children at five;
and as many or more in the evening; and more affectionate
ones I never saw. For the present at least God has touched
their hearts. On Wednesday and Thursday I preached at
Bradford and Halifax; on Friday, at Greetland chapel, and
Huddersfield. After preaching I retired to Longwood-House,
one of the pleasantest spots in the county. Saturday, 28. I
preached at Longwood-House, at Mirfield, and at Daw-Green.
Sunday, 29. I preached at eight before the House. I
expected to preach at one, as usual, under the hill at Birstal;
but after the Church Service was ended, the Clerk exclaimed
with a loud voice, “The Rev. Mr. Wesley is to preach here
in the afternoon.” So I desired Mr. Pawson to preach at one.
The church began at half-hour past two; and I spoke
exceeding plain to such a congregation as I never met there
before. In the evening I preached at Bradford to thousands
upon thousands, on, “The wages of sin is death; but the
gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.”
Mon. 30.--I crossed over to Tadcaster at noon; and in
the evening to York. Hence I took a little circuit through
Malton, Scarborough, Beverley, Hull, and Pocklington, and
came to York again.
Aug. 1781.] JOURNAL. 213
Sun. AUGUST 5.--At the old church in Leeds we had
eighteen Clergymen, and about eleven hundred communicants.
I preached there at three: The church was thoroughly filled;
and I believe most could hear, while I explained the “new
covenant,” which God has now made with the Israel of God.
Mon. 6.-I desired Mr. Fletcher, Dr. Coke, and four more
of our brethren, to meet every evening, that we might consult
together on any difficulty that occurred. On Tuesday our
Conference began, at which were present about seventy
Preachers, whom I had severally invited to come and assist
me with their advice, in carrying on the great work of God.
Wednesday, 8. I desired Mr. Fletcher to preach. I do not
wonder he should be so popular; not only because he
preaches with all his might, but because the power of God
attends both his preaching and prayer. On Monday and
Tuesday we finished the remaining business of the Conference,
and ended it with solemn prayer and thanksgiving.
Wed. 15.-I went to Sheffield. In the afternoon I took a
view of the chapel lately built by the Duke of Norfolk: One
may safely say, there is none like it in the three kingdoms;
nor, I suppose, in the world. It is a stone building, an
octagon, about eighty feet diameter. A cupola, which is at a
great height, gives some, but not much, light. A little more
is given by four small windows, which are under the galleries.
The pulpit is movable: It rolls upon wheels; and is shifted
once a quarter, that all the pews may face it in their turns : I
presume the first contrivance of the kind in Europe.
After preaching in the evening to a crowded audience, and
exhorting the society to brotherly love, I took chaise with Dr.
Coke; and, travelling day and night, the next evening came
to London. We observed Friday, 17, as a fast-day, and
concluded it with a solemn watch-night. Having finished my
business in town for the present, on Sunday, 19, at eight
in the evening, I took coach with my new fellow-traveller,
George Whitfield; and on Monday evening preached at Bath.
Tuesday, 21. I went on to Bristol; and after resting a day,
on Thursday, 23, set out for Cornwall.
Finding, after breakfast, that I was within a mile of my old
friend, G. S.-, I walked over, and spent an hour with him.
He is all-original still, like no man in the world, either in
sentiments or any thing about him. But perhaps if I had
his immense fortune, I might be as great an oddity as he.
214 REv. J. Wesley’s [Aug. 1781.
About six in the evening I preached at Taunton, to a
numerous congregation. I found the letters concerning Popery
had much abated prejudice here. Friday, 24. I preached at
Collumpton about noon, and at Exeter in the evening. Satur
day, 25. I preached in the Square at Plymouth-Dock, to a
quieter congregation than usual. Sunday, 26. Between one
and two, I began in the new House in Plymouth. The large
congregation was all attention; and there seemed reason to
hope that even here we shall find some fruit of our labour.
In the evening I preached again in the Square, on the story
of the Pharisee and Publican, to such a congregation, for
number and seriousness together, as I never saw there before.
Mon. 27.--I was desired to preach at Trenuth at noon, a
little way (they said) out of the road. The little way proved
six or seven miles, through a road ready to break our wheels in
pieces. However, I just reached St. Austle time enough to
preach; and God greatly comforted the hearts of his people.
Tues. 28.-Between nine and ten we had such a storm
of rain, as I do not remember to have seen in Europe before.
It seemed ready to beat in the windows of the chaise, and in
three minutes drenched our horsemen from head to foot. We
reached Truro, however, at the appointed time. I have not
for many years seen a congregation so universally affected.
One would have imagined, every one that was present had a
desire to save his soul.
In the evening I preached in the High-street at Helstone.
I scarce know a town in the whole county which is so totally
changed ; not a spark of that bitter enmity to the Methodists,
in which the people here for many years gloried above their
fellows.
Going through Marazion, I was told that a large congrega
tion was waiting: So I stepped out of my chaise, and began
immediately; and we had a gracious shower. Some were cut
to the heart; but more rejoiced with joy unspeakable.
In the evening I preached in the market-place at Penzance.
I designed afterwards to meet the society; but the people were
so eager to hear all they could, that they quickly filled the
House from end to end. This is another of the towns
wherein the whole stream of the people is turned, as it were,
from east to west.
We had a happy season, both at St. Just on Thursday
evening, and in the market-place at St. Ives on Friday.
Sept. 1781.] JOURNAL. , 215
Saturday, SEPTEMBER 1. I made an end of that curious book,
Dr. Parson’s “Remains of Japhet.” The very ingenious
author has struck much light into some of the darkest parts of
ancient history; and although I cannot entirely subscribe to
every proposition which he advances, yet I apprehend he has
sufficiently proved the main of his hypothesis; namely,-
1. That, after the flood, Shem and his descendants peopled
the greatest parts of Asia. 2. That Ham and his children
peopled Africa. 3. That Europe was peopled by the two sons
of Japhet, Gomer and Magog; the southern and south
western by Gomer and his children; and the north and the
north-western by the children of Magog. 4. That the former
were called Gomerians, Cimmerians, Cimbrians, and after
wards Celtiae, Galatae, and Gauls; the latter were called by
the general name of Scythians, Scuiti, Scots. 5. That the
Gomerians spread swiftly through the north of Europe, as far
as the Cimbrian Chersonesus, (including Sweden, Denmark,
Norway, and divers other countries,) and then into Ireland,
where they multiplied very early into a considerable nation.
6. That some ages after, another part of them who had first
settled in Spain, sailed to Ireland, under Milea, or Milesius;
and, conquering the first inhabitants, took possession of the
land. 7. That about the same time the Gomerians came to
Ireland, the Magogians, or Scythians, came to Britain; so
early that both still spoke the same language, and well under
stood each other. 8. That the Irish, spoke by the Gomerians,
and the Welsh, spoke by the Magogians, are one and the
same language, expressed by the same seventeen letters, which
were long after brought by a Gomerian Prince into Greece.
9. That all the languages of Europe, Greek and Latin in
particular, are derived from this. 10. That the antediluvian
language, spoken by all till after the flood, and then continued
in the family of Shem, was Hebrew; and from this (the
Hebrew) tongue many of the Eastern languages are derived.
The foregoing particulars this fine writer has made highly
probable. And these may be admitted, though we do not agree
to his vehement panegyric on the Irish language; much less,
receive all the stories told by the Irish Poets, or Chroniclers,
as genuine, authentic history.
At eleven I preached in Camborne Church-town; and I
believe the hearts of all the people were bowed down before the
216 REv. J. Wesley’s. |Sept. 1781
Lord. After the Quarterly Meeting in Redruth, I preached
in the market-place, on the first principle, “Ye are saved
through faith.” It is also the last point; and it connects the
first point of religion with the last.
Sun. 2.-About five in the evening I preached at Gwennap.
I believe two or three and twenty thousand were present;
and I believe God enabled me so to speak, that even those
who stood farthest off could hear distinctly. I think this is
my me plus ultra. I shall scarce see a larger congregation,
till we meet in the air.
After preaching at Bodmin, Launceston, Tiverton, and
Halberton, on Wednesday, 5, about noon, I preached at
Taunton. I believe it my duty to relate here what some will
esteem a most notable instance of enthusiasm. Be it so or
not, I aver the plain fact. In an hour after we left Taunton,
one of the chaise-horses was on a sudden so lame, that he
could hardly set his foot to the ground. It being impossible
to procure any human help, I knew of no remedy but prayer.
Immediately the lameness was gone, and he went just as he
did before. In the evening I preached at South-Brent; and
the next day went on to Bristol.
Fri. 7.--I went over to Kingswood, and made a particular
inquiry into the management of the school. I found some
of the Rules had not been observed at all; particularly that
of rising in the morning. Surely Satan has a peculiar spite
at this school | What trouble has it cost me for above these
thirty years I can plan ; but who will evecute 2 I know
not; God help me !
Sun. 9.--In the calm, sunshiny evening I preached near
King's Square. I know nothing more solemn than such a
congregation, praising God with one heart and one voice.
Surely they who talk of the indecency of field-preaching
never saw such a sight as this.
Mon. 10.--I preached at Paulton and Shepton-Mallet to a
lively, increasing people in each place. Tuesday, 11. I found
the same cause of rejoicing at Coleford; and the next evening
at Frome. Thursday, 13. I preached at Roade and at
Bradford. Friday, 14. After an interval of thirty years, I
preached again in Trowbridge. About two I preached near
the church in Freshford; and then spent a day or two at
|Bath.
Oct. 1781.] 30URNAL. 217
On Monday, 17, I preached at Chew-Magna and Stoke;
on Tuesday, at Clutton and Pensford. But Pensford is now
a dull, dreary place, the flower of the congregation being
gone.
Thur. 20.--I went over to Mangots-Field, a place famous
for all manner of wickedness, and the only one in the neigh
bourhood of Kingswood which we had totally neglected.
But, on a sudden, light is sprung up even in this thick
darkness. Many inquire what they must do to be saved
Many of these have broke off outward sin, and are earnestly
calling for an inward Saviour. I preached in the main
street, to almost all the inhabitants of the town, on, “Believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.”
Fri. 21.--I preached at Thornbury, where I had not been
before for near forty years. It seems as if good might at length
be done here also; as an entire new generation is now come up,
in the room of the dry, stupid stocks that were there before.
On Monday, 24, and the following days, I met the classes
at Bristol, and was not a little surprised to find that the society
is still decreasing. Certainly we have all need to stir up the gift
of God that is in us, and with all possible care to “strengthen
the things that remain.”
Thur. 27.--I preached at Bath and Bradford; and on
Friday, at Trowbridge. How long did we toil here and
take nothing ! At length, it seems, the answer of many
prayers is come. Friday, 28. About noon I preached at
Keynsham; and not without hopes of doing good even here.
Since Miss Owen has removed from Publow, Miss Bishop
has set up a school here ; and it is worthy to be called a
Christian school. It is what the school at Publow was
Sat. 29.--I spent an hour with Mr. Henderson at Hannam,
and particularly inquired into his whole method; and I am
persuaded there is not such another house for lunatics in the
three kingdoms. He has a peculiar art of governing his
patients; not by fear, but by love. The consequence is,
many of them speedily recover, and love him ever after.
Thur. October 4.--I was importuned to preach the
condemned sermon at Bristol. I did so, though with little
hope of doing good; the criminals being eminently impenitent.
Yet they were, for the present, melted into tears; and they
were not out of God’s reach.
218 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Oct. 1781.
Sun. 7.--I took my leave of the congregation in the new
Square, in a calm, delightful evening. Monday, 8. I preached
at the Devizes about eleven ; at Sarum in the evening.
Tues. 9.--I preached at Winchester, where I went with
great expectation to see that celebrated painting in the cathe
dral, the raising of Lazarus. But I was disappointed. I
observed, 1. There was such a huddle of figures, that, had I
not been told, I should not ever have guessed what they
meant. 2. The colours in general were far too glaring, such
as neither Christ nor his followers ever wore. When will
painters have common sense?
Wed. 10.--I opened the new preaching-house just finished
at Newport in the Isle of Wight. After preaching, I explained
the nature of a Methodist society; of which few had before
the least conception. Friday, 12. I came to London, and
was informed that my wife died on Monday. This evening
she was buried, though I was not informed of it till a day or
two after.
Mon. 15.--I set out for Oxfordshire, and spent five days
with much satisfaction among the societies. I found no
offences among them at all, but they appeared to walk in
love. On Friday, 19, I returned to London.
Sun. 21.--About ten at night we set out for Norwich, and
came thither about noon on Monday. Finding the people
loving and peaceable, I spent a day or two with much
satisfaction; and on Wednesday, went on to Yarmouth.
There is a prospect of good here also, the two grand
hinderers having taken themselves away. At Lowestoft I
found much life and much love. On Friday I preached at
Loddon, and on Saturday returned to Norwich.
Sun. 28.--I preached at Bear-Street to a large congregation,
most of whom had never seen my face before. At half an hour
after two, and at five, I preached to our usual congregation;
and the next morning commended them to the grace of God.
Mon. 29.--I went to Fakenham, and in the evening
preached in the Room, built by Miss Franklin, now Mrs.
Parker. I believe most of the town were present. Tuesday,
30. I went to Wells, a considerable sea-port, twelve miles
from Fakenham, where also Miss Franklin had opened a door,
by preaching abroad, though at the peril of her life. She was
followed by a young woman of the town, with whom I talked
Dec. 1781.] JOURNAL. 219
largely, and found her very sensible, and much devoted to God.
From her I learnt that till the Methodists came, they had
none but female Teachers in this country; and that there were
six of these within ten or twelve miles, all of whom were
members of the Church of England. I preached about ten
in a small, meat preaching-house; and all but two or three
were very attentive. Here are a few who appear to be in
great earnest. And if so, they will surely increase.
At two in the afternoon I preached at Walsingham, a place
famous for many generations. Afterwards I walked over what
is left of the famous Abbey, the east end of which is still
standing. We then went to the Friary; the cloisters and
chapel whereof are almost entire. Had there been a grain
of virtue or public spirit in Henry the Eighth, these noble
buildings need not have run to ruin.-*
Wed. 31.-I went to Lynn, and preached in the evening to
a very genteel congregation. I spoke more strongly than I am
accustomed to do, and hope they were not all sermon-proof.
Friday, NoveMBER 2. I returned to London.
Mon. 5.--I began visiting the classes, and found a consider
able increase in the society. This I impute chiefly to a small
company of young persons, who have kept a prayer-meeting at
five every morning. In the following week I visited most of
the country societies, and found them increasing rather than
decreasing. Sunday, 18. I preached at St. John’s, Wapping;
and God was present both to wound and heal. Monday, 19.
Travelling all night, I breakfasted at Towcester, and preached
there in the evening and the following morning. Tuesday,
20. We had a pleasant walk to Whittlebury. This is still
the loveliest congregation, as well as the liveliest society, in
the Circuit. Thursday, 22. We had a large congregation at
Northampton. On Friday I returned to London.
Mon. 26.--I took a little tour through Sussex; and Wednes
day, 28, I preached at Tunbridge-Wells, in the large Presby
terian meeting-house, to a well-dressed audience, and yet deeply
serious. On Thursday I preached at Sevenoaks. Friday, 30.
I went on to Shoreham, to see the venerable old man. He is
in his eighty-ninth year, and has nearly lost his sight: But he
has not lost his understanding, nor even his memory; and is
full of faith and love. On Saturday I returned to London.
Sunday, DEcEMBER 2-I preached at St. Swithin's church
220 REv. J. Wesley’s [Jan. 1782.
in the even, ng. About eight I took coach, and reached St.
Neot’s in the morning. I preached in the evening to a larger
congregation than I ever saw there before. Tuesday, 4.
About nine I preached for the first time at Bugden, and in
the evening at Huntingdon. Wednesday, 5. I was at
Bedford. On Thursday, 6, our House at Luton was
thoroughly filled; and I believe the people felt as well as
heard, those words, “Where their worm dieth not, and the
fire is not quenched.” On Saturday I was in London.
Mon. 10.-I went to Canterbury, and preached in the
evening on, “Casting all your care upon Him.” It was a
word in season. Tuesday, 11. Finding abundance of people
troubled, as though England were on the brink of destruction,
I applied those comfortable words, “I will not destroy the city
for ten’s sake.” Wednesday, 12. I preached at Chatham,
and the next day returned to London.
Friday, 21, we observed all over England as a day of fasting
and prayer: And surely God will be entreated for a sinful
nation | Friday, 28. By reading in Thurloe's Memoirs the
original papers of the treaty at Uxbridge, agnovi fatum
Carthaginis /* I saw it was then flatly impossible for the
King to escape destruction. For the Parliament were resolved
to accept no terms, unless he would, I. Give up all his friends
to beggary or death; and, 2. Require all the three kingdoms to
swear to the Solemn League and Covenant. He had no other
choice. Who then can blame him for breaking off that treaty?
Tuesday, JANUARY 1, 1782.--I began the service at four
in West-Street chapel, and again at ten. In the evening many
of us at the new chapel rejoiced in God our Saviour.
Sun. 6.--A larger company than ever before met together
to renew their covenant with God; and the dread of God, in
an eminent degree, fell upon the whole congregation.
Mon. 14.--Being informed, that, through the ill conduct of
the Preachers, things were in much disorder at Colchester, I
went down, hoping to “strengthen the things which remained,
that were ready to die.” I found that part of the Class-Leaders
were dead, and the rest had left the society; the Bands were
totally dissolved; morning preaching was given up; and
hardly any, except on Sunday, attended the evening preaching.
This evening, however, we had a very large congregation, to
* I perceived at once the fate of the Monarchy.--EDIT.
March, 1782.] JOURNAL, 221
whom I proclaimed “the terrors of the Lord.” I then told
them, I would immediately restore the morning preaching:
And the next morning I suppose an hundred attended. In
the day-time I visited as many as I possibly could, in all
quarters of the town. I then inquired, who were proper and
willing to meet in Band; and who were fittest for Leaders
either of bands or classes. The congregation this evening
was larger than the last; and many again put their hands to
the plough. O may the Lord confirm the fresh desires he
has given, that they may no more look back!
Fri. MARCH 1.-We had a very solemn and comfortable
watch-night at West-Street. Sunday, 3. I took coach, and
the next evening had a watch-night at Bath. Tuesday and
Wednesday. After meeting the classes, I visited as many
as I could, chiefly of the sick and poor. Thursday, 7. I
preached about eleven at Keynsham, and in the evening at
Bristol. Friday, 8, and most of the following days, I visited
Mr. C-n, just hovering between life and death. What a
blessing may this illness be On Monday, Tuesday, and
Wednesday, I visited the classes, and found a little increase.
Friday, 15. I opened the new House at Freatford. In the
afternoon I called at Mr. Henderson's, at Hannam, and spent
some time with poor, disconsolate Louisa. Such a sight,
in the space of fourteen years, I never saw before Pale
and wan, worn with sorrow, beaten with wind and rain, having
been so long exposed to all weathers, with her hair rough and
frizzled, and only a blanket wrapped round her, native beauty
gleamed through all. Her features were small and finely
turned; her eyes had a peculiar sweetness; her arms and
fingers were delicately shaped, and her voice soft and agree
able. But her understanding was in ruins. She appeared
partly insane, partly silly and childish. She would answer no
question concerning herself, only that her name was Louisa.
She seemed to take no notice of any person or thing, and
seldom spoke above a word or two at a time. Mr. Henderson
has restored her health, and she loves him much. She is in a
small room by herself, and wants nothing that is proper for her.
Some time since a gentleman called, who said he came two
hundred miles on purpose to inquire after her. When he
saw her face, he trembled exceedingly; but all he said was,
“She was born in Germany, and is not now four-and-twenty
years old.”
222 Rev. J. Weslev’s [March, 1782.
In the evening I preached at Kingswood School, and after
wards met the Bands. The colliers spoke without any reserve.
I was greatly surprised: Not only the matter of what they
spoke was rational and scriptural, but the language, yea, and
the manner, were exactly proper. Who teacheth like Him?
Mon. 18.-I left our friends at Bristol with satisfaction ;
having been much refreshed among them. In the evening
and the next day, I preached at Stroud; Wednesday, 20,
at Gloucester, Tewkesbury, and Worcester.
Fri. 22.--About two in the morning we had such a storm as
I never remember. Before it began, our chamber-door clattered
to and fro exceedingly: So it sounded to us; although, in fact,
it did not move at all. I then distinctly heard the door open,
and, having a light, rose and went to it; but it was fast shut.
Meantime the window was wide open: I shut it, and went to
sleep again. So deep a snow fell in the night, that we were
afraid the roads would be impassable. However, we set out
in the afternoon, and made shift to get to Kidderminster.
We had a large congregation in the evening, though it was
intensely cold; and another at seven in the morning, Saturday,
23; and all of them were deeply serious. It was with a good
deal of difficulty we got to Bridgenorth, much of the road
being blocked up with snow. In the afternoon we had another
kind of difficulty: The roads were so rough and so deep, that
we were in danger, every now and then, of leaving our wheels
behind us. But, by adding two horses to my own, at length
we got safe to Madeley.
Both Mr. and Mrs. Fletcher complained, that, after all the
pains they had taken, they could not prevail on the people to
join in society, no nor even to meet in a class. Resolving to
try, I preached to a crowded audience, on, “I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.” I followed the blow in the
afternoon, by strongly applying those words, “Awake, thou
that sleepest;” and then enforcing the necessity of Christian
fellowship on all who desired either to awake or keep awake.
I then desired those that were willing to join together for this
purpose, to call upon Mr. Fletcher and me after Service.
Ninety-four or ninety-five persons did so; about as many
men as women. We explained to them the mature of a
Christian society, and they willingly joined therein.
Mon. 25.--I spent an agreeable hour at the Boarding-School
in Sheriff-Hales. I believe the Misses Yeomans are well
April, 1782.] journal. 223
qualified for their office. Several of the children are under
strong drawings. We then went on to Newcastle-under-Lyne.
(This is the name of a little river which runs near the town.)
Tuesday, 26. I found many at Burslem, too, under sad appre
hensions of the public danger: So I applied to these also those
comfortable words, “I will not destroy it for ten’s sake.”
Thur. 28.--Coming to Congleton, I found the Calvinists
were just breaking in, and striving to make havoc of the flock.
Is this brotherly love? Is this doing as we would be done
to ? No more than robbing on the highway. But if it is
decreed, they cannot help it: So we cannot blame them.
MARch 29.--(Being Good-Friday.) I came to Maccles
field just time enough to assist Mr. Simpson in the laborious
service of the day. I preached for him morning and after
noon; and we administered the sacrament to about thirteen
hundred persons. While we were administering, I heard a
low, soft, solemn sound, just like that of an AEolian harp. It
continued five or six minutes, and so affected many, that they
could not refrain from tears. It then gradually died away.
Strange that no other organist (that I know) should think of
this. In the evening, I preached at our Room. Here was
that harmony which art cannot imitate.
Sat. 30.-As our friends at Leek, thirteen miles from
Macclesfield, would take no denial, I went over, and preached
about noon to a lovely congregation. God bore witness to
his word in an uncommon manner, so that I could not think
much of my labour.
MARCH 31.--(Being Easter-Day.) I preached in the church,
morning and evening, where we had about eight hundred com
municants. In the evening, we had a love-feast; and such an
one as I had not seen for many years. Sixteen or eighteen
persons gave a clear, scriptural testimony of being renewed
in love. And many others told what God had done for their
souls, with inimitable simplicity.
Mon. APRIL 1.--We set out in the morning for Chapel-en
le-Firth. But such a journey I have seldom had, unless in
the middle of January. Wind, snow, and rain we had in abun
dance, and roads almost impassable. However, at last we got
to the town, and had a good walk from thence to the chapel,
through the driving snow, about half a mile. But I soon forgot
my labour, finding a large congregation that were all athirst
for God.
224 Rev. J. WEslEY’s [April, 1782.
Tues. 2.-About ten I preached at New-Mills, to as simple
a people as those at Chapel. Perceiving they had suffered
much by not having the doctrine of Perfection clearly explained,
and strongly pressed upon them, I preached expressly on the
head; and spoke to the same effect in meeting the society.
The spirits of many greatly revived; and they are now
“going on unto perfection.” I found it needful to press the
same thing at Stockport in the evening. Thursday, 4. I
preached at noon in the new preaching-house at Ashton, to
as many as the House would hold. The inscription over the
door is, “Can any good come out of Nazareth? Come and
see.” In the evening I preached at Manchester.
Fri. 5.--About one I preached at Oldham; and was
surprised to see all the street lined with little children; and
such children as I never saw till now. Before preaching they
only ran round me and before me; but after it, a whole troop,
boys and girls, closed me in, and would not be content till I
shook each of them by the hand. Being then asked to visit
a dying woman, I no sooner entered the room, than both she
and her companions were in such an emotion as I have seldom
seen. Some laughed; some cried; all were so transported,
that they could hardly speak. O how much better is it to go
to the poor, than to the rich; and to the house of mourning,
than to the house of feasting !
About this time I had a remarkable letter. Part of it was
as follows:--
“THE work of God prospers among us here: I never saw
anything equal to it. The last time I was at St. Just, the
Leaders gave me an account of seventy persons who had
found either pardon or perfect love, within the last fortnight:
And the might and morning I was there, twenty more were
delivered. One-and-twenty, likewise, were then added to the
society; most of whom have found peace with God.
“CHRISTOPHER WATKINs.”
Sat. 13.--I preached at St. Helen's, a small, but populous
town, ten or twelve miles from Liverpool, in Joseph Harris's
house; who is removed hither from Kingswood, to take care
of the copper-works. Surely God has brought him hither for
good. The people seem to be quite ripe for the Gospel.
I was waked at half-past two this morning, as was Mr. Broad
bent also, by a very loud noise, like a vast crack of thunder,
April, 1782.] JOURN A L. 225
accompanied with aflash of bright light. It made the whole room
shake, and all the tables and chairs therein jar. But (what is
strange) none in the house, or in the town, heard it, beside us.
Mon. 15.--I saw an uncommon sight, the preaching-house
at Wigan filled, yea, crowded ! Perhaps God will cause fruit
to spring up even in this desolate place.
I had now leisure to transcribe a letter, wrote last May,
from Amherst, in Nova-Scotia, by a young man whose father,
some years since, went thither with his whole family:--
“IN the year 1779, I saw, if I would go to heaven, I must
lead a new life. But I did not know I wanted an inward change,
or see the deplorable state I was in by nature, till I was at a
prayer-meeting, held at Mr. Oxley’s. While they were praying,
my heart began to throb within me, my eyes gushed out with
tears, and I cried aloud for mercy; as did most that were in the
room, about fourteen in number. One, indeed, could not hold
from laughing, when we began to cry out; but it was not long
before he cried as loud as any. In a few moments, it pleased
God to fill Mrs. Oxley with joy unspeakable. After this, we
went, almost every night, to Mr. Oxley’s, to sing and pray.
Going thence one night, and seeing the Northern Lights, I
thought, ‘What, if the Day of Judgment be coming?' I
threw myself down on the ground, and cried to the Lord for
mercy. On Sunday, Mr. Wells, an old Methodist, came to
Amherst, and gave us an exhortation; in which he said, ‘Sin
and repent, sin and repent, till you repent in the bottomless
pit.’ The words went like a dagger to my heart; and I con
tinued mourning after God for five weeks and four days, till
our monthly meeting. I was then strongly tempted to put
an end to my life; but God enabled me to resist the tempta
tion. Two days after, an old Methodist, after praying with
me, said, ‘I think you will get the blessing before morning.’
About two hours after, while we were singing a hymn, it
pleased God to reveal his Son in my heart. Since that time,
I have had many blessed days, and many happy nights.
“One Sunday night, after my brother Dicky and I were
gone to bed, I asked him, ‘Can you believe?” He answered,
‘No.’ I exhorted him to wrestle hard with God, and got up
to pray with him. But he was unbelieving still: So I went to
sleep again. Yet, not being satisfied, after talking largely to
him, I got up again, and began praying for him; being fully
226 REv. J. WESLEY’s [April, 1782.
persuaded that God would set his soul at liberty. And so he
did: He pardoned all his sins, and bade him “go in peace.”
“It being now between twelve and one, I waked my
brothers, John and Thomas, and told them the glad tidings.
They got up. We went to prayer; and when we rose from
our knees, Tommy declared, “God has blotted out all my
sins.’ I then went to my father and mother, (who were both
seeking salvation,) and told them the joyful news. My father
said, ‘Willy, pray for us.” I did; and earnestly exhorted him
to wrestle with God for himself. So he did; and it was not
long before God set his soul also at liberty. The next morning,
it pleased Him to show my sister Sally his pardoning love.
Blessed be his name for all his benefits
“Not long after, Mr. Oxley’s son came to our house, and
lay with me, and complained of his hardness of heart. After
I had talked with him a little while, the Lord laid his hand
upon him in a wonderful manner, so that he rolled up and
down, and roared as in the agonies of death. But between
one and two in the morning, he likewise could rejoice in God
his Saviour. These are a few of the wonderful works of God
among us: But he is also working on the hearts of the
inhabitants in general.
“WILLIAM BLACK, Jun.”
Mon. 22.--I preached, about eleven, in Todmorden church,
thoroughly filled with attentive hearers; in the afternoon, in
Heptonstall church; and at the Ewood in the evening. Wed
nesday, 24. The flood, caused by the violent rains, shut me
up at Longwood-House. But on Thursday the rain turned
to snow: So on Friday I got to Halifax; where Mr. Floyd
lay in a high fever, almost dead for want of sleep. This was
prevented by the violent pain in one of his feet, which was
much swelled, and so sore, it could not be touched. We
joined in prayer that God would fulfil his word, and give his
beloved sleep. Presently the swelling, the soreness, the pain,
were gone; and he had a good night’s rest.
Sat. 27.--As we rode to Keighley, the north-east wind was
scarce supportable; the frost being exceeding sharp, and all the
mountains covered with snow. Sunday, 28. Bingley church
was hot, but the heat was very supportable, both in the morning
and afternoon. Monday, 29. I preached at Skipton-in-Craven,
at Grassington, and at Pateley-Bridge. Tuesday, 30. I found
May, l782.] Journ AL. 227
Miss Ritchie, at Otley, still hovering between life and death.
Thursday, MAY 2. I met the select society; all but two
retaining the pure love of God, which some of them received
near thirty years ago. On Saturday evening I preached to
an earnest congregation at Yeadon. The same congregation
was present in the morning, together with an army of little
children; full as numerous, and almost as loving, as those
that surrounded us at Oldham.
Sun. 5.--One of my horses having been so thoroughly
lamed at Otley, that he died in three or four days, I pur
chased another: But as it was his way to stand still when he
pleased, I set out as soon as possible. When we had gone
three miles, the chaise stuck fast. I walked for about a mile,
and then borrowed a horse, which brought me to Birstal
before the Prayers were ended. I preached on those words
in the Gospel, “Do ye now believe?” which gave me an
opportunity of speaking strong words, both to believers and
unbelievers. In the evening I preached at Leeds, on St.
James's beautiful description of pure religion and undefiled:
“To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to
keep himself unspotted from the world.”-
Thur. 9.--I preached at Wakefield in the evening. Such
attention sat on every face, that it seemed as if every one in
the congregation was on the brink of believing. Friday, 10.
I preached at Sheffield; Saturday, 11, about noon, at Don
caster; and in the evening at Epworth. I found the accounts
I had received of the work of God here, were not at all exag
gerated. Here is a little country town, containing a little
more than eight or nine hundred grown people; and there
has been such a work among them, as we have not seen in so
short a time either at Leeds, Bristol, or London.
Sun. 12.--About eight I preached at Misterton; about
one at Overthorpe. Many of the Epworth children were
there, and their spirit spread to all around them. But the
huge congregation was in the market-place at Epworth, and
the Lord in the midst of them. The love-feast which fol
lowed exceeded all. I never knew such a one here before. As
soon as one had done speaking, another began. Several of
them were children; but they spoke with the wisdom of the
aged, though with the fire of youth. So out of the mouth of
babes and sucklings did God perfect praise.
228 REv. J. W. Esley’s [June, 1782.
Mon. 13.−I preached at Thorne. Never did I see such
a congregation here before. The flame of Epworth hath
spread hither also: In seven weeks fifty persons have found
peace with God.
Tues. 14.--Some years ago four factories for spinning and
weaving were set up at Epworth. In these a large number
of young women, and boys and girls, were employed. The
whole conversation of these was profane and loose to the last
degree. But some of these stumbling in at the prayer-meeting
were suddenly cut to the heart. These never rested till they
had gained their companions. The wholc scene was changed.
In three of the factories, no more lewdness or profaneness
were found; for God had put a new song in their mouth, and
blasphemies were turned to praise. Those three I visited to
day, and found religion had taken deep root in them. No
trifling word was heard among them, and they watch over
each other in love. I found it exceeding good to be there,
and we rejoiced together in the God of our salvation.
Wed. 15.-I set out for the other side of Lincolnshire.
Thursday, 16. I preached in the new house at Barrow. I
was well pleased to meet with my old fellow-traveller, Charles
Delamotte, here. He gave me an invitation to lodge at his
house, which I willingly accepted of. He seemed to be just
the same as when we lodged together, five-and-forty years
ago. Only he complained of the infirmities of old age, which,
through the mercy of God, I know nothing of.
Hence I went by Hull, Beverley, Bridlington; and then has
tened to Newcastle-upon-Tyne, where I preached on Sunday,
26. Monday, 27. I set out for Scotland, and Wednesday,
29, reached Dunbar. The weather was exceeding rough and
stormy. Yet we had a large and serious congregation. Thurs
day, 30. Finding the grounds were so flooded, that the com
mon roads were not passable, we provided a guide to lead us a
few miles round, by which means we came safe to Edinburgh.
Fri. 31.-As I lodged with Lady Maxwell at Saughton
Hall, (a good old mansion-house, three miles from Edin
burgh,) she desired me to give a short discourse to a few of
her poor neighbours. I did so, at four in the afternoon, on
the story of Dives and Lazarus. About seven I preached in
our House at Edinburgh, and fully delivered my own soul.
Saturday, JUNE 1. I spent a little time with forty poor chil
June, 1782.] JOURNAL, 229
dren, whom Lady Maxwell keeps at school. They are swiftly
brought forward in reading and writing, and learn the prin
ciples of religion. But I observe in them all the ambitiosa
paupertas.” Be they ever so poor, they must have a scrap
of finery. Many of them have not a shoe to their foot : But
the girl in rags is not without her ruffles.
Sun. 2.-Mr. Collins intended to have preached on the
Castle-hill, at twelve o’clock: But the dull Minister kept us
in the kirk till past one. At six the House was well filled:
And I did not shun to declare the whole counsel of God. I
almost wonder at myself. I seldom speak anywhere so
roughly as in Scotland. And yet most of the people hear
and hear, and are just what they were before.
Mon. 3.-I went on to Dundee. The congregation was
large and attentive, as usual. But I found no increase,
either of the society, or of the work of God. Tuesday, 4.
The House at Arbroath was well filled with serious and
attentive hearers. Only one or two pretty flutterers seemed
inclined to laugh, if any would have encouraged them. Wed
nesday, 5. We set out early, but did not reach Aberdeen till
between five and six in the evening.
The congregations were large both morning and evening,
and many of them much alive to God. Friday, 7. We
received a pleasing account of the work of God in the north.
The flame begins to kindle even at poor, dull Keith : But
much more at a little town near Fraserburgh: And most of all
at Newburgh, a small fishing town, fifteen miles from Aber
deen, where the society swiftly increases: And not only men
and women, but a considerable number of children, are either
rejoicing in God or panting after him.
Sat. 8.--I walked with a friend to Mr. Lesley's seat, less
than a mile from the city. It is one of the pleasantest places
of the kind I ever saw, either in Britain or Ireland. He has
laid his gardens out on the side of a hill, which gives a fine
prospect both of sea and land: And the variety is beyond
what could be expected within so small a compass. But still
Valeat possessor oportet,
Si comportatis rebus bene cogitat uti.
Unless a man have peace within, he can enjoy none of the
things that are round about him.
* The love of finery among the poor.--EDIT.
230 REv. J. wesley’s [June, 1782.
Sun. 9.--We had a lovely congregation in the morning,
many of whom were athirst for full salvation. In the even
ing God sent forth his voice, yea, and that a mighty voice.
I think few of the congregation were unmoved : And we
never had a more solemn parting.
Mon. 10.--We went to Arbroath; Tuesday, 11, to Dun
dee; and Wednesday, 12, to Edinburgh. We had such con
gregations both that evening and the next, as had not been
on a week-day for many years: Some fruit of our labours
here we have had already. Perhaps this is a token that we
shall have more.
Fri. 14.--We travelled through a pleasant country to
Kelso, where we were cordially received by Dr. Douglas. I
spoke strong words in the evening, concerning judgment to
come: And some seemed to awake out of sleep. But how
shall they keep awake, unless they “that fear the Lord speak
often one to another?”
Sat. 15.--As I was coming down stairs, the carpet slipped
from under my feet, which, I know not how, turned me round,
and pitched me back, with my head foremost, for six or seven
stairs. It was impossible to recover myself till I came to the
bottom. My head rebounded once or twice, from the edge of
the stone stairs. But it felt to me exactly as if I had fallen
on a cushion or a pillow. Dr. Douglas ran out, sufficiently
affrighted. But he needed not. For I rose as well as ever;
having received no damage, but the loss of a little skin from
one or two of my fingers. Doth not God give his angels
charge over us, to keep us in all our ways?
In the evening, and on Sunday, 16, I preached at Alnwick.
Monday, 17. I preached at Rothbury in the Forest; for
merly a nest of banditti; now as quiet a place as any in the
county. About one I preached at Saugh-House, a lone
house, twelve miles from Rothbury. Though it was sultry
hot, the people flocked from all sides: And it was a season
of refreshment to many. In the evening I went to Hexham,
and preached near the old Priory, to an immense multitude.
Very many were present again in the morning, and seemed
to drink in every word that was spoken.
Tues. 18.--After preaching about one at Prudhoe, I went
Cn Newcastle.r
Wednesday, 19, and the following days, I examined the
July, 1782.] JOURNAL, 231
society. I found them increased in grace, though not in
number. I think four in five, at least, were alive to God.
To quicken them more, I divided all the classes anew, accord
ing to their places of abode. Another thing I observed, the
congregations were larger, morning and evening, than any I
have seen these twenty years.
Sun. 23.--I preached about eight at Gateshead-Fell;
about noon at Burnup-Field; and at the Garth-Heads in the
evening. My strength was as my day. I was no more tired
at night, than when I rose in the morning.
Mon. 24.--I came to Darlington just in time; for a great
stumbling-block had lately occurred. But my coming gave
the people a newer thing to talk of. So I trust the new
thing will soon be forgotten.
Wed. 26.-I preached at Thirsk; Thursday, 27, at York.
Friday, 28. I entered into my eightieth year; but, blessed
be God, my time is not “labour and sorrow.” I find no
more pain or bodily infirmities than at five-and-twenty. This
I still impute, 1. To the power of God, fitting me for what he
calls me to. 2. To my still travelling four or five thousand
miles a year. 3. To my sleeping, night or day, whenever I
want it. 4. To my rising at a set hour. And, 5. To my con
stant preaching, particularly in the morning. Saturday, 29. I
went on to Leeds, and, after preaching, met the select society,
consisting of about sixty members; most of whom can testify,
that “the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from all sin.”
Mon. JULY 1.-Coming to Sheffield, just at the time of the
Quarterly Meeting, I preached on Acts is. 31 : “Then had
the churches rest , and were edified; and walking in the
fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, were
multiplied.” This is eminently fulfilled in all these parts; at
Sheffield in particular.
Tues. 2.--I found a serious, as well as a numerous, con
gregation at Nottingham. Thursday, 4. I preached at
Derby. I trust the work of God will now prosper here also.
All the jars of our brethren are at an end, and they strive
together for the hope of the Gospel.
Sat. 6.--I came to Birmingham, and preached once more
in the old dreary preaching-house.
Sun. 7.--I opened the new House at eight, and it contained
the people well: But not in the evening; many were then
232 REv. J. Wesley’s [July, 1782.
constrained to go away. In the middle of the sermon, a huge
noise was heard, caused by the breaking of a bench on which
some people stood. None of them was hurt; yet it occasioned
a general panic at first: But in a few minutes all was quiet.
Wed, 10.--I read Prayers and preached in the church at
Darlaston, and in the evening returned to Birmingham. Fri
day, 12. I walked through Mr. Bolton’s curious works. He
has carried every thing which he takes in hand to a high degree
of perfection, and employs in the house about five hundred men,
women, and children. His gardens, running along the side of a
hill, are delightful indeed; having a large piece of water at the
bottom, in which are two well-wooded islands. If faith and love
dwell here, then there maybe happiness too. Otherwise all these
beautiful things are as unsatisfactory as straws and feathers.
Sat. 13.--I spent an hour in Hagley-Park; I suppose
inferior to few, if any, in England. But we were straitened
for time. To take a proper view of it, would require five or
six hours. Afterwards I went to the Leasowes, a farm so
called, four or five miles from Hagley. I never was so sur
prised. I have seen nothing in all England to be compared
with it. It is beautiful and elegant all over. There is no
thing grand, nothing costly; no temples, so called; no statues;
(except two or three, which had better have been spared;) but
such walks, such shades, such hills and dales, such lawns, such
artless cascades, such waving woods, with water intermixed, as
exceed all imagination | On the upper side, from the
openings of a shady walk, is a most beautiful and extensive
prospect. And all this is comprised in the compass of three
miles I doubt if it be exceeded by any thing in Europe.
The father of Mr. Shenstone was a gentleman-farmer, who
bred him at the University, and left him a small estate. This
he wholly laid out in improving the Leasowes, living in hopes
of great preferment, grounded on the promises of many rich
and great friends. But nothing was performed, till he died
at forty-eight; probably of a broken heart!
Sun. 14.--I heard a sermon in the old church, at Birming
ham, which the Preacher uttered with great vehemence
against these “hairbrained, itinerant enthusiasts.” But he
totally missed his mark; having not the least conception of
the persons whom he undertook to describe.
Mon. 15.-Leaving Birmingham early in the morning, I
Aug. 1782.] JOURNAL. 233
preached at nine in a large school-room at Coventry. About
noon I preached to a multitude of people, in the brick-yard,
at Bedworth. A few of them seemed to be much affected.
In the evening I preached at Hinckley, one of the civilest
towns I have seen.
Wed. 17.-I went on to Leicester; Thursday, 18, to
Northampton; and Friday, 19, to Hinxworth, in Hertford
shire. Adjoining to Miss Harvey’s house is a pleasant gar
den; and she has made a shady walk round the neighbour
ing meadows. How gladly could I repose awhile here !
But repose is not for me in this world. In the evening
many of the villagers flocked together, so that her great hall
was well filled. I would fain hope, some of them received the
seed in good ground, and will bring forth fruit with patience.
Sat. 20.-We reached London. All the following week
the congregations were uncommonly large. Wednesday, 24.
My brother and I paid our last visit to Lewisham, and spent
a few pensive hours with the relict of our good friend, Mr.
Blackwell. We took one more walk round the garden and
meadow, which he took so much pains to improve. Upwards
of forty years this has been my place of retirement, when I
could spare two or three days from London. In that time,
first Mrs. Sparrow went to rest; then Mrs. Dewall; then
good Mrs. Blackwell; now Mr. Blackwell himself. Who
can tell how soon we may follow them?
Mon. 29.-I preached at West-Street, on the ministry of
angels; and many were greatly refreshed in considering the
office of those spirits that continually attend on the heirs of
salvation.
Friday, AUGUST 2, we observed as a day of fasting and
prayer for a blessing on the ensuing Conference; and I
believe God clothed his word with power in an uncommon
manner throughout the week; so that, were it only on this
account, the Preachers, who came from all parts, found their
labour was not in vain.
Tues. 13.--Being obliged to leave London a little sooner
than I intended, I concluded the Conference to-day; and
desired all our brethren to observe it as a day of solemn
thanksgiving. At three in the afternoon I took coach. About
one on Wednesday morning we were informed that three high
waymen were on the road before us, and had robbed all the
234 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Aug. 1782.
coaches that had passed, some of them within an hour or two.
I felt no uneasiness on the account, knowing that God would
take care of us. And he did so; for, before we came to the
spot, all the highwaymen were taken ; so we went on unmo
lested, and early in the afternoon came safe to Bristol.
Thur. 15.--I set out for the west; preached at Taunton in
the evening; Friday noon, at Collumpton; and in the even
ing, at Exeter. Here poor Hugh Saunderson has pitched his
standard, and declared open war. Part of the society have
joined him; the rest go on their way quietly, to make their
calling and election sure.
Sun. 18.-I was much pleased with the decent behaviour
of the whole congregation at the cathedral; as also with the
solemn music at the post-communion, one of the finest com
positions I ever heard. The Bishop inviting me to dinner, I
could not but observe, 1. The lovely situation of the palace,
covered with trees, and as rural and retired as if it was quite
in the country. 2. The plainness of the furniture, not costly
or showy, but just fit for a Christian Bishop. 3. The dinner,
sufficient, but not redundant; plain and good, but not deli
cate. 4. The propriety of the company, five Clergymen
and four of the Aldermen; and, 5. The genuine, unaffected
courtesy of the Bishop, who, I hope, will be a blessing to
his whole diocese.
We set out early in the morning, Monday, 19, and in the
afternoon came to Plymouth. I preached in the evening,
and at five and twelve on Tuesday, purposing to preach in
the Square at the Dock in the evening; but the rain pre
vented. However, I did so on Wednesday evening. A little
before I concluded, the Commanding Officer came into the
Square with his regiment; but he immediately stopped the
drums, and drew up all his men in order on the high side of
the Square. They were all still as night; nor did any of
them stir, till I had pronounced the blessing.
Thur. 22.-I preached at St. Austle; Friday, 23, at Truro,
and in the street at Helstone. Saturday, 24. I preached in
Marazion, at eleven; in the evening, at Penzance.
Sun. 25.--We prayed that God would “stay the bottles of
heaven;” and he heard our prayer. I preached at Mousehole
about nine, to a large congregation ; to a larger at Buryan,
about two: But that at St. Just in the evening exceeded both
Sept. 1782.] JOURNAL. 235
of them put together. After visiting the other societies, I
came to Redruth on Saturday, 31. I preached there in the
evening, and at noon on Sunday, SEPTEMBER 1. Afterwards
I expounded the Parable of the Sower at Gwennap, to how
many thousands I know not. But all (I was informed) could
hear distinctly. “This is the Lord’s doing.”
Mon. 2.-I went on to Port-Isaac. Tuesday, 3. I preached
in the street at Camelford. Being informed here, that my old
friend, Mr. Thompson, Rector of St. Gennis, was near death,
and had expressed a particular desire to see me, I judged no
time was to be lost. So, borrowing the best horse I could
find, 1 set out, and rode as fast as I could. On the way, I
met with a white-headed old man, who caught me by the
hand, and said, “Sir, do you not know me?” I answered,
“No.” He said, “My father, my father I am poor John
Trembath.” I desired him to speak to me in the evening at
Launceston; which he did. He was for some time reduced
to extreme poverty, so as to hedge and ditch for bread; but
in his distress he cried to God, who sent him an answer of
peace. He likewise enabled him to cure a gentleman that
was desperately ill, and afterward several others; so that he
grew into reputation, and gained a competent livelihood.
“And now,” said he, “I want for nothing; I am happier
than ever I was in my life.”o
I found Mr. Thompson just alive, but quite sensible. It
seemed to me as if none in the house but himself was very
glad to see me. He had many doubts concerning his final
state, and rather feared, than desired, to die; so that my
whole business was to comfort him, and to increase and con
firm his confidence in God. He desired me to administer the
Lord's Supper, which I willingly did; and I left him much
happier than I found him, calmly waiting till his change
should come.
NEWINGToN,
January 19, 1786.
or THE
Wednesday, SEPTEMBER 4, 1782.--I preached in the
market-house at Tiverton; Thursday, 5, at Halberton,
Taunton, and South-Brent. Friday, 6. About ten I
preached at Shipham, a little town on the side of Men
diff, almost wholly inhabited by miners, who dig up lapis
calaminaris. I was surprised to see such a congregation
at so short a warning; and their deep and serious atten
tion seemed to be a presage, that some of them will profit
by what they hear. In the afternoon we went on to Bristol.
Sun. 8.--My brother read Prayers, and I preached to a very
uncommon congregation. But a far more numerous one met
near King's Square in the evening, on whom I strongly
enforced, “Ye cannot serve God and mammon.” Permit me
to observe here, how you may distinguish a genuine small
Field's Bible from a spurious one: The genuine reads here,
“Ye can serve God and mammon.” In the spurious, the
“not” is supplied.
Mon.9.--About nine I preached at Paulton, where the flame
is abated, but not quenched. The same is the case at Shepton
Mallet, where I preached in the evening. Tuesday, 10. I
went on to the simple-hearted colliers, at Coleford, abundance
of whom met at six in the evening, in a green meadow, which
was delightfully gilded by the rays of the setting sun. Wed
nesday, 11. I preached to a large and serious congregation at
the end of the preaching-house at Frome.
After preaching at Roade, Pensford, Trowbridge, and
Freshford, on Friday, 13, I preached at Bath. Sunday, 15.
I had a far greater number of communicants than usual.
Both at this time, and in the afternoon and the evening
service, we had no common blessing.
On Monday and Tuesday I preached at Chew-Magna, at
Sutton, Stoke, and Clutton: In my way thither, I saw a
famous monument of antiquity, at Stanton-Drew; supposed
238 It Ev. J. WESLEY’s [Oct. 1782.
to have remained there between two and three thousand
years. It was undoubtedly a Druid's temple, consisting of a
smaller and a larger circle of huge stones set on end, one
would think by some power more than human. Indeed,
such stones have been used for divine worship, nearly, if not
quite, from the time of the flood. On the following days I
preached at many other little places.
Sun. 22.--After the service at Bristol, I hastened to Kings
wood, and preached a funeral sermon on Jenny Hall; a lovely
young woman, who died in full triumph, and desired a sermon
might be preached on Rev. vii. 13, and following verses.
On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I visited the classes;
and was concerned to find, that, for these two last years, the
society has been continually decreasing. Thursday, 26, and
the following days, I visited the rest of the country societies.
For a day or two I was not well, but I went on with my work
till Sunday, when I preached morning and evening at the
new Room, and in the afternoon in Temple church.
Tues. October 1.-I read among the letters, in the even
ing, the striking account of Robert Roe's death; a burning
and a shining light while alive, but early numbered with the
dead. Saturday, 5. I visited several that are yet in the
body, but longing to depart and to be with Christ. But
many have this year stepped before them. For forty years I
do not know that so many have, in the space of one year,
been removed to Abraham’s bosom.
Sun. 6.--I preached in Temple church, between our own
morning and evening service; and I now found how to speak
here, so as to be heard by every one: Direct your voice to
the middle of the pillar fronting the pulpit.
Mon. 7.--I left Bristol with much satisfaction, firmly believ
ing that God will revive his work there. I preached at the
Devizes about eleven; and in the evening at Sarum; Tues
day, 8, at Winchester, and at Portsmouth-Common. Wed
nesday, 9. We took a wherry for the Isle of Wight. There
was sea enough, which now and then washed over our boat.
However, in about an hour we landed safe, and walked on to
Newport. This place seems now ripe for the Gospel: Oppo
sition is at an end. Only let our Preachers be men of faith
and love, and they will see the fruit of their labours.
Fri. 11.--I returned to Portsmouth ; took chaise at two
the next morning, and in the afternoon came to London.
Oct. 1782.] JOURNAL. 239
Mon. 14.--I went to Wallingford. The House was filled in
the evening with much-affected hearers. Shall all our labour
here be in vain? Lord, thou knowest !
Tues. 15.--About noon I preached at Oxford. I have seen
no such prospect here for many years. The congregation was
large and still as night, although many gentlemen were among
them. The next evening the House would not contain the
congregation; yet all were quiet, even those that could not
come in : And I believe God not only opened their under
standings, but began a good work in some of their hearts.
Wed. 16.--I preached at Witney, one of the liveliest places
in the Circuit, where I always find my own soul refreshed.
I saw such a garden at Oxford as I verily believe all Eng
land cannot parallel. It is three-square; and, I conjecture,
contains about an acre of ground: It is filled with fruit-trees
of various sorts, and all excellent in their kinds. But it is odd
beyond all description; superlatively whimsical. The owner
has crowded together pictures, statues, urns, antiques of
various kinds: For all which why should not Mr. Badcock's
name, as well as Mr. Roberts's, be consigned to posterity?
Thur. 17.--I preached at Thame; this evening and the next,
at High-Wycomb; and on Saturday, returned to London.
Mon. 21.--I preached at Tunbridge-Wells; Tuesday, 22,
at Sevenoaks. Wednesday, 23. I visited the house of mourning
at Shoreham, and read the strange account at first hand. Not
long after his former wife died, Mr. H. paid his addresses to
Miss B. He had been intimately acquainted with her for some
years. By immense assiduity, and innumerable professions of
the tenderest affection, he, by slow degrees, gained hers. The
time of marriage was fixed: The ring was bought: The wed
ding clothes were sent to her. He came one Thursday, a few
days before the wedding-day, and showed the most eager
affection; so he did on Saturday. He came again on the
Wednesday following, sat down very carelessly on a chair,
and told her with great composure, that he did not love her
at all, and therefore could not think of marrying her. He
talked a full hour in the same strain, and them walked away !
Her brother sent a full account of this to Miss Perronet, who
read it with perfect calmness, comforted her niece, and strongly
exhorted her to continue steadfast in the faith. But the grief
which did not outwardly appear, preyed the more upon her
240 Rev. J. wesley’s [Nov. 1782.
spirits, till, three or four days after, she felt a pain in her breast,
lay down, and in four minutes died. One of the ventricles of
her heart burst; so she literally died of a broken heart.
When old Mr. Perronet heard that his favourite child,
the stay of his old age, was dead, he broke into praise and
thanksgiving to God, who had “taken another of his children
out of this evil world !”
But Mr. H., meantime, has done nothing amiss. So both
himself and his friends say !
Fri. 25.-I returned to London, and was glad to find Mr.
Edward Smyth and his family just come from Dublin. Sunday,
27. At ten I took coach; reached Norwich on Monday noon,
and preached at six in the evening. I stayed there on Tuesday;
and Wednesday, 30, went to Yarmouth, where were the largest
congregations I had seen for many years. Thursday, 31. I
went on to Lowestoft, which is, at present, far the most com
fortable place in the whole Circuit. Friday, Nov EMBER 1. Mr.
Smyth and his wife gave us a strange account:--A little before
they were married, her brother Samuel was about eight years
old. One evening, as she was with Mr. Smyth, in one of the
rows, at Yarmouth, both of them saw Samuel standing five or
six yards off. She cried out, “Sammy, come hither; I want
you;” but instantly he was gone. Just then he fell into the
river. A large water-dog, which was on the bridge, directly
leaped off, swam about and sought him, but could not find him.
He then came out, and ran to his mother's house howling;
nor would he leave her till he was put out by force.
Sat. 2.-About nine I preached at Cove, a village nine or
ten miles from Lowestoft : The poor people presently filled
the House, and seemed to devour every word. About one, I
preached at Loddon; and at Norwich in the evening.
Sun. 3.--I administered the Lord’s Supper to about an
hundred and forty communicants. I preached at half-past
two, and again in the evening; after which I requested them
to go away in silence, without any one speaking to another.
They took my advice : They went away in profound silence,
so that no sound was heard but that of their feet.
Mon. 4.--At five in the morning the congregation was
exceeding large. That in the evening seemed so deeply affected,
that I hope Norwich will again lift up its head. At nine we took
coach; and before eleven, on Tuesday, 5, reached Colchester.
Dec. 1782.] JOURNAL. 24l
In order to strengthen this poor feeble society, I stayed with
them till Friday, preaching morning and evening, and visiting
in the day as many as I could, sick or well. I divided the
classes anew, which had been strangely and irregularly jum
bled together; appointed Stewards; regulated temporal as
well as spiritual things; and left them in a better way than
they had been for several years.
Monday, 11, and the following days, I visited the societies
in and about London.
Sun. 24.--I preached at St. Clement's in the Strand, (the
largest church I ever preached in at London, except, perhaps,
St. Sepulchre's,) to an immense congregation. I fully dis
charged my own soul, and afterwards took coach for North
amptonshire. On Monday, 25, I preached at Towcester; on
Tuesday, at Whittlebury, so called; but the true name of the
town is Whittle; on Wednesday, at Northampton; and on
Thursday I returned to London. Friday, 29. I preached at
Highgate, in the palace built in the last century by that
wretched Duke of Lauderdale; now one of the most elegant
boarding-houses in England. But, alas ! it is not Publow !
Mon. DECEMBER. 2.-I preached at St. Neot's, in Hunting
donshire; Tuesday, 3, at Bugden about one ; and in the even
ing at Huntingdon. Two Clergymen were there, with one of
whom I had much serious conversation. Wednesday, 4. I
preached with great enlargement of spirit, to my old congrega
tion at Bedford. Thursday, 5. With some difficulty I crossed
the country to Hinxworth, and preached to fifty or sixty plain
people, who seemed very willing to learn. In the afternoon,
it being impossible to drive a chaise straight round to Luton,
I was obliged to go many miles about, and so did not reach it
till after six o'clock; so I went directly to the preaching-house,
and began without delay enforcing those solemn words, “To
day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.”
Fri. 6.--I could procure no other conveyance to St. Alban’s
but in an open chaise; and hence, (the frost being very sharp,)
I contracted a severe cold. Monday,9. I had a better convey
ance into Kent. In the evening I preached at Canterbury;
on Tuesday at Dover; the next day at Canterbury again. On
Thursday, 12, and on Friday morning, I preached at Chatham;
and in the afternoon returned to London.
Sat.14.--I found the cold which I had contracted in the way
242 REv. J. wesley’s ' [Feb. 1783.
to St. Alban’s exceedingly increased, having a deep and
violent cough, which continued at intervals till spring.
Mon. 16.-I retired to Hoxton for a few days. Thursday,
19. About eleven at night, a gun was fired at our chamber
window, and at the same time a large stone thrown through
it. (Probably in sport, by some that had been drinking.) I
presently went to sleep again.
Sat. 21.-I visited Mr. Maxfield, struck with a violent
stroke of palsy. He was senseless, and seemed near death;
but we besought God for him, and his spirit revived, I cannot
but think, in answer to prayer. Sunday, 29. I buried the
remains of Thomas Forfit, a rich, and yet a generous man.
He was unwearied in well doing; and in a good old age,
without any pain or struggle, fell asleep. Tuesday, 31. We
concluded the year with a solemn watch-night.
Wed. JANUARY 1, 1783.−May I begin to live to-day !
Sunday, 5. We met to renew our covenant with God. We
never meet on this occasion without a blessing; but I do not
know that we had ever so large a congregation before.
Fri. 10.--I paid one more visit to Mr. Perronet, now in his
ninetieth year. I do not know so venerable a man. His
understanding is little, if at all, impaired; and his heart seems
to be all love. A little longer I hope he will remain here, to
be a blessing to all that see and hear him.
Sun. 19.--I preached at St. Thomas's church in the after
noon, and at St. Swithin's in the evening. The tide is now
turned; so that I have more invitations to preach in churches
than I can accept of.
Sat. FEBRUARY 1.-I drank tea at Mr. A--’s, in the
Maze-pond, Southwark; but both Mr. A-- and his wife
informed me they were determined to quit the house as soon
as possible, by reason of strange noises, which they heard day
and night, but in the night chiefly, as if all the tables and
chairs had been thrown up and down, in the rooms above and
under them.
Sun. 2.-Mr. Maxfield continuing ill, I preached this after
noon at his chapel. Prejudice seems now dying away : God
grant it may never revive Tuesday, 11. I buried the remains
of Sarah Clay, many years a mother in Israel; the last of those
holy women, who, being filled with love, forty years ago devoted
themselves wholly to God, to spend and be spent in his service.
Feb. 1783.] J()URNAL. 243
Her death was like her life, calm and easy. She was dress
ing herself when she dropped down and fell asleep.
Mon. 17.--I had an opportunity of attending the Lecture
of that excellent man, Dr. Conyers. He was quite an ori
ginal; his matter was very good, his manner very bad; but
it is enough that God owned him, both in the conviction and
conversion of sinners.
Thur. 20.--I went to Dorking; and in the afternoon took
a walk through the lovely gardens of Lord Grimstone. His
father-in-law, who laid them out, is some time since num
bered with the dead; and his son-in-law, living elsewhere,
has not so much as the beholding them with his eyes!
Fri. 21.-At our yearly meeting for that purpose, we exa
mined our yearly accounts, and found the money received
(just answering the expense) was upwards of three thousand
pounds a year; but that is nothing to me: What I receive of
it yearly, is neither more nor less than thirty pounds.
To-day Charles Greenwood went to rest. He had been a
melancholy man all his days, full of doubts and fears, and con
tinually writing bitter things against himself. When he was
first taken ill, he said he should die, and was miserable through
fear of death; but two days before he died, the clouds dispersed,
and he was unspeakably happy, telling his friends, “God has
revealed to me things which it is impossible for man to utter.”
Just when he died, such glory filled the room, that it seemed
to be a little heaven; none could grieve or shed a tear, but
all present appeared to be partakers of his joy.
Mon. 24.--Iburied the remains of Captain Cheesement, one
who, some years since, from a plentiful fortune, was by a train
of losses utterly ruined; but two or three friends enabling him
to begin trade again, the tide turned; he prospered greatly, and
riches flowed in on every side. A few years ago he married one
equally agreeable in her person and temper. So what had he
to do but enjoy himself? Accordingly, he left off business,
took a large, handsome house, and furnished it in a most elegant
manner. A little while after, showing his rooms to a friend,
he said, “All this will give small comfort in a dying hour.”
A few days after, he was taken with a fever. I saw him twice:
He was sensible, but could not speak. In spite of all means,
he grew worse and worse, and in about twelve days died. So
within a few days we lost two of our richest, and two of our
244 REv. J. WESLEY’s [March, 1783.
holiest, members, Sarah Clay, and good old George Hufflet,
who had been, for many years, a burning and a shining light.
He lay fourteen weeks praising God continually, and had
then a triumphant entrance into his kingdom.
Sun. MARCH 2.--In the evening I took coach, and the next
evening preached at Bath. Thursday, 6. I went on to Bristol,
and found a family of love, so united as it had not been for
some years. The next week I met the classes; and on Friday
had a watch-night at Kingswood; but I was far from being
well, the cold which I had caught in coming from Luton rather
increasing than decreasing. Saturday, 15. I had a deep, tear
ing cough, and was exceeding heavy and weak. However,
I made shift to preach at Weaver’s Hall, and to meet the
penitents. Sunday, 16. I found myself considerably worse.
However, I preached in the morning; but had such a fever
in the afternoon, that I was obliged to take my bed.
I now knew not what to do, having fixed the next morning
for beginning my journey to Ireland, and sent notice to
Stroud, Gloucester, and various other places, of the days
wherein I purposed to visit them. But Mr. Collins kindly
undertook to supply my place at Stroud, and the other places,
as far as Worcester.
Lying down in bed, I took part (being able to swallow no
more) of a draught which was prepared for me. It gave me
four or five and twenty stools, and a moderate vomit; after
which I fell fast asleep. Monday, 17. Mr. Collins set out.
About six in the morning, finding myself perfectly easy, I set
out in the afternoon, and overtook him at Stroud. But it was
as much as I could do; for I was in a high fever, though with
out any pain. After giving a short exhortation to the society,
I was very glad to lie down. My fever was exactly of the same
kind with that I had in the north of Ireland. On Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, I was just the same :
The whole nervous system was violently agitated. Hence arose
the cramp, with little intermission, from the time I lay down in
bed till morning: Also a furious, tearing cough, usually recur
ring before each fit of the cramp. And yet I had no pain in
my back, or head, or limbs, the cramp only excepted. But I
had no strength at all, being scarce able to move, and much
less to think. In this state I lay till Friday morning, when
a violent fit of the cramp carried the fever quite away. Perceiv
May, 1783.] JOURNAL. 245
ing this, I took chaise without delay, and reached Worcester
in the afternoon. Here I overtook Mr. Collins again, who
had supplied all my appointments, and with a remarkable
blessing to the people. But being much exhausted, I found
rest was sweet. Saturday, 22. In the morning I gave a short
exhortation, and then went on to Birmingham.
Sun. 23.--Finding still some remains of the fever, with a load
and tightness across my breast, and a continual tendency to the
cramp, I procured a friend to electrify me thoroughly, both
through the legs and the breast, several times in the day. God
so blessed this, that I had no more fever or cramp, and no more
load or tightness across my breast. In the evening I ventured
to preach three quarters of an hour, and found no ill effect at all.
Tues. 25.--In the afternoon I reached Hilton-Park, about
six miles north of Wolverhampton. Here I found my old
acquaintance, Miss Freeman, (whom I had known almost
from a child,) with Sir Philip Gibbes's lady, and his two
amiable daughters, in a lovely recess. With these I spent
this evening and the next day, both profitably and agreeably.
Thur. 27.-I crossed over the country to Hinckley, and
preached in the evening, in the neat, elegant preaching-house.
So I did, morning and evening, on the three following days,
to a serious, well-behaved people.
Here I met with Dr. Horne’s “Commentary on the
Psalms:” I suppose the best that ever was wrote. Yet I
could not comprehend his aggrandizing the Psalms, it seems
even above the New Testament. And some of them he
hardly makes anything of; the eighty-seventh in particular.
Tues. APRIL 1, &c.--I went through several of the socie
ties till I reached Holyhead, on Friday, 11. We went on
board without delay, and on Sunday morning, the 13th,
landed at Dunleary; whence (not being able to procure a
carriage) I walked on to Dublin.
Here I spent two or three weeks with much satisfaction, in
my usual employments. Monday, 21. I spent an hour with
Mr. Shelton; I think, full as extraordinary a man as Mr.
Law ; of full as rapid a genius; so that I had little to do but
to hear; his words flowing as a river.
Tues. 29.-Our little Conference began, and continued till
Friday, MAY 2. All was peace and love; and I trust the
same spirit will spread through the nation.
246 REv. J. Wesley’s [May, 1783.
Sat. 3.-I made a little excursion to a Nobleman’s seat, a
few miles from Dublin. It may doubtless vie in elegance, if
not in costliness, with any seat in Great Britain: But the
miserable master of the whole has little satisfaction therein.
God hath said, “Write this man childless.” For whom then
does he heap up these things? He is himself growing old:--
And must he leave this paradise ? Then leave
These happy shades, and mansions fit for gods?
Sun. 4.--There was an Ordination at St. Patrick’s. I admired
the solemnity wherewith the Archbishop went through the Ser
vice: But the vacant faces of the ordained showed how little
they were affected thereby. In the evening multitudes met to
renew their covenant with God. But here was no vacant face
to be seen; for God was in the midst, and manifested himself to
many; particularly to a daughter of good William Pennington.
Mon. 5.--We prepared for going on board the packet; but
as it delayed sailing, on Tuesday, 6, Iwaited on Lady Arabella
Denny, at the Black Rock, four miles from Dublin. It is one
of the pleasantest spots I ever saw. The garden is everything
in miniature. On one side is a grove, with serpentine walks;
on the other, a little meadow and a green-house, with a study
(which she calls her chapel) hanging over the sea. Between
these is a broad walk, leading down almost to the edge of the
water; along which run two narrow walks, commanding the
quay, one above the other. But it cannot be long before this
excellent lady will remove to a nobler paradise.-
The unusually large congregation in the evening was plenti
fully watered with the dew of heaven. I found a particular
concern for the children, many of whom willingly attended.
Wed. 7.--The packet still delaying, I exhorted a large con
gregation, in the evening, to take care how they built their
house upon the sand; and then cheerfully commended them
to the grace of God.
Thur. 8.-We rose at one, went down to the quay at two,
and about four went on board the Hillsborough packet.
About five the wind turned fair, and, between five and six
in the evening, brought us to Holyhead. About seven we
took coach, and the next evening met our friends at Chester.
Mon. 12.--About eight I preached at Preston-in-the-Hill;
about twelve, in Warrington; and in the evening, at Liverpool.
May, 1783.] JOURNAL. 247
Here the scandal of the cross seems to be ceased, and we are
grown honourable men. Thursday, 15. I preached about
noon at Wigan, and in the evening at Bolton, to a people
much alive to God. Saturday, 17. I went on to Manchester.
Sunday, 18. Mr. Bayley came very opportunely to assist me
in the Morning Service. Such a sight, I believe, was never
seen at Manchester before. It was supposed there were
thirteen or fourteen hundred communicants, among whom
there was such a spirit as I have seldom found; and their
whole behaviour was such as adorned the Gospel.
Tues. 20.--I met the select society, consisting of between
forty and fifty members. Several of these were lately made
partakers of the great salvation; as several were above twenty
years ago. I believe there is no place but London, where we
have so many souls so deeply devoted to God; and his hand is
not shortened yet, but his work rapidly increases on every side.
About noon I preached at Stockport; and in the after
noon, in the new church at Macclesfield. This society seems
as lively as even that at Manchester, and increases nearly as
fast. Not a week passes wherein some are not justified, and
some renewed in love. Wednesday, 21. I met a few of these,
and found them indeed
All praise, all meekness, and all love.
In the evening I exhorted them all to expect pardon or holi
ness to-day, not to-morrow. O let their love never grow cold !
Fri. 23.--I set out for Derby; but the smith had so effect
ually lamed one of my horses, that many told me he would
never be able to travel more. I thought, “Even this may be
made matter of prayer;” and set out cheerfully. The horse,
instead of growing worse and worse, went better and better;
and in the afternoon (after I had preached at Leek by the
way) brought me safe to Derby.
Sat. 24.--Being desired to marry two of our friends at
Buxton, two-and-thirty miles from Derby, I took chaise at
three, and came thither about eight. I found notice had
been given of my preaching in the church ; and the Minister
desired me to read Prayers. By this means I could not leave
Buxton till eleven, nor reach Nottingham till after seven ;
whereas I was to have preached at six. But Mr. Brackenbury
came to town just in time to supply my place.
248 REv. J. Wesley’s [June, 1783.
Sun. 25.--I had an easy day's work, as Mr. Bayley assisted
me, by reading Prayers, and delivering the wine at the Lord's
Table.
Tues. 27.-I preached at Loughborough in the morning,
and at Mountsorrel at one. While I was preaching, the rain,
which was so wanted, began, and continued for eight-and
forty hours. In the evening I preached at Leicester, where
I always feel much liberty, and yet see but little fruit. After
preaching at Northampton, Bedford, and Hinxworth, on
Saturday, 31, I returned to London.
Sun. JUNE 1.-I was refreshed by the very sight of the con
gregation at the new chapel. Monday, 2, and the following
days, I employed in settling my business, and preparing for
my little excursion. Wednesday, 11. I took coach with Mr.
Brackenbury, Broadbent, and Whitfield; and in the evening
we reached Harwich. I went immediately to Dr. Jones, who
received me in the most affectionate manner. About nine in
the morning we sailed; and at nine on Friday, 13, landed at
Helvoetsluys. Here we hired a coach for Briel, but were
forced to hire a wagon also, to carry a box which one of us
could have carried on his shoulders. At Briel we took a boat
to Rotterdam. We had not been long there, when Mr. Ben
met, a bookseller, who had invited me to his house, called upon
me. But as Mr. Loyal, the Minister of the Scotch congrega
tion, had invited me, he gave up his claim, and went with us
to Mr. Loyal's. I found a friendly, sensible, hospitable, and,
I am persuaded, a pious man. We took a walk together round
the town, all as clean as a gentleman's parlour. Many of the
houses are as high as those in the main street at Edinburgh;
and the canals, running through the chief streets, make them
convenient, as well as pleasant ; bringing the merchants’
goods up to their doors. Stately trees grow on all their
banks. The whole town is encompassed with a double row
of elms; so that one may walk all round it in the shade.
Sat. 14.--I had much conversation with the two English
Ministers, sensible, well-bred, serious men. These, as well
as Mr. Loyal, were very willing I should preach in their
churches; but they thought it would be best for me to preach
in the Episcopal church. By our conversing freely together,
many prejudices were removed, and all our hearts seemed to
be united together.
June, 1783.] JOURNAL. 249
In the evening we again took a walk round the town, and I
observed, 1. Many of the houses are higher than most in
Edinburgh. It is true they have not so many stories; but
each story is far lostier. 2. The streets, the outside and inside
of their houses in every part, doors, windows, well-staircases,
furniture, even floors, are kept so micely clean that you cannot
find a speck of dirt. 3. There is such a grandeur and elegance
in the fronts of the large houses, as I never saw elsewhere;
and such a profusion of marble within, particularly in their
lower floors and staircases, as I wonder other nations do not
imitate. 4. The women and children (which I least of all
expected) were in general the most beautiful I ever saw.
They were surprisingly fair, and had an inexpressible air of
innocence in their countenance. 5. This was wonderfully set
off by their dress, which was simplea munditiis, plain and neat
in the highest degree. 6. It has lately been observed, that
growing vegetables greatly resist putridity; so there is an use
in their numerous rows of trees which was not thought of at
first. The elms balance the canals, preventing the putrefac
tion which those otherwise might produce.
One little circumstance I observed, which I suppose is pecu
liar to Holland: To most chamber-windows a looking-glass is
placed on the outside of the sash, so as to show the whole street,
with all the passengers. There is something very pleasing in
these moving pictures. Are they found in no other country?
Sun. 15.--The Episcopal church is not quite so large as the
chapel in West-Street. It is very elegant both without and
within. The Service began at half-past nine. Such a congre
gation had not often been there before. I preached on, “God
created man in his own image.” The people seemed, “all but
their attention, dead.” In the afternoon the church was so
filled as (they informed me) it had not been for these fifty years.
I preached on, “God hath given us eternal life; and this life
is in his Son.” I believe God applied it to many hearts.
Were it only for this hour, I am glad I came to Holland.
One thing which I peculiarly observed was this, and the
same in all the churches in Holland: At coming in, no one
looks on the right or the left hand, or bows or courtesies to ally
one; but all go straightforward to their seats, as if no other
person was in the place. During the service none turns his
head on either side, or looks at anything but his book or the
250 REv. J. WESLEY’s [June, 1783.
Minister; and in going out, none takes notice of any one, but
all go straight forward till they are in the open air.
After church an English gentleman invited me to his .
country-house, not half a mile from the town. I scarce ever
saw so pretty a place. The garden before the house was in
three partitions, each quite different from the others. The
house lay between this and another garden, (nothing like any
of the others,) from which you looked through a beautiful
summer-house, washed by a small stream, into rich pastures
filled with cattle. We sat under an arbour of stately trees,
between the front and the back gardens. Here were four
such children (I suppose seven, six, five, and three years old)
as I never saw before in one family: Such inexpressible
beauty and innocence shone togetherl
In the evening I attended the service of the great Dutch
church, as large as most of our cathedrals. The organ (like
those in all the Dutch churches) was elegantly painted and
gilded; and the tunes that were sung were very lively, and
yet solemn.-
Mon. 16.--We set out in a track-skuit for the Hague. By
the way we saw a curiosity : The gallows near the canal, sur
rounded with a knot of beautiful trees | So the dying man
will have one pleasant prospect here, whatever befalls him
hereafter At eleven we came to Delft, a large, handsome
town, where we spent an hour at a merchant's house, who,
as well as his wife, a very agreeable woman, seemed both to
fear and to love God. Afterwards we saw the great church;
I think nearly, if not quite, as long as York Minster. It is
exceedingly light and elegant within, and every part is kept
exquisitely clean. The tomb of William the First is much
admired; particularly his statue, which has more life than
one would think could be expressed in brass.
When we came to the Hague, though we had heard much
of it, we were not disappointed. It is, indeed, beautiful
beyond expression. Many of the houses are exceeding grand,
and are finely intermixed with water and wood; yet not too
close, but so as to be sufficiently ventilated by the air.
Being invited to tea by Madam de Vassenaar, (one of the
first quality in the Hague,) I waited upon her in the afternoon.
She received us with that easy openness and affability which is
almost peculiar to Christians and persons of quality. Soon after
June, 1783.] JOURNAL. 251
came ten or twelve ladies more, who seemed to be of her own
rank, (though dressed quite plain,) and two most agreeable gen
tlemen; one of whom, I afterwards understood, was a Colonel
in the Prince's Guards. After tea I expounded the three first
verses of the thirteenth of the first Epistle to the Corinthians.
Captain M. interpreted, sentence by sentence. I then prayed,
and Colonel V. after me. I believe this hour was well employed.
Tues. 17.--As we walked over the Place we saw the Swiss
Guards at their exercise. They are a fine body of men, taller,
I suppose, than any English regiment; and they all wear large
whiskers, which they take care to keep as black as their boots.
Afterwards we saw the gardens at the Old Palace, beautifully
laid out, with a large piece of water in the middle, and a canal
at each end: The open walks in it are pleasant, but the shady
serpentine walks are far pleasanter.
We dined at Mrs. L 's, in such a family as I have sel
dom seen. Her mother, upwards of seventy, seemed to be
continually rejoicing in God her Saviour: The daughter
breathes the same spirit; and her grandchildren, three little
girls and a boy, seem to be all love. I have not seen four such
children together in all England. A gentleman coming in after
dinner, I found a particular desire to pray for him. In a little
while he melted into tears, as indeed did most of the company.
Wednesday, 18. In the afternoon Madam de Vassenaar invited
us to a meeting at a neighbouring lady's house. I expounded
Gal. vi. 14, and Mr. M. interpreted as before.
Thur. 19.-We took boat at seven. Mrs. L. and one of
her relations, being unwilling to part so soon, bore us company
to Leyden; a large and populous town, but not so pleasant as
Rotterdam. In the afternoon we went on to Haerlem, where a
plain, good man and his wife received us in a most affectionate
manner. At six we took boat again. As it was filled from end
to end, I was afraid we should not have a very pleasant jour
ney. After Mr. Ferguson had told the people who we were,
we made a slight excuse, and sung an hymn. They were all
attention. We then talked a little, by means of our inter
preter, and desired that any of them who pleased would sing.
Four persons did so; and sung well. After a while we sung
again: So did one or two of them; and all our hearts were
strangely knit together, so that when we came to Amsterdam
they dismissed us with abundance of blessings.
252 REv. J. Wesley’s {June, 1783.
Fri. 20.--We breakfasted at Mr. Ferguson’s, near the heart
of the city. At eleven we drank coffee (the custom in Holland)
at Mr. J 's, a merchant, whose dining-room is covered,
both walls and ceiling, with the most beautiful paintings. He
and his lady walked with us in the afternoon to the Stadt
House; perhaps the grandest buildings of the kind in Europe.
The great hall is a noble room indeed, near as large as that
of Christ-Church in Oxford. But I have neither time nor
inclimation to describe particularly this amazing structure.
At five in the evening we drank tea at another merchant’s,
Mr. G 's, where I had a long conversation with Mr. de H.;
one of the most learned as well as popular Ministers in the city;
and (I believe, what is far more important) he is truly alive to
God. He spoke Latin well, and seemed to be one of a strong
understanding, as well as of an excellent spirit. In returning
to our inn, we called at a stationer's; and though we spent but
a few minutes, it was enough to convince us of his strong affec
tion, even to strangers. What a change does the grace of God
make in the heart! Shyness and stiffness are now no more
Sat. 21.--We breakfasted with a very extraordinary woman,
who lamented that she could not talk to us but by an interpre
ter. However, she made us understand, that she had a little
child some years since, three or four years old, that was pray
ing continually: That one morning, having just dressed her,
she said, “Will you go kiss your sister?” She said, “Yes,
mamma; and I will kiss you too;” and threw her arms
about her mother’s neck; who said, “My dear, where will
you go now?” She said, “I will go to Jesus;” and died.
At eleven I spent an hour with a woman of large fortune,
who appeared to be as much devoted to God as her. We
were immediately as well acquainted with each other, as if
we had known each other for many years. But indeed an
easy good-breeding (such as I never expected to see here)
runs through all the genteeler people of Amsterdam. And
there is such a child-like simplicity in all that love God, as
does honour to the religion they profess.
About two we called upon Mr. V n, and immediately
fell into close conversation. There seems to be in him a pecu
liar softness and sweetness of temper; and a peculiar liveliness
in Mrs. V m. Our loving dispute, concerning deliverance
from sin, was concluded within an hour: And we parted, if that
June, 1783.] JOURNAL. 253
could be, better friends than we met. Afterwards we walked
to Mr. J 's house in the Plantations, a large tract of
ground, laid out in shady walks. These lie within the city
walls: But there are other walks, equally pleasant, without
the gates. Indeed nothing is wanting but the power of reli
gion, to make Amsterdam a paradise.
Sun. 22.--I went to the new church, so called still, though
four or five hundred years old. It is larger, higher, and better
illuminated, than most of our cathedrals. The screen that
divides the church from the choir is of polished brass, and
shines like gold. I understood the Psalms that were sung,
and the text well, and a little of the sermon ; which Mr. de
H. delivered with great earnestness. At two I began the Ser
vice at the English church, an elegant building, about the size
of West-Street chapel. Only it has no galleries; nor have any
of the churches in Holland. I preached on Isaiah lv. 6, 7; and
I am persuaded many received the truth in the love thereof.
After service I spent another hour at Mr. V. ’s. Mrs.
V again asked me abundance of questions, concerning
deliverance from sin; and seemed a good deal better satis
fied, with regard to the great and precious promises. Thence
we went to Mr. B., who had lately found peace with God.
He was full of faith and love, and could hardly mention the
goodness of God without tears. His wife appeared to be
exactly of the same spirit, so that our hearts were soon knit
together. From thence we went to another family, where a
large company were assembled. But all seemed open to
receive instructions, and desirous to be altogether Christians.
After dinner Mrs. J took me in a coach to the Mere,
and thence round the country to Zeeburg. I never saw
such a country before: I suppose there is no such summer
country in Europe. From Amsterdam to Mere is all a train
of the most delightful gardens. Turning upon the left, you
then open upon the Texel, which spreads into a sea. Zeeburg
itself is a little house built on the edge of it, which commands
both a land and sea prospect. What is wanting to make the
inhabitants happy, but the knowledge and love of God?
Tues. 24.--We took a view of the new Workhouse, which
stands on one side of the Plantations. It much resembles Shore
ditch Workhouse: Only it is considerably larger. And the front
of it is so richly ornamented, that it looks like a royal palace
254 Rev. J. Wesley’s [June, 1783.
About four hundred are now in the house, which is to receive
four hundred more : Just half as many as are in the Poorhouse
at Dublin, which now contains sixteen hundred. We saw many
of the poor people, all at work, knitting, spinning, picking work,
or weaving. And the women in one room were all sewing,
either fine or plain work. Many of these had been women of
the town : For this is a Bridewell and Workhouse in one. The
head keeper was stalking to and fro, with a large silver-hilted
sword by his side. The bed-chambers were exceeding neat:
The beds are better or worse as are those that use them. We
saw both the men in one long room, and the women in ano
ther, at dinner. In both rooms they sung a Psalm and prayed,
before and after dinner. I cannot but think the managers in
Amsterdam wiser than those in Dublin : For certainly a little
of the form of religion is better than none at all !
Afterwards we spent an hour at Mrs. V 's, a very
extraordinary woman. Both from her past and present expe
rience, I can have no doubt but she is perfected in love. She
said, “I was born at Surinam ; and came from thence when
I was about ten years old. But when I came hither, my
guardian would not let me have my fortune, unless I would go
back to Surinam. However, I got acquainted with some pious
people, and made shift to live, till I was about sixteen: I then
embarked for Surinam ; but a storm drove us to the coast of
England, where the ship was stranded. I was in great dis
tress, fearing I had done wrong in leaving the pious people:
But just then God revealed himself to my soul. I was filled
with joy unspeakable; and boldly assured the people, who
despaired of life, that God would preserve them all. And so he
did : We got on shore at Devon; but we lost all that we had.
“After a time I returned to Amsterdam, and lived four
years in service: Then I married. Seven years after, it
pleased God to work a deeper work in my heart: Since then
I have given myself wholly to Him. I desire nothing else.
Jesus is my All. I am always pleased with his will : So I
was, even when my husband died. I had not one discon
tented thought; I was still happy in God.”
Wed. 25.-We took boat for Haerlem. The great church
here is a noble structure, equalled by few cathedrals in England,
either in length, breadth, or height: the organ is the largest I
ever saw, and is said to be the finest in Europe. Hence we went
June, 1783.] JOURNAL. 255
to Mr. Van Ka 's, whose wife was convinced of sin and
justified by reading Mr. Whitefield's Sermons.-
Here we were as at home. Before dinner we took a walk in
Haerlem Wood. It adjoins to the town, and is cut out in
many shady walks; with lovely vistas shooting out every way.
The walk from the Hague to Scheveling is pleasant; those
near Amsterdam more so; but these exceed them all.
We returned in the afternoon to Amsterdam ; and in the
evening took leave of as many of our friends as we could.
How entirely were we mistaken in the Hollanders, supposing
them to be of a cold, phlegmatic, unfriendly temperl I have
not met with a more warmly affectionate people in all Europel
No, not in Ireland
Thur. 26.--Our friends having largely provided us with
wine and fruits for our little journey, we took boat in a lovely
morning for Utrecht, with Mr. Van ’s sister, who in the
way gave us a striking account: “In that house,” said she,
(pointing to it as we went by,) “my husband and I lived; and
that church adjoining to it was his church. Five years ago,
we were sitting together, being in perfect health, when he
dropped down, and in a quarter of an hour died: I lifted up
my heart and said, ‘Lord, thou art my husband now;’ and
found no will but his.” This was a trial worthy of a Chris
tian: And she has ever since made her word good. We were
scarce got to our inn at Utrecht, when Miss L Came.
I found her just such as I expected. She came on purpose
from her father's country-house, where all the family were.
I observe of all the pious people in Holland, that, without any
rule but the word of God, they dress as plain as Miss March
did formerly, and Miss Johnson does now ! And considering
the vast disadvantage they are under, having no connexion
with each other, and being under no such discipline at all
as we are, I wonder at the grace of God that is in
them
Fri. 27.-Iwalked over to Mr. L ’s country-house, about
three miles from the city. It is a lovely place, surrounded with
delightful gardens, laid out with wonderful variety. Mr. L
is of an easy genteel behaviour, speaks Latin correctly, and is
no stranger to philosophy. Mrs. L is the picture of friend
liness and hospitality; and young Mr. L seems to be cast
in the same mould. We spent a few hours very agreeably.
Then Mr. L would send me back in his coach.
256 REv. J. WEsley’s [June, 1783.
Being sick of inns, (our bill at Amsterdam alone amounting
to near a hundred florins,) I willingly accepted of an invita
tion to lodge with the sons-in-law of James Oddie.
Sat. 28.--We went over to Zeist, the settlement of the Ger
man Brethren. It is a small village, finely situated, with woods
on every side, and much resembles one of the large Colleges in
Oxford. Here I met with my old friend Bishop Antone, whom
I had not seen for near fifty years. He did not ask me to eat
or drink; for it is not their custom, and there is an inn; but
they were all very courteous; and we were welcome to buy any
thing that we pleased at their shops I cannot see how it is
possible for this community to avoid growing immensely rich.
I have this day lived fourscore years; and, by the mercy of
God, my eyes are not waxed dim: And what little strength of
body or mind I had thirty years since, just the same I have
now. God grant I may never live to be useless | Rather may I
My body with my charge lay down,
And cease at once to work and live.
Sun. 29.--At ten I began the service in the English church
in Utrecht. I believe all the English in the city were present,
and forty or fifty Hollanders. I preached on 1 Cor. xiii.; I
think, as searchingly as ever in my life. Afterwards a mer
chant invited me to dinner: For six years he had been at
death’s door by an asthma, and was extremely ill last night;
but this morning, without any visible cause, he was well, and
walked across the city to the church. He seemed to be deeply
acquainted with religion, and made me promise, if I came to
Utrecht again, to make his house my home.
In the evening a large company of us met at Miss L.’s, where
I was desired to repeat the substance of my morning sermon.
I did so: Mr. Toydemea (the Professor of Law in the Uni
versity) interpreting it sentence by sentence. They then sung
a Dutch hymn; and we an English one. Afterwards Mr.
Regglet, a venerable old man, spent some time in prayer, for
the establishment of peace and love between the two nations.
Utrecht has much the look of an English town. The
streets are broad, and have many noble houses. In quietness
and stillness it much resembles Oxford. The country all
round is like a garden: And the people I conversed with are
not only civil and hospitable, but friendly and affectionate,
even as those at Amsterdam.
July, 1783.] JOURNAL. 257
Mon. 30.-We hired a coach for Rotterdam, at half-acrown per head. We dined at Gouda, at M. Van Flooten's,
Minister of the town, who receivedus with all possible kindness.
Before dinner we went into the church, famous for its painted
windows; but we had not time to survey a tenth part of them:
We could only observe, in general, that the colours were
exceeding lively, and the figures exactly proportioned. In the
evening we reached once more the hospitable house of Mr.
Loyal, at Rotterdam.
Tues. JULY 1.-I called on as many as I could of my
friends, and we parted with much affection. We then hired
a yacht, which brought us to Helvoetsluys, about eleven the
next day. At two we went on board; but the wind turning
against us, we did not reach Harwich till about nine on
Friday morning. After a little rest we procured a carriage,
and reached London about eleven at night.-
I can by no means regret either the trouble or expense which
attended this little journey. It opened me a way into, as it
were, a new world; where the land, the buildings, the people,
the customs, were all such as I had never seen before. But as
those with whom I conversed were of the same spirit with my
friends in England, I was as much at home in Utrecht and
Amsterdam, as in Bristol and London.
Sun. 6.--We rejoiced to meet once more with our English
friends in the new chapel; who were refreshed with the account
of the gracious work which God is working in Holland also.
Wed. 9.--I spent a melancholy hour with Mr. M., and several
others, who charged him with speaking grievous things of me,
which he then knew to be utterly false. If he acknowledges his
fault, I believe he will recover; if not, his sickness is unto death.
These four days, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and
Friday, were as hot as the midsummer days in Jamaica.
The summer heat in Jamaica usually raises the thermometer
to about eighty degrees. The quicksilver in my thermometer
now rose to eighty-two.
Mon. 14.--I took a little journey into Oxfordshire, and found
the good effects of the late storms. The thunder had been
uncommonly dreadful; and the lightning had tore up a field
near High-Wycomb, and turned the potatoes into ashes. In
the evening I preached in the new preaching-house at Oxford,
a lightsome, cheerful place, and well filled with rich and poor,
258 REv. J. wesley’s [July, 1783.
scholars as well as townsmen. Tuesday, 15. Walking through
the city, I observed it swiftly improving in everything but
religion. Observing narrowly the Hall at Christ-Church, I
was convinced it is both loftier and larger than that of the
Stadt-House in Amsterdam. I observed also, the gardens
and walks in Holland, although extremely pleasant, were not to
be compared with St. John’s, or Trinity gardens; much less
with the parks, Magdalen water-walks, &c., Christ-Church
meadow, or the White-walk.
Wed. 16.--I went on to Witney. There were uncommon
thunder and lightning here last Thursday; but nothing to that
which were there on Friday night. About ten the storm was
just over the town; and both the bursts of thunder and lightning,
or rather sheets of flame, were withoutintermission. Those that
were asleep in the town were waked, and many thought the day
of judgment was come. Men, women, and children, flocked
out of their houses, and kneeled down together in the streets.
With the flames, the grace of God came down also in a manner,
never known before; and as the impression was general, so it
was lasting: It did not pass away with the storm; but the spirit
of seriousness, with that of grace and supplication, continued.
A prayer-meeting being appointed on Saturday evening, the
people flocked together; so that the preaching-house was more
than filled; and many were constrained to stand without the
door and windows. On Sunday morning, before the usual time
of Service, the church was quite filled. Such a sight was never
seen in that church before. The Rector himself was greatly
moved, and delivered a pressing, close sermon, with uncommon
earnestness. When I came on Wednesday, the same serious
ness remained on the generality of the people. I preached in
the evening at Wood-Green, whereamultitude flocked together,
on the Son of man coming in his glory. The word fell heavy
upon them, and many of their hearts were as melting wax.
Thursday, 17. At five they were still so eager to hear, that
the preaching-house would not near contain the congregation.
After preaching, four-and-thirty persons desired admission
into the society; every one of whom was (for the present, at
least) under very serious impressions: And most of them,
there is reason to hope, will bring forth fruit with patience.
In the evening I preached to a lovely congregation, at Stroud;
and on Tuesday afternoon came to Bristol.
Aug. 1783.] JOURNAL. 259
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I spent at Bath. Thurs
day, 24. I went with a few friends to Blase-Castle. The woods
on the side of the hill, cut through various directions, are the
pleasantest I ever saw, little inferior to the Leasowes; and, by
the beautiful prospects, far superior to Stow gardens. After
wards we took a view of Lord Clifford’s woods, at King's
Weston. They are amazingly beautiful : I have seen nothing
equal to them in the west of England, and very few in any
other parts. In the evening I read to the congregation an
account of our brethren in Holland, and many thanksgivings
were rendered to God on their account.
Tues. 29.--Our Conference began, at which two important
points were considered: First, the case of Birstal House; and,
Secondly, the state of Kingswood School. With regard to
the former, our brethren earnestly desired that I would go to
Birstal myself, believing this would be the most effectual way
of bringing the Trustees to reason. With regard to the latter,
we all agreed, that either the School should cease, or the Rules
of it be punctually observed: Particularly, that the children
should never play; and that a master should be always
present with them.
Tues. AUGUST 5.--Early in the morning I was seized with a
most impetuous flux. In a few hours it was joined by a violent
and almost continual cramp; first, in my feet, legs, thighs;
then, in my side and my throat. The case being judged
extreme, a grain and a half of opium was given me in three
doses: This speedily stopped the cramp; but, at the same time,
took away my speech, hearing, and power of motion; andlocked
me up from head to foot; so that I lay a mere log. I then sent
for Dr. Drummond, who from that time attended me twice a
day. For some days I was worse and worse; till, on Friday, I
was removed to Mr. Castleman's. Still my head was not
affected, and I had no pain, although in a continual fever. But
I continued slowly to recover, so that I could read or write
an hour or two at a time. On Wednesday, 13, I took a
vomit, which almost shook me to pieces; but, however, did me
good. Sunday, 17, and all the following week, my fever gra
dually abated; but I had a continual thirst, and little or no
increase of strength: Nevertheless, being unwilling to be idle,
on Saturday, 23, I spent an hour with the penitents; and,
finding myself no worse, on Sunday, 24, I preached at the
260 REv. J. wasLEY’s [Sept. 1783.
new Room, morning and afternoon. Finding my strength was
now in some measure restored, I determined to delay no
longer; but setting out on Monday, 25, reached Gloucester
in the afternoon: In the evening I preached in the Town
Hall; I believe, not in vain. Tuesday, 26. I went on to
Worcester, where many young people are just setting out in
the ways of God. I joined fifteen of them this afternoon to
the society; all of them, I believe, athirst for salvation. Wed
nesday, 27. I preached at Birmingham, and had a comfort
able season. Thursday, 28. I paid another visit to the amiable
family at Hilton-Hall. Friday, 29. About ten I preached
for the first time at Stafford, to a large and deeply attentive
congregation. It is now the day of small things here; but the
grain of mustard-seed may grow up into a great tree.
Hence I rode to Congleton. I had received abundance
of complaints against the Assistant of this Circuit, James
Rogers. Saturday, 30. I heard all the parties face to face,
and encouraged them all to speak their whole mind. I was sur
prised ; so much prejudice, anger, and bitterness, on so slight
occasions, I never saw. However, after they had had it out,
they were much softened, if not quite reconciled. Sunday, 31.
I preached in the new church at Macclesfield, both morning
and afternoon. I believe we had seven hundred communicants.
Mon. SEPTEMBER 1.--We clambered over the mountains to
Buxton. In the afternoon I preached in Fairfield church,
about half a mile from the town ; it was thoroughly filled with
serious and attentive hearers. Tuesday, 2. We went to Leeds,
where I was glad to find several Preachers.
Wed. 3.−I consulted the Preachers, how it was best to
proceed with the Trustees of Birstal House, to prevail upon
them to settle it on the Methodist plan. They all advised
me to begin by preaching there. Accordingly, I preached on
Thursday evening, and met the society. I preached again
in the morning. Friday, 5. About nine I met the nineteen
Trustees; and, after exhorting them to peace and love, said,
“All that I desire is, that this House may be settled on the
Methodist plan; and the same clause may be inserted in your
Deed which is inserted in the Deed of the new chapel in
London; viz., “In case the doctrine or practice of any
Preacher should, in the opinion of the major part of the
Trustees, be not conformable to Mr. W. ’s Sermons and
Oct. 1783.] JOURNAL. 261
Notes on the New Testament, on representing this, another
Preacher shall be sent within three months.’”
Five of the Trustees were willing to accept of our first
proposals; the rest were not willing.
Although I could not obtain the end proposed; and, in that
respect, had only my labour for my pains; yet I do not at all
repent of my journey: I have done my part; let others bear
their own burden. Going back nearly the same way I came,
on Saturday, 13, I reached Bristol. I had likewise good
reward for my labour, in the recovery of my health, by a
journey of five or six hundred miles.
On Wednesday, 17, and the two following days, I visited
several of the country societies; and found most of them, not
only increasing in number, but in the knowledge and love
of God.
Fri. 26.--Observing the deep poverty of many of our
brethren, I determined to do what I could for their relief. I
spoke severally to some that were in good circumstances, and
received about forty pounds. Next I inquired who were in
the most pressing want, and visited them at their own houses.
I was surprised to find no murmuring spirits among them,
but many that were truly happy in God; and all of them
appeared to be exceeding thankful for the scanty relief which
they received.
Sun. 28.-It being a fair day, I snatched the opportunity
of preaching abroad to twice or thrice as many as the Room
would have contained. Wednesday, October 1. I preached
at Bath, to such a congregation as I have not seen there of a
long season. All my leisure hours this week I employed in
visiting the remaining poor, and in begging for them.
Having collected about fifty pounds more, I was enabled to
relieve most of those that were in pressing distress.
Mon. 6.--Leaving the society in a more prosperous way than
it had been for several years, I preached in the Devizes about
noon, and at Sarum in the evening. Captain Webb lately
kindled a flame here, and it is not yet gone out. Several persons
were still rejoicing in God; and the people in general were
much quickened. Tuesday, 7. I found his preaching in the
street at Winchester had been blessed greatly. Many were
more or less convinced of sin, and several had found peace with
God. I never saw the preaching-house so crowded before with
serious and attentive hearers. So was that at Portsmouth also.
263 REv. J. wesley’s [Oct. 1783.
Wednesday, 8. We took a wherry for the Isle of Wight.
Before we were half over, the sea rose, and the water washed
over us. However, we got safe to Watton-Bridge, and then
walked on to Newport. There is much life among the people
here; and they walk worthy of their profession.
Thur. 9.--I went to Newtown, (two miles from Newport,)
supposed to be the oldest town in the isle; but its glory is
past ! The church lies in ruins, and the town has scarce
six houses remaining. However, the preaching-house was
thoroughly filled; and the people appeared to be all of one
rank; none rich and none extremely poor; but all were
extremely serious and attentive.
Fri. 10.-I crossed over to Southampton; and found two or
three there also who feared and loved God. Then I went to
Winchester, and had the pleasure of dining with Mr. Lowth,
and supping with Mrs. Blackwell. Her six lovely children are
in admirable order; it is a pleasure to see them. A Clergy
man having offered me his church, I purposed beginning at
five; but the key was not to be found; so I made a virtue
of necessity, and preached near the Cross-Street; probably
to double the congregation which would have been in the
church.
Many of the Dutch prisoners remaining here, I paid them a
short visit. When they were brought hither first, one of them
prayed with as many as desired it, and gave them a word of
exhortation. Presently one found peace with God, and joined
him in that labour of love. These increased, so that they
have now five exhorters: Many are justified, and many more
convinced of sin. About two hundred of them were met
together when I came: They first sung a hymn in their own
language; I then gave them a short exhortation in English,
for which they were extremely thankful.
Sat. 1].-Just at twelve (the same hour as at Bristol) I was
taken exceeding ill, and so continued till three. I then took
chaise, as I had appointed, and was better and better every
stage, and quite well when I came to London.
Mon. 13.--I preached at Wallingford. Tuesday, 14. I
went on to Oxford, and found both the congregation and
society increased in zeal as well as in number. Wednesday,
15. I came to Witney. The flame which was kindled here
by that providential storm of thunder and lightning, is not
extinguished ; but has continued ever since, with no discernible
Oct. 1783.] J () URNAL. 263
internission. The preaching-house is still too small for the
congregation. Thursday, 16. I preached at High-Wycomb;
and on Friday returned to London.
Sun. 19.--I took the diligence for Norwich, and preached
there the next evening, to more than the House would contain;
and both this night and the following, we sensibly felt that
God was in the midst of us... Wednesday, 22. I went to
Yarmouth. Often this poor society had been well nigh
shattered in pieces; first, by Benjamin Worship, then a
furious Calvinist, tearing away near half of them ; next, by
John Simpson turning Antinomian, and scattering most that
were left. It has pleased God, contrary to all human proba
bility, to raise a new society out of the dust; nay, and to
give them courage to build a new preaching-house, which is
well finished, and contains about five hundred persons. I
opened it this evening; and as many as could get in, seemed
to be deeply affected. Who knows but God is about to
repair the waste places, and to gather a people that shall be
scattered no more ?
Thur. 23.--We went to Lowestoft, where the people have
stood firm from the beginning. Observing in the evening, that
forty or fifty people were talking together, as soon as the service
was over, (a miserable custom that prevails in most places of
public worship, throughout England and Ireland,) I strongly
warned the congregation against it; as I had done those at
Norwich and Yarmouth. They received it in love; and the
next evening, all went silently away. But this warning must be
given again and again in every place, or it will not be effectual.
Sat. 25.--I preached in Lowestoft at five ; at eight to an
earnest, lively people at Cove; and at one to a more numerous,
but not more lively, congregation at Loddon. The most
numerous was that at Norwich in the evening, many of whom
were truly alive to God.
Sun. 26.--I gave the sacrament at seven ; at nine I
preached at Bear-Street, where I am in hopes considerable
good will be done. The most serious congregation in our
House we had at two ; but the most numerous at six; though
not above half of those that came could get in. Those that
could hear, did not lose their labour; for God “satisfied the
hungry with good things.”
Mon. 27.--I talked at large with M. F. Such a case I have
not known before. She has been in the society nearly from the
264. REV. J. W. ESLEY’s [Nov. 1783.
beginning. She found peace with God five-and-thirty years
ago; and the pure love of God a few years after. Above
twenty years she has been a Class and a Band Leader, and of
very eminent use. Ten months since she was accused of
drunkenness, and of revealing the secret of her friend. Being
informed of this, I wrote to Norwich, (as I then believed the
charge,) that she must be no longer a Leader, either of a band
or a class. The Preacher told her further, that, in his judg
ment, she was unfit to be a member of the society. Upon this
she gave up her ticket, together with the band and her class
papers. Immediately all her friends (of whom she seemed to
have a large number) forsook her at once. No one knew her,
or spoke to her. She was as a dead thing out of mind
On making a more particular inquiry, I found that Mrs.
W (formerly a common woman) had revealed her own
secret, to Dr. Hunt, and twenty people besides. So the first
accusation vanished into air. As to the second, I verily believe,
the drunkenness with which she was charged, was, in reality, the
falling down in a fit. So we have thrown away one of the most
useful Leaders we ever had, for these wonderful reasons !
Wed. 29.--I crossed over to Lynn, and found things much
better than I expected. The behaviour of Mr. G. , which
one would have imagined would have done much harm, had
rather dome good. People in general cried, “Let that bad
man go, they will do better without him.” And the House was
sufficiently crowded with serious hearers. November 1. I
returned to London.
In the two following weeks I visited the classes both in
London and the neighbouring societies. Sunday, 16. Being
much importuned, I preached in the evening at Mr. Maxfield's
chapel. But I dare not do so again, as it cannot contain one
third of that congregation at the new chapel.
Mon. 17.-I preached at Sevenoaks, and on Tuesday, 18,
at Mount-Ephraim, near Tunbridge-Wells. Wednesday, 19,
I came once more to the lovely family at Shoreham. A little
longer that vesserable old man is permitted to remain here,
that the flock may not be scattered.
When I was at Sevenoaks I made an odd remark. In the
year 1769, I weighed an hundred and twenty-two pounds. In
1783, I weighed not a pound more or less. I doubt whether
such another instance is to be found in Great Britain.
Mon. 24.--I preached at Canterbury, and again on Wednes
Jan. 1784.] JOURNAL. 265
day; on Tuesday, 25, at Dover; Thursday, 27, at Sheerness,
where Mr. Fox read Prayers, and I preached on those words
in the Second Lesson, “To-day, if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts.”
Fri. 28.--I returned to London. Tuesday, DECEMBER 2.
I married Mr. Rutherford and Miss Lydia Duplex. Wednes
day, 3. I took a little journey into Hertfordshire; and having
preached at Hinxworth, and Wrestlingworth, on Friday, 5, I
preached at Barnet, and on Saturday, 6, returned to London.
I now inquired more carefully and particularly into the
strange case of poor Mr. M. But the more I inquired, the
worse the matter appeared to be. It was plain, by the
evidence of many unexceptionable witnesses, that he had told
innumerable lies; affirming, denying, and affirming again!
And this man, who has lived above twenty years in a constant
course of lying and slandering, tells you, he enjoys constant
communion with God; and that nothing can make him
happier, but heaven
Thur. 18.--I spent two hours with that great man, Dr.
Johnson, who is sinking into the grave by a gentle decay.
Wednesday, 24. While we were dining at Mr. Blunt’s, his
servant-maid, ill of a sore throat, died. Saturday, 27. I
dined at Mr. Awbrey's, with Mr. Wynantz, son of the Dutch
merchant at whose house I met with Peter Böhler and his
brethren, forty-five years ago.
Wed. 31.-We concluded the year at the new chapel, with
the voice of praise and thanksgiving.
Thur. JANUARY 1, 1784.--I retired for two or three days
to Peckham. Sunday, 4. Though it rained violently, we
had, I believe, upwards of eighteen hundred people, at the
renewal of the Covenant: Many found an uncommon blessing
therein. I am sure I did, for one.
Tues. 6.--At noon I preached at Barking, and in the even
ing at Purfleet, to a people that were all alive. Wednesday, 7.
I went on to Colchester; and on Friday, 9, returned to London.
Mon. 12.--Desiring to help some that were in pressing
want, but not having any money left, I believed it was not
improper, in such a case, to desire help from God. A few
hours after, one from whom I expected nothing less, put ten
pounds into my hands.
Wed. 21.-Being vehemently accused, by a well-meaning
man, of very many things, particularly of covetousness and
266 REv. J. Wesley’s [March, 1784.
uncourteousness, I referred the matter to three of our brethren.
Truly in these articles, “I know nothing by myself. But he
that judgeth me is the Lord.”
Sat. 24.--I began visiting the classes in the town and
country. Sunday, 25. I preached in the afternoon in St.
George's, Southwark; a very large and commodious church.
Thursday, FEBRUARY 5. I went down to Nottingham, and
preached a charity sermon for the General Hospital. The
next day I returned to London. In the following week I
visited the country societies. Saturday, 14. I desired all our
Preachers to meet, and consider thoroughly the proposal of
sending Missionaries to the East Indies. After the matter
had been fully considered, we were unanimous in our judgment,
that we have no call thither yet, no invitation, no providential
opening of any kind.
Thur. 19.--I spent an agreeable hour with the modern Han
nibal, Pascal Paoli; probably the most accomplished General
that is now in the world. He is of a middle size, thin, well
shaped, genteel, and has something extremely striking in his
countenance. How much happier is he now, with his moderate
pension, than he was in the midst of his victories
On Saturday, having a leisure hour, I made an end of that
strange book, “Orlando Furioso.” Ariosto had doubtless an
uncommon genius, and subsequent poets have been greatly
indebted to him: Yet it is hard to say, which was the most
out of his senses, the hero or the poet. He has not the least
regard even to probability; his marvellous transcends all
conception. Astolpho's shield and horn, and voyage to the
moon, the lance that unhorses every one, the all-penetrating
sword, and I know not how many impenetrable helmets and
coats of mail, leaves transformed into ships, and into leaves
again,_stones turned into horses, and again into stones, are
such monstrous fictions as never appeared in the world before,
and, one would hope, never will again. O who, that is not
himself out of his senses, can compare Ariosto with Tasso !
Mon. MARCH 1.-I went to Newbury, and preached in the
evening to a large and deeply affected congregation. Tuesday,
2, and Wednesday, 3, I preached at Bath, and on Thursday,
4, went on to Bristol. Friday, 5. I talked at large with our
Masters in Kingswood School, who are now just such as I
wished for. At length the Rules of the House are punctually
observed, and the children are all in good order.
March, 1784.] JOURNAL. 267
Sat. 6.--I spent a few melancholy minutes at Mr. Hender
son's with the lost Louisa. She is now in a far more deplorable
case than ever. She used to be mild, though silly : But now
she is quite furious. I doubt the poor machine cannot be
repaired in this life.-
The next week I visited the classes at Bristol. Friday, 12,
being at Samuel Rayner's, in Bradford, I was convinced of two
vulgar errors; the one, that nightingales will not live in cages;
the other that they only sing a month or two in the year. He
has now three nightingales in cages; and they sing almost all
day long, from November to August. Saturday, 13. About
nine I preached at Trowbridge, where a large congregation
quietly attended. Returning to Bristol, I lodged once more
at E J--'s, a genuine old Methodist. God has lately
taken away her only brother, as well as her beloved sister.
But she was still able to say, “It is the Lord : Let him do
what seemeth him good.”
Mon. 15.--Leaving Bristol after preaching at five, in the
evening I preached at Stroud; where, to my surprise, I found
the morning preaching was given up, as also in the neighbour
ing places. If this be the case while I am alive, what must
it be when I am gone? Give up this, and Methodism too
will degenerate into a mere sect, only distinguished by some
opinions and modes of worship.
Tues. 16.--I preached in Painswick at noon, and at Glou
cester in the evening. The Room was full at five in the morn
ing, and both the Preachers and people promised to neglect the
early preaching no more. Wednesday, 17. We went to Chel
tenham, which I had not seen for many years. I preached at
noon to half a houseful of hearers, most of them cold and dead
enough. I expected to find the same at Tewkesbury, but was
agreeably disappointed. Not only the congregation was much
larger, but I admired their teachableness. On my mentioning
the impropriety of standing at prayer, and sitting while we were
singing praise to God, they all took advice; kneeling while we
prayed, and stood up while we sung Psalms.
Thur. 18.--We crossed over to Bengeworth, where Mr.
Cooper read Prayers, and I preached. Friday, 19. Being
informed that my chaise could pass part of the way to Broad
marston, I went boldly for a while, and then stuck fast. I
borrowed a horse, and went on. At five I preached in Pebworth
church, and at five in the morning in our own chapel at Broad
268 REv. J. Wesley’s [March, 1784.
marston. As we rode back to Bengeworth, the cold was so
intense, that it had an effect I never felt before, it made me
downright sick. However, I went on, and preached in the
church at eleven, and in the evening at Worcester. Sunday,
21. I preached to a crowded audience, in St. Andrew’s
church. The Vicar read Prayers, and afterwards told me
I should be welcome to the use of his church, whenever I
came to Worcester.
Mon. 22.--In the evening preached at Birmingham.
Tuesday, 23. I preached in the church at Quinton, to a con
gregation gathered from all parts. Not many appeared to be
unaffected; for the power of God was eminently present.
After preaching at various other places, on Saturday, 27, I
went to Madeley; and, at Mr. Fletcher's desire, revised his
Letters to Dr. Priestley. I think there is hardly another man
in England so fit to encounter him. Sunday, 28. Notwithstand
ing the severe weather, the church was more than filled. I
preached on part of the Epistle; (Heb. ix. 13, &c.;) in the
afternoon, on “the grace of God that bringeth salvation;”
and I believe God applied it to many hearts.
Mon. 29.--I gave an exhortation at Sheriff-Hales, in my way
to Stafford. When I came thither, I found no notice had been
given: So I had only a small company, in a deplorable hole,
formerly a stable. Hence we went to Lane-End, a village two
or three miles from Newcastle-under-Lyne. It was still pierc
ingly cold; but the preaching-house would not hold a fourth
part of the people. So I preached in the open air; the moon
giving us clear light, though not much heat. The House was
filled at five in the morning; and God again applied his word.
Tues. 30.-I preached in the new preaching-house at Henley
Green; but this was far too small to hold the congregation.
Indeed, this country is all on fire, and the flame is still spread
ing from village to village. The preaching-house at Newcastle
just held the congregation, many being kept away by the elec
tion; especially the Gentry. But still the poor heard the
Gospel preached, and received it with all readiness of mind.
Wed. 31.-I reached Burslem, where we had the first society
in the country; and it is still the largest, and the most in ear
nest. I was obliged to preach abroad. The House would but
just contain the societies at the love-feast; at which many, both
men and women, simply declared the wonderful works of God.
I did not find so lively a people at Congleton. Although the
April, 1784.] JOURNAL, 269
wounds made by prejudice were nearly healed, yet a faintness
and deadness remained. I found the same sad effects of preju
dice at Macclesfield: But there are so many here truly alive
to God, that his work goes on still; only not in so rapid a
manner as it might otherwise have done.
Sun. APRIL 4.--I preached at the new church, morning and
evening, to a London congregation. Monday, 5. About noon
I preached at Alpraham, to an unusually large congregation.
I was surprised, when I came to Chester, to find that there
also morning preaching was quite left off, for this worthy
reason: “Because the people will not come, or, at least, not
in the winter.” If so, the Methodists are a fallen people.
Here is proof. They have “lost their first love;” and they
never will or can recover it, till they “do the first works.”
As soon as I set foot in Georgia, I began preaching at five in
the morning; and every communicant, that is, every serious
person in the town, constantly attended throughout the year:
I mean, came every morning, winter and summer, unless in
the case of sickness. They did so till I left the province. In
the year 1738, when God began his great work in England, I
began preaching at the same hour, winter and summer, and
never wanted a congregation. If they will not attend now,
they have lost their zeal; and then, it cannot be denied, they
are a fallen people.
And, in the mean time, we are labouring to secure the
preaching-houses to the next generation . In the name of God,
let us, if possible, secure the present generation from drawing
back to perdition | Let all the Preachers that are still alive
to God join together as one man, fast and pray, lift up their
voice as a trumpet, be instant in season, out of season, to
convince them they are fallen; and exhort them instantly to
“repent, and do the first works:” This in particular, rising
in the morning, without which neither their souls nor bodies
can long remain in health.
Wed. 7.--I crossed over the water to Liverpool. Here I
found a people much alive to God; one cause of which was,
that they have preaching several mornings in a week, and
prayer-meetings on the rest; all of which they are careful to
attend. On Good-Friday, APRIL 9, I went to Warrington.
In the morning I read Prayers, preached, and administered
the Lord's Supper, to a serious congregation. I preached at
270 REv. J. WESLEY’s [April, 1784.
five again, and believe few were present who did not feel that
God was there of a truth.
Sat. 10.--I preached to a huge congregation at Manchester,
and to a far larger at ten in the morning, being Easter-Day.
It was supposed there were near a thousand communicants.
But hitherto the Lord has helped me in this respect also:
I have found no congregation which my voice could not
command.
Mon. 12.--I found a lovely congregation at Stockport, much
alive to God. So was that at Oldham the next day, which was
not perceptibly lessened, though it blew a storm, and poured
down with rain. Here a young woman, of unblamable character,
(otherwise I should not have given her any credit,) gave me a
remarkable account. She said, “I had totally lost the sight
of my right eye, when I dreamed one night, that our Saviour
appeared to me; that I fell at his feet, and he laid his hand
upon my right eye. Immediately I waked, and from that
moment have seen as well with that eye as with the other.”
I applied, to a very large congregation, the case of the
Rechabites. (Jer. xxxv.) I asked, 1. Does it appear that
these owed to Jonadab more than the Methodists owe to
me? 2. Are they as observant of my advices (although both
scriptural and rational; to instance only in dress and rising
early) as the Rechabites were of his advices 2 (Of drinking
no wine, and living in tents; which had neither Scripture nor
reason to support them l)
I think every member of the society at Bolton does take
my advice, with respect to other things, as well as with respect
to dress and rising early; in consequence of which they are
continually increasing in number as well as in grace.
Fri. 16.--I preached about ten at Wingate, a village five
or six miles from Bolton. I was constrained, by the multitude
of people, to preach abroad, though it was exceeding cold, on,
“All things are ready; come unto the marriage.” Truly the
people were ready too. They drank in every word.
In the evening we had a very uncommon congregation at
Wigan. Only one gentlewoman behaved “as she used to do
at church;” (so several afterwards informed me;) talking all
the time, though no one answered her | But the rest were
deeply attentive ; and, I trust, will not be forgetful hearers. I
had designed to go from hence to Blackburn; but hearing that
April, 1784.] JOURNAL. 27]
one of our society, near Preston, was at the point of death, I
turned a little out of my way, to spend half an hour with her.
I found Mrs. Nuttal, a lovely patient creature, praising God
continually, though worn away with pining sickness and long
continued pain. Having paid the last office of friendship here,
I went to Preston, and preached to a serious congregation. In
the evening I preached at Blackburn, where also the society is
lively, and continually increasing.
Sun. 18.--After preaching at five to a numerous congrega
tion, (but not one rich or well-dressed person among them,
either morning or evening ! Poor Blackburn ) I hastened on
to Gisburn. The church was so full that a few were obliged to
stand without the doors. The word was quick and powerful.
So it was afterward at Settle. Sufficient for this day was the
labour thereof.
Mon. 19.--I went on to Ambleside; where, as I was sitting
down to supper, I was informed, notice had been given of my
preaching, and that the congregation was waiting. I would not
disappoint them; but preached immediately on salvation by
faith. Among them were a gentleman and his wife, who gave
me a remarkable relation. She said she had often heard her
mother relate, what an intimate acquaintance had told her, that
her husband was concerned in the Rebellion of 1745. He was
tried at Carlisle, and found guilty. The evening before he was
to die, sitting and musing in her chair, she fell fast asleep. She
dreamed, one came to her, and said, “Go to such a part of the
wall, and among the loose stones you will find a key, which you
must carry to your husband.” She waked ; but, thinking it a
common dream, paid no attention to it. Presently she fell
asleep again, and dreamed the very same dream. She started
up, put on her cloak and hat, and went to that part of the wall,
and among the loose stones found a key. Having, with some
difficulty, procured admission into the gaol, she gave this to her
husband. It opened the door of his cell, as well as the lock
of the prison-door. So at midnight he escaped for life.
Tues. 20.--We went to Whitehaven, where there is a fairer
prospect than has been for many years. The society is united
in love, not conformed to the world, but labouring to experience
the full image of God, wherein they were created. The House
was filled in the evening, and much more the next, when we
had all the Church Ministers, and most of the Gentry in the
272 REv. J. wesley’s [April, 1784.
town; but they behaved with as much decency as if they had
been colliers.
Thur. 22.-I preached in the market-house at Cocker
mouth. In our way thence, we had some of the heaviest rain
I have seen in Europe. The Sessions being at Carlisle, I
could not have the Court-House; but we had a good oppor
tunity in our own House. Friday, 23. We travelled through
a lovely country to Longtown, the last town in England;
and one of the best built in it; for all the houses are new, from
one end to the other. The road from hence to Langholm is
delightfully pleasant, running mostly by the side of a clear
river. But it was past seven before we reached Selkirk.
Sat. 24.--We had frost in the morning, snow before seven,
piercing winds all day long, and in the afternoon vehement
hail; so that I did not wonder we had a small congregation
at Edinburgh in the evening.
Sun. 25.-I attended the Tolboothkirkat eleven. The sermon
was very sensible; but having no application, was no way likely
to awaken drowsy hearers. About four I preached at Lady
Maxwell’s, two or three miles from Edinburgh, and at six in our
own House. For once it was thoroughly filled. I preached on,
“God is a Spirit; and they that worship him, must worship him
in spirit and in truth.” I am amazed at this people. Use the
most cutting words, and apply them in the most pointed manner,
still they hear, but feel no more than the seats they sit upon
Mon. 26.--I went to Glasgow, and preached in the evening
to a very different congregation. Many attended in the
morning, although the morning preaching had been long
discontinued both here and at Edinburgh. In the evening
many were obliged to go away, the House not being able to
contain them. Wednesday, 28. We found the same incon
venience, but those who could get in found a remarkable
blessing. Thursday, 29. The House was thoroughly filled at
four; and the hearts of the people were as melting wax. After
wards I returned to Edinburgh, and in the evening the House
was well filled. So that we must not say, “The people of
Edinburgh love the word of God only on the Lord's day.”
Fri. 30.-We went to Perth; now but the shadow of what it
was, though it begins to lift up its head. It is certainly the
sweetest place in all North Britain, unless perhaps Dundee. I
preached in the Tolbooth, to a large and well-behaved congre
May, 1784.] JOURNAL. 273
gation. Many of them were present again at five in the morn
ing, MAY 1. I then went to Dundee, through the Carse of
Gowry, the fruitfullest valley in the kingdom. And I observe
a spirit of improvement prevails in Dundee, and all the coun
try round about it. Handsome houses spring up on every
side. Trees are planted in abundance. Wastes and com
mons are continually turned into meadows and fruitful fields.
There wants only a proportionable improvement in religion,
and this will be one of the happiest countries in Europe.
In the evening I preached in our own ground to a numerous
congregation: But the next afternoon to one far more
numerous; on whom I earnestly enforced, “How long halt
ye between two opinions?” Many of them seemed almost
persuaded to halt no longer: But God only knows the heart.
Mon. 3.-I was agreeably surprised at the improvement
of the land between Dundee and Arbroath. Our preaching
house at Arbroath was completely filled. I spoke exceeding
plain on the difference of building upon the sand, and building
upon the rock. Truly these “approve the things that are
excellent,” whether they practise them or no.
I found this to be a genuine Methodist society: They are
all thoroughly united to each other. They love and keep our
Rules; they long and expect to be perfected in love: If they
continue so to do, they will and must increase in number as
well as in grace.
Tues. 4.--I reached Aberdeen between four and five in the
afternoon. Wednesday, 5. I found the morning preaching had
been long discontinued: Yet the bands and the select society
were kept up. But many were faint and weak for want
of morning preaching and prayer-meetings, of which I found
scarce any traces in Scotland.
In the evening I talked largely with the Preachers, and
showed them the hurt it did both to them and the people, for
any one Preacher to stay six or eight weeks together in one
place. Neither can he find matter for preaching every morning
and evening, nor will the people come to hear him. Hence he
grows cold by lying in bed, and so do the people. Whereas,
if he never stays more than a fortnight together in one place,
he may find matter enough, and the people will gladly hear
him. They immediately drew up such a plan for this
Circuit, which they determined to pursue.
274 REv. W. wesley’s [May, 1784.
Thur. 6.--We had the largest congregation at five which
I have seen since I came into the kingdom. We set out
immediately after preaching, and reached Old-Meldrum
about ten. A servant of Lady Banff's was waiting for us
there, who desired I would take post-horses to Fort-Glen. In
two hours we reached an inn, which, the servant told us, was
four little miles from her house. So we made the best of our
way, and got thither in exactly three hours. All the family
received us with the most cordial affection. At seven I
preached to a small congregation, all of whom were seriously
attentive, and some, I believe, deeply affected.
Fri. 7.--I took a walk round about the town. I know not
when I have seen so pleasant a place. One part of the house
is an ancient castle, situated on the top of a little hill. At a
small distance runs a clear river, with a beautiful wood on its
banks. Close to it is a shady walk to the right, and another on
the left hand. On two sides of the house there is abundance
of wood: On the other, a wide prospect over fields and
meadows. About ten I preached again with much liberty
of spirit, on, “Love never faileth.” About two I left this
charming place, and made for Keith. But I know not how
we could have got thither, had not Lady Banff sent me
forward, through that miserable road, with four stout horses.
I preached about seven to the poor of this world: Not a silk
coat was seen among them: And to the greatest part of them
at five in the morning. And I did not at all regret my labour.
Sat. 8.--We reached the banks of the Spey. I suppose there
are few such rivers in Europe. The rapidity of it exceeds even
that of the Rhine: And it was now much swelled with melting
snow. However, we made shift to get over before ten; and
about twelve reached Elgin. Here I was received by a daugh
ter of good Mr. Plenderleith, late of Edinburgh; with whom
having spent an agreeable hour, I hastened toward Forres: But
we were soon at full stop again; the river Findhorn also was so
swollen, that we were afraid the ford was not passable. How
ever, having a good guide, we passed it without much difficulty.
I found Sir Lodowick Grant almost worn out. Never was a
visit more seasonable. By free and friendly conversation his
spirits were so raised, that I am in hopes it will lengthen his life.
Sun. 9.--I preached to a small company at noon, on,
“His commandments are not grievous.” As I was concluding,
May, 1784.] JOURNAL, 275
Colonel Grant and his lady came in : For whose sake I
began again, and lectured, as they call it, on the former part
of the fifteenth chapter of St. Luke. We had a larger
company in the afternoon, to whom I preached on “judgment
to come.” And this subject seemed to affect them most.
Mon. 10.-I set out for Inverness. I had sent Mr. M*Allum
before, on George Whitfield's horse, to give notice of my com
ing. Hereby I was obliged to take both George and Mrs.
M'Allum with me in my chaise. To ease the horses, we walked
forward from Nairn, ordering Richard to follow us, as soon as
they were fed : He did so, but there were two roads. So, as we
took one, and he the other, we walked about twelve miles and a
half of the way, through heavy rain. We then found Richard
waiting for us at a little ale-house, and drove on to Inverness.
But, blessed be God, I was no more tired than when I set out
from Nairn. I preached at seven to a far larger congregation
than I had seen here since I preached in the kirk. And surely the
labour was not in vain: For God sent a message to many hearts.
Tues. 11.--Notwithstanding the long discontinuance of
morning preaching, we had a large congregation at five. I
breakfasted at the first house I was invited to at Inverness,
where good Mr. M'Kenzie then lived. His three daughters
live in it now ; one of whom inherits all the spirit of her
father. In the afternoon we took a walk over the bridge, into
one of the pleasantest countries I have seen. It runs along
by the side of the clear river, and is well-cultivated and well
wooded. And here first we heard abundance of birds,
welcoming the return of spring. The congregation was larger
this evening than the last: And great part of them attended
in the morning. We had then a solemn parting, as we could
hardly expect to meet again in the present world.
Wed. 12.--I dined once more at Sir Lodowick Grant’s, whom
likewise I scarce expect to see any more. His lady is lately
gone to rest, and he seems to be swiftly following her. A church
being offered me at Elgin, in the evening I had a multitude of
hearers, whom I strongly exhorted to “seek the Lord while he
may be found.” Thursday, 13. We took a view of the poor
remains of the once-magnificent cathedral. By what ruins are
left, the workmanship appears to have been exquisitely fine. What
barbarians must they have been, who hastened the destruction
of this beautiful pile, by taking the lead off the roof!
276 REv. J. Wesley’s [May, 1784,
The church was again well filled in the evening, by those
who seemed to feel much more than the night before. In
consequence, the morning congregation was more than
doubled; and deep attention sat on every face. I do not
despair of good being done even here, provided the Preachers
be “sons of thunder.”
Fri. 14.--We saw, at a distance, the Duke of Gordon's new
house, six hundred and fifty feet in front. Well might the
Indian ask, “Are you white men no bigger than we red men?
Then why do you build such lofty houses?” The country
between this and Banff is well cultivated, and extremely plea
sant. About two I read Prayers and preached in the Episcopal
chapel at Banff, one of the neatest towns in the kingdom.
About ten I preached in Lady Banff's dining-room, at Fort
Glen, to a very serious, though genteel, congregation; and after
wards spent a most agreeable evening with the lovely family.
Sat. 15.--We set out early, and dimed at Aberdeen. On the
road I read Ewen Cameron's Translation of Fingal. I think
he has proved the authenticity of it beyond all reasonable contra
diction: But what a poet was Ossian Little inferior to either
Homer or Virgil; in some respects superior to both. And what
an hero was Fingal Far more humane than Hector himself,
whom we cannot excuse for murdering one that lay upon the
ground; and with whom Achilles, or even pious AEneas, is not
worthy to be named. But who is this excellent translator,
Ewen Cameron? Is not his other name Hugh Blair?
Sun. 16.--I went to Newburgh, a small fishing-town, fifteen
miles north of Aberdeen. Here is at present, according to its
bigness, the liveliest society in the kingdom. I preached here
in a kind of Square, to a multitude of people; and the whole
congregation appeared to be moved, and ready prepared for
the Lord.
At two in the afternoon Mr. Black read Prayers, and I
preached, in Trinity chapel. It was crowded with people
of all denominations. I preached from 1 Cor. xiii. 1, 2, 3, in
utter defiance of their common saying, “He is a good man,
though he has bad tempers.” Nay, if he has bad tempers,
he is no more a good man than the devil is a good angel.
At five I preached in our own chapel, exceeding crowded, on
the form and power of godliness. I am now clear of these
people, and can cheerfully commend them to God.
May, 1784.] JOURNAL. 277
Mon. 17.-I reached Arbroath, and inquired into that odd
event which occurred there in the latter end of the last war.
The famous Captain Fell came one afternoon to the side of
the town, and sent three men on shore, threatening to lay the
town in ashes, unless they sent him thirty thousand pounds.
That not being done, he began firing on the town the next
day, and continued it till night. But, perceiving the country
was alarmed, he sailed away the next day, having left some
hundred cannon-balls behind him; but not having hurt man,
woman, or child, or anything else, save one old barn-door.
Tues. 18.--I preached at Dundee. Wednesday, 19. I
crossed over the pleasant and fertile county of Fife, to Melval
House, the grand and beautiful seat of Lord Leven. He
was not at home, being gone to Edinburgh, as the King's
Commissioner; but the Countess was, with two of her daugh
ters, and both her sons-in-law. At their desire I preached in
the evening, on, “It is appointed unto man once to die;”
and I believe God made the application. Thursday, 20. It
blew a storm : Nevertheless, with some difficulty, we crossed
the Queen’s Ferry. Friday, 21. I examined the society, and
found about sixty members left. Many of these were truly
alive to God: So our labour here is not quite in vain. Satur
day, 22. I had some close conversation with L. M., who
appeared to be clearly saved from sin, although exceedingly
depressed by the tottering tenement of clay. About noon I
spent an hour with her poor scholars; forty of whom she has
provided withaserious master, who takes pains to instruct them
in the principles of religion, as well as in reading and writing.
A famous actress, just come down from London, (which, for
the honour of Scotland, is just during the sitting of the
Assembly,) stole away a great part of our congregation to-night.
How much wiser are these Scots than their forefathers
Sun. 23.−I went in the morning to the Tolbooth kirk; in
the afternoon, to the old Episcopal chapel. But they have lost
their glorying; they talked, the moment Service was done, as
if they had been in London. In the evening the Octagon
was well filled; and I applied, with all possible plainness,
“God is a Spirit; and they that worship him must worship
him in spirit and in truth.”
Mon. 24.--I preached at Dunbar. Tuesday, 25. I spent an
hour with Mr. and Mrs. F., a woman every way accomplished.
27 S Rev. J. WESLEY’s [June, 1784.
Neither of them had ever yet heard a sermon out of the kirk;
but they ventured that evening; and I am in hope they did
not hear in vain. Wednesday, 26. We went on to Berwick
upon-Tweed. The congregation in the Town-Hall was very
numerous. So it was likewise at five in the morning.
Thursday, 27. We travelled through a delightful country to
Kelso. Here the two Seceding Ministers have taken true
pains to frighten the people from hearing us, by retailing all
the ribaldry of Mr. Cudworth, Toplady, and Rowland Hill.
But God has called one of them to his account already, and in
a fearful manner. As no house could contain the congregation,
I preached in the church-yard; and a more decent behaviour
I have scarce ever seen. Afterwards we walked to the Duke
of Roxburgh's seat, about half a mile from the town, finely
situated on a rising ground, near the ruins of Roxburgh
Castle. It has a noble Castle; the front and the offices
round, make it look like a little town. Most of the apart
ments within are finished in an elegant, but not in a costly,
manner. I doubt whether two of Mr. Lascelles's rooms at
Harewood House, did not cost more in furnishing, than twenty
of these. But the Duke's house is far larger, containing no
less than forty bed-chambers. But it is not near finished yet,
nor probably will be till the owner is no more seen.
Fri. 28.--I entered into England once more, and in the
evening preached in the Town-Hall, at Alnwick. Saturday,
29. I should have preached in the Town-Hall, at Morpeth;
but it was pre-engaged by a company of strolling players.
So we retired into our own preaching-house. In the afternoon
I went on to Newcastle.
MAY 30.--(Being Whitsunday.) The rain obliged us to be
in the Orphan-House, both morning and evening; but in the
afternoon I was forced to preach abroad at the Fell, by the
multitudes that flocked together; partly moved by the death
of William Bell and his wife, one so soon after the other.
Tues. JUNE 1.--About nine I preached to a large number
of the poor people at Howden Pans; at noon, in North-Shields;
and in the evening, at Newcastle; where I had now great
satisfaction, the congregation, both morning and evening,
being larger than they had been for many years, and the
society being much alive, and in great peace and harmony.
Friday, 4. I went over to Sunderland, and found the work
June, 1784.] JOURNAL. 279
of God here also in a prosperous state. Saturday, 5. I saw
as many of the people, sick or well, as I could, and was much
comforted among them. Sunday, 6. I preached at eight in
the Room ; at eleven in Monk-Wearmouth church. I
purposed preaching abroad at Newcastle in the evening, but
the weather would not permit : So I preached in the House,
on, “This is the record, that God hath given unto us eternal
life, and this life is in his Son.”
Mon. 7.--About noon I preached at Anham ; and in the
evening in the Town-Hall at Hartlepool, where I had not been
for sixteen years.
Tues. 8.--I came to Stockton-upon-Tees. Here I found an
uncommon work of God among the children. Many of them
from six to fourteen were under serious impressions, and ear
nestly desirous to save their souls. There were upwards of
sixty who constantly came to be examined, and appeared to be
greatly awakened. I preached at noon, on, “The kingdom
of heavenis at hand;” and the people seemed to feel every word.
As soon as I came down from the desk, I was enclosed by a
body of children; one of whom, and another, sunk down upon
their knees, until they were all kneeling: So I kneeled down
myself, and began praying for them. Abundance of people ran
back into the House. The fire kindled, and ran from heart to
heart, till few, if any, were unaffected. Is not this a new thing
in the earth P God begins his work in children. Thus it has
been also in Cornwall, Manchester, and Epworth. Thus the
flame spreads to those of riper years; till at length they all
know him, and praise him from the least unto the greatest.
Wed. 9.-I went to Barnard-Castle. Here I was informed,
that my old school-fellow, Mr. Fielding, and his wife, were
gone to rest. His son, not choosing to live there, had let his
lovely house to a stranger: So in a little time his very name
and memory will be lost !
Thur. 10.-After preaching at five, I took horse for the
Dales, and about eight preached at Cutherston. Here I had
the pleasure of seeing some of our brethren, who had been
long at variance, cordially reconciled. Hence we rode
through rain and wind to Newbiggen in Teesdale. Being
but a poor horseman, and having a rough horse, I had just
strength for my journey, and nome to spare; but after resting
awhile. I preached without any weariness.
280 REv. J. W.ESLEY’s [June, 1784.
Having then procured an easier horse, I rode over the great
mountain into Weardale. But I found not my old host: Good
Stephen Watson was removed to Abraham's bosom. So was
that mother in Israel, Jane Nattres; (before Salkeld;) the great
instrument of that amazing work among the children. But God
is with them still: Most of the Leaders and many of the people
are much alive to God; as we found in the evening, when we
had such a shower of grace as I have seldom known.
Fri. 11.--About ten, riding through a village called Middle
ton, I was desired to preach there. So I began in the street
without delay. A large number of people came together, and
received the word with gladness. Afterwards we rode at leisure
to Barnard-Castle; and on Saturday, 12, to Darlington.
Sun. 13.--We had a sound, useful sermon at Church. At
eight I preached in our own Room, designing to preach abroad
in the afternoon; but the rain prevented. Monday, 14. About
noon I preached at Northallerton; and, I believe, God touched
many hearts: As also at Thirsk, where I preached in the
evening to an attentive congregation.
Tues. 15.--I preached once more to my old friends at
Osmotherley. About noon I preached at Potto; and in the
evening at Hutton-Rudby, where we had a glorious oppor
tunity: Some great persons who were present seemed to be
struck, and almost persuaded to be Christians. Wednesday,
16. I preached in Stokesley about eight; in Guisborough at
noon; and in the evening at Whitby.
The morning congregation filled the House. Indeed the
society here may be a pattern to all in England. They despise
all ornaments but good works, together with a meek and quiet
spirit. I did not see a ruffle, no, nor a fashionable cap, among
them; though many of them are in easy circumstances. I
preached at the market-place in the evening, where were at
least thrice as many as the House could contain.
Sat. 19.--I met such a select society as I have not seen
since I left London. They were about forty, of whom I did
not find one who had not a clear witness of being saved from
inbred sin. Several of them had lost it for a season, but could
never rest till they had recovered it. And every one of them
seemed now to walk in the full light of God’s countenance.
About one I preached to another congregation of plain
people at Robin Hood's Bay. Here was the first society in
June, 1784.] JOURNAL. 281
all these parts, several years before there was any in Whitby.
But their continual jars with each other prevented their
increase either in grace or number. At present they seem to
be all at peace : So I hope we shall now have joy over them.
In the evening I preached to a large congregation at Scar
borough. Sunday, 20. The new Vicar showed plainly, why he
refused those who desired the liberty for me to preach in his
church. A keener sermon I never heard. So all I have done
to persuade the people to attend the church is overturned at
once And all who preach thus, will drive the Methodists from
the church, in spite of all that I can do. I preached in the
evening, on 1 Cor. xiii. 1, 2, 3; and God mightily confirmed
his word, applying it to the hearts of many of the hearers.
Mon. 21.-The rain drove us into the House at Bridling
ton. Tuesday, 22. We stopped at a little town, where Mr.
Osbaldeston lately lived, a gentleman of large fortune, whose
lady was as gay and fashionable as any; but suddenly she
ran from east to west; she parted with all her clothes, dressed
like a servant, and scarce allowed herself the necessaries of life.
But who can convince her that she is going too far? I fear,
nothing less than Omnipotence.
About one I preached to a large and remarkably serious
congregation at Beverley; about six, at Hull. Afterwards, I
met the society, and strongly exhorted them to “press on to
the prize of their high calling.” Thursday, 24. I preached
about one at Pocklington; and in the evening at York,
where I enforced, “Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shalt thou serve.” Friday, 25. Many were in
tears, and a fire seemed to run through the whole congre
gation, while I opened that scripture, “They shall rest in
their beds, each one walking in his uprightness.” Such
another opportunity we had in the evening, while I was
explaining the words of our Lord to the Centurion, “Go thy
way; and as thou hast believed, so be it done unto thee.”
Sat. 26.-About two I preached at Thorne, and inquired
what fruit remained of the great work of God there. Some,
I found, had drawn back to their sins; but many held fast
what they received. Hence I rode to Epworth, which I still
love beyond most places in the world. In the evening I
besought all them that had been so highly favoured, “not to
receive the grace of God in vain.”
282 REv. J. Wesley’s [June, 1784.
Sun. 27.--I preached at Misterton, at eight; and at
Overthorpe about one. At four I took my stand in Epworth
market-place, and preached on those words in the Gospel
for the day, “There is joy in heaven over one sinner that
repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons that
need no repentance.” It seemed as if very few, if any, of
the sinners then present were unmoved.
Mon. 28.--I inquired into the state of the work of God which
was so remarkable two years ago. It is not yet at an end; but
there has been a grievous decay, owing to several causes: 1.
The Preachers that followed Thomas Tattershall were neither
so zealous nor so diligent as he had been. 2. The two Leaders
to whom the young men and lads were committed, went up and
down to preach, and so left them in a great measure to them
selves; or, rather, to the world and the devil. 3. The two
women who were the most useful of all others, forsook them;
the one leaving town, and the other leaving God. 4. The fac
tories which employed so many of the children failed, so that all
of them were scattered abroad. 5. The meetings of the child
ren by the Preachers were discontinued; so their love soon
grew cold; and as they rose into men and women, foolish desires
entered, and destroyed all the grace they had left. Nevertheless
great part of them stood firm, especially the young maidens,
and still adorn their profession. This day I met the children
myself, and found some of them still alive to God. And I do
not doubt, but if the Preachers are zealous and active, they
will recover most of those that have been scattered.
To-day I entered on my eighty-second year, and found
myself just as strong to labour, and as fit for any exercise of
body or mind, as I was forty years ago. I do not impute this
to second causes, but to the Sovereign Lord of all. It is He
who bids the sun of life stand still, so long as it pleaseth him.
I am as strong at eighty-one, as I was at twenty-one; but
abundantly more healthy, being a stranger to the head-ache,
tooth-ache, and other bodily disorders which attended me in
my youth. We can only say, “The Lord reigneth !” While
we live, let us live to him.-
In the afternoon I went to Gainsborough, and willingly
accepted the offer of Mr. Dean’s chapel. The audience was
large, and seemed much affected: Possibly some good may be
done even at Gainsborough Tuesday, 29. I preached in the
July, 1784.j JOURNAL. 283
street at Scotter, to a large and deeply attentive congregation.
It was a solemn and comfortable season. In the evening I
read Prayers and preached in Owstone church; and again in
the morning. Wednesday, 30. In the evening I preached at
Epworth. In the residue of the week, I preached morning
and evening in several of the neighbouring towns.
Sun. JULY 4.--I read prayers and preached in Owstone
church, so filled as probably it never was before; and believe
every one, awakened or unawakened, felt that God was there.
The congregation in the afternoon, at Epworth market-place,
was thought to be larger than ever it was before; and great
was the Holy One of Israel in the midst of them.
Mon. 5.--At twelve I preached in the elegant House
at Doncaster, for once pretty well filled; and spoke more
strongly, indeed more roughly, than I am accustomed to do.
It was sultry hot (as it has been once or twice before) while
we went to Rotherham, where I preached abroad to a larger
congregation, both of rich and poor, than even at Epworth;
and earnestly enforced on those who are called believers, “By
their fruits ye shall know them.”
Tues. 6.--I joined again the select society, which was fallen
in pieces; and prayed them to be wiser for the time to come.
Ibreakfasted at that amiable old man’s, Mr. Sparrow; elder bro
ther to his twin-soul whom I knew at Westminster. Thence I
went on to Sheffield, where the society is increased to near some
hundred members. How swiftly does the work of God spread
among those who earn their bread by the sweat of their brow !
Wed. 7.--It was supposed there were a thousand persons
present at five in the morning. A young gentlewoman was
with us at breakfast, who was mourning and refused to be
comforted. We prayed for her in faith, and in a few hours
she was enabled to rejoice in God her Saviour. In the
afternoon the heat was scarce supportable, and it seemed to
increase every hour; but between two and three in the
morning, Thursday, 8, came a violent storm, followed by
uncommon thunder, and a flood of rain, which continued about
three hours; this entirely cooled the air, and, ceasing just
as we set out, left us a pleasant journey to Wakefield.
I recommended to the congregation here, (and afterwards
many other places,) the example of the people in Holland,
(at least, wherever I have been,) who never talk in a place
284 REv. J. Wesley’s [July, 1784.
of public worship, either before or after the service. They took
my advice. None courtesied, or bowed, or spoke to any one;
but went out in as decent a manner, and in as deep silence,
as any I saw at Rotterdam or Utrecht.
Fri. 9.--I preached at Huddersfield in the morning; at
Longwood-House, at noon; and in the evening, at Halifax.
Sunday, 11. I preached in the morning at Greetland-House;
at one, and in the evening, at Halifax. The House would
in nowise contain the people; yet the wind was so high, that
I could not preach abroad.
Mon. 12.-Mr. Sutcliffe read Prayers, and I preached at
Heptonstall, where many poor souls were refreshed. Between
one and two I preached in Todmorden church; and, at five,
in our own preaching-house, boldly situated on the steep
ascent of a tall mountain.
Tues. 13.−I went to Burnley, a place which had been tried
for many years, but without effect. It seems, the time was
now come. High and low, rich and poor, now flocked together
from all quarters; and all were eager to hear, except one man,
who was the Town-crier. He began to bawl amain, till his
wife ran to him, and literally stopped his noise: She seized
him with one hand, and clapped the other upon his mouth, so
that he could not get out one word. God then began a work,
which, I am persuaded, will not soon come to an end. Wed
nesday, 14. I preached at Colne. Thursday, 15. I retired
to Otley, and rested two days. Sunday, 18. I preached,
morning and afternoon, in Bingley church; but it would not
near contain the congregation. Before Service I stepped
into the Sunday-school, which contains two hundred and forty
children, taught every Sunday by several masters, and super
intended by the Curate. So, many children in one parish
are restrained from open sin, and taught a little good manners,
at least, as well as to read the Bible. I find these schools
springing up wherever I go. Perhaps God may have a
deeper end therein, than men are aware of Who knows but
some of these schools may become nurseries for Christians?
Tues. 20.--Though it rained all day, in the morning we
had a good congregation at five. Wednesday, 21. I met the
society, and found but one or two of the original members,
most of them being gone to Abraham's bosom. I was a little
surprised to find that only two or three of the rest had stood
Aug. 1784.] JOURNAL. 285
fast in the glorious liberty. But, indeed, most of them
recovered their loss four years ago.
Thur. 22.--Although it rained, yet I met the congregation
in the morning, and most of them were athirst for full
salvation. Friday, 23. Abundance of people were present at
five in the morning, and such a company of children as I
have hardly seen in England.
Sat. 24.--In the evening I went to Hanging-Heaton, a little
village near Dewsbury. Some months since, an uncommon
work of God broke out here;--the whole town was in a flame.
There are now about two hundred in the society, and very few
that do not know God. I was obliged to preach abroad, by
the multitude that flocked together; and many of them found
that God was there, to their unspeakable comfort.
Sun. 25.-I preached to several thousands at Birstal, and to,
at least, as many at Leeds. Tuesday, 27. Our Conference
began; at which four of our brethren, after long debate, (in
which Mr. Fletcher took much pains,) acknowledged their fault,
and all that was past was forgotten. Thursday, 29, being the
public Thanksgiving Day, as there was not room for usin the old
church, I read Prayers, as well as preached, at our Room. I
admired the whole Service for the day. The Prayers, Scrip
tures, and every part of it, pointed at one thing: “Beloved, if
God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.” Having
five Clergymento assist me, we administered the Lord's Supper,
as was supposed, to sixteen or seventeen hundred persons.
Sun. AUGUST 1.-We were fifteen Clergymen at the old
church.
Tues. 3.-Our Conference concluded in much love, to the
great disappointment of all. This evening I went as far as
Halifax, and the next day to Manchester. Thursday, 5. We
set out early, but, being obliged to go round about, could not
reach Shrewsbury till half-past seven. I began preaching
immediately, in memory of good John Appleton, lately called
away, on, “Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with
thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge,
nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.” Friday, 6. I
preached at Birmingham ; and on Saturday, 7, at Worcester.
Sun. 8.-I preached in the afternoon in St. Andrew’s church,
and was agreeably surprised to observe the congregation deeply
attentive, while I applied the story of Dives and Lazarus.
286 Rev. J. wesley’s [Aug. 1784.
Mon. 9.--I rode over Malvern-Hills, which affords one of
the finest prospects in the kingdom, to Ledbury; then, through
miserable roads, to Ross. I preached in the evening at Mon
mouth, to a very quiet and civil congregation. Tumults were
now at an end, as I lodged at the house of a gentleman whom
none cared to oppose; and even in the morning we had a
large congregation, both of rich and poor.
Tues. 10.-I took a walk to what is called the Bowling
Green House, not a mile from the town. I have hardly seen
such a place before. A gravel-walk leads through the most
beautiful meadows, surrounded on all sides by fruitful hills, to
a gently-rising ground, on the top of which is a smooth Green,
on which the Gentry of the town frequently spend the evening
in dancing. From hence spread various walks, bordered with
flowers; one of which leads down to the river, on the back of
which runs another walk whose artless shades are not pene
trated by the sun. These are full as beautiful in their kind, as
even the hanging-woods at Brecknock. Wednesday, 11. It
was with some difficulty that I broke from this affectionate
people, and went on, through a most lovely country, to Brecon.
Thur. 12.--I found the little flock were in great peace, and
increasing in number as well as in strength. I preached in
the Town-Hall. I never saw such a congregation in Brecknock
before; no, not even when I preached abroad. And I scarce
ever found the power of God so present. It seemed as if every
one must know the Lord, from the least to the greatest.
Fri. 13.--We went on to Carmarthen. After preaching, I
advised all the audience to copy after the decent behaviour of
the Hollanders, in and after public worship. They all took my
advice; none opened their lipstill they came into the open air.
Saturday, 14, was the hottest day we have had this summer.
We reached Tenby soon after one. After dinner we took a
walk through the town. I think there is not such a town in
Dngland. It is the Killmallock of Great Britain. Two-thirds
of the ancient town are either in ruins, or vanished away. In
the evening I preached in the street, to a large congregation
of rich and poor, all quiet and attentive. I cannot but think,
salvation is at length come to this town also. I preached again
in the morning, Sunday, 15, and the word seemed to sink
into the hearts of the hearers. Thence we went by Pembroke
to St. Daniel’s. It was a comfortable season. We had such
Aug. 1784.] JOURNAL. 287
another at Pembroke in the evening. Many mourned after
God, and many rejoiced with joy unspeakable.
Mon. 16.--I preached at Haverfordwest. Tuesday, 17.
We rode over to Roach, eight miles from Haverford. The new
preaching-house was pretty well filled; and I was glad to find
that a little ride did me no harm. Wednesday, 18. I went to
Admiral Vaughan's, at Tracoon, one of the pieasantest seats
in Great Britain. The house is embosomed in lofty woods,
and does not appear till you drop down upon it. The
Admiral governs his family, as he did in his ship, with the
utmost punctuality. The bell rings, and all attend without
delay; whether at meals, or at morning and evening prayer.
I preached at seven, on Phil. iii. 8; and spent the evening in
serious conversation.
Thur. 19.-I went on to Mr. Bowen's at Llyngwair; another
most agreeable place; but more so because of the company, L
Mr. and Mrs. Bowen, his brother, and six of their eleven child
ren, two of whom are lately come from the University. Friday,
20. About eight I preached in the church at Newport, and
spoke strong words, if haply some might awake out of sleep.
Thence we went to Haverfordwest; it being the day when the
Bishop held his visitation. As I was returning in the afternoon
from visiting some of the poor people, a carriage in the street
obliged me to walk very near a Clergyman, who made me a low
bow : I did the same to him; though I did not then know the
Bishop; who has indeed won the hearts of the people in
general by his courteous and obliging behaviour.
Sun. 22.-I heard a good sermon in the church at Carmar
then, (being the Assize sermon,) on, “There is no power but of
God.” In the evening I preached in the market-place, to, I
think, the largest congregation I ever saw in Wales. Thurs
day, 26. On the road I read over Voltaire's Memoirs of him
self. Certainly never was a more consummate coxcomb! But
even his character is less horrid than that of his royal hero !
Surely so unnatural a brute never disgraced a throne before
Cedite, Romani Catamiti / Cedite, Grail /* A monster
that made it a fixed rule to let no woman and no Priest enter
his palace; that not only gloried in the constant practice
of Sodomy himself, but made it free for all his subjects 1
* Ye Catamites among the Greeks and Romans, concede to this wretch the
palm of criminality.--EDIT.
288 REv. J. wesley’s [Sept. 1784.
What a pity that his father had not beheaded him in his youth,
and saved him from all this sin and shame !
In the evening I preached in the Town-Hall at Cardiff, and
showed the scriptural meaning of that much-mistaken word,
“A Christian.” Friday, 27. I preached at Newport. I
hardly know such another place; the people hear, and hear,
and are as much moved as the benches they sit upon. I
spoke as strong as I possibly could, on, “Awake, thou that
sleepest;” and I judged, from the number who attended at
five in the morning, that it was not all lost labour.
Sat. 28.--Being informed the boat would pass at eight, we
hastened to the New-Passage : But we were time enough; for
it did not set out till past six in the evening. However, we got
into the boat about seven, and before nine reached Bristol.
Tues. 31.--Dr. Coke, Mr. Whatcoat, and Mr. Vasey, came
down from London, in order to embark for America.
Wed. SEPTEMBER 1.--Being now clear in my own mind, I
took a step which I had long weighed in my mind, and
appointed Mr. Whatcoat and Mr. Vasey to go and serve
the desolate sheep in America. Thursday, 2. I added to
them three more; which, I verily believe, will be much to
the glory of God. Friday, 3. I preached at Guinea-Street;
and the word of God was with power; in consequence of
which there was a large congregation at five in the morning,
although they had not been accustomed before to any service
at that hour. Saturday, 4. In the evening I preached at
Bath. Sunday, 5. I read Prayers, preached, and administered
the sacrament, to a large congregation; but it was larger in
the afternoon, and largest of all in the evening, when I
opened and applied, “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy
self.” And many were laid in the balance and found wanting,
even of those who had often appealed to this very rule.
Wed. 8.--I preached at Kendalshire, where I do not remem
ber to have been for near forty years. On the two following
days, I preached at Chelton and Coleford. After preaching to
an earnest congregation at Coleford, I met the society. They
contained themselves pretty well during the exhortation; but
when I began to pray, the flame broke out. Many cried
aloud, many sunk to the ground, many trembled exceedingly;
but all seemed to be quite athirst for God, and penetrated by
the presence of his power.
Sept. 1784.] JOURNAL. 289
Sun. 12.--Dr. Coke read Prayers, and I preached, in the
new Room. Afterward I hastened to Kingswood, and
preached under the shade of that double row of trees which
I planted about forty years ago. How little did any one then
think that they would answer such an intention | The sun
shone as hot as it used to do even in Georgia; but his rays
could not pierce our canopy; and our Lord, meantime, shone
upon many souls, and refreshed them that were weary.
Mon. 13.−I visited one that was confined to her bed, and
in much pain, yet unspeakably happy, rejoicing evermore,
praying without ceasing, and in everything giving thanks;
yea, and testifying that she had enjoyed the same happiness,
without any intermission, for two-and-twenty years.
Tues. 14.--I preached at Bath and Bradford; Wednesday,
15, at Trowbridge and Frome. Thursday, 16. I went to
Ditchet, a village near Castle-Carey, where I found a friendly,
hospitable family. I preached in the evening to a numerous
and earnest congregation. Friday, 17. The House would not
contain half the people. Hence we passed through a delightful
country to the Nunnery, a mere elegant trifle, near King
Alfred's Tower; a lofty, triangular building, standing in the
height of the country, on the very, spot (as is supposed) where
he drew up his army against the Danes. About eleven I
preached at Castle-Carey, to a quiet and attentive multitude.
In the evening I preached at Shepton-Mallet, where the people
at length know the day of their visitation. Saturday, 18. I
preached in the neat, cheerful church at Midsummer-Norton.
Monday, 20, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I met the classes;
but found no increase in the society. No wonder, for disci
pline had been quite neglected; and without this, little good
can be done among the Methodists. Thursday, 23. I
preached at Paulton about one; and at Pensford in the
evening. The gentlemen at Chew-Magna having sent me
word I was welcome to preach in the church, I went thither the
next morning; but they now sent me word they had changed
their minds; so I preached in our own preaching-house, on,
“If we let him alone, all men will believe on him.”
Thur. 30.-I had a long conversation with John M*Geary,
one of our American Preachers, just come to England. He
gave a pleasing account of the work of God there continually
increasing, and vehemently importuned me to pay one more
290 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Oct. 1784.
visit to America before I die. Nay, I shall pay no more
visits to new worlds, till I go to the world of spirits.
Sat. October 2.--It pleased God once more to pour out his
Spirit on the family at Kingswood. Many of the children were
much affected. I talked particularly with some who desired
to partake of the Lord's Supper. They did so the next morn
ing. Afterwards I spent a little time with all the children;
and easily observed an uncommon awe resting upon them all.
In the evening we renewed our covenant with God in the
new Room at Bristol. It was supposed we had a thousand
communicants; and I believe none went empty away.
Mon. 4.--I set out for London. About eleven I preached
at the Devizes; and in the evening at Sarum. A grievous
stumbling-block was lately thrown in the way of this poor
people. A young gentlewoman, after being deeply convinced
of sin, found peace with God in a glorious manner. She was
unspeakably happy; but, not long after, suddenly fell into
black despair, and afterwards into melancholy madness,
wherein she continued about two years. Here was an
occasion of offence for them that sought occasion, which they
took care to improve.
Wed. 6.--About eleven I preached at Winchester; and in
the evening at Portsmouth-Common. Those who could not
get in, at first made a little noise; but in a short time all was
quiet. Thursday, 7. I crossed over to the Isle of Wight. In
the afternoon I preached at Newtown, once the largest town
in the Isle; but now not having six houses together. In the
evening all the Ministers, and most of the Gentry at New
port, attended the preaching. Who hath warned them to flee
from the wrath to come? O may many “bring forth fruit
with patience 1” Friday, 8. We returned to Portsmouth
Common; and Saturday, 9, to London.
Mon. 18.--I set out for Oxfordshire; and in the evening
preached at Wallingford. Tuesday, 19. I spent an hour at
Lord Harcourt’s seat, near Newnham; one of the pleasantest
spots I have seen. It stands on a gently-rising hill, and
commands a most delightful prospect. The rooms are not so
grand as some, but elegant in the highest degree. So is also
the front of the house, and what is called the flower-garden;
a small inclosure, surrounded by lofty trees, and filled with
all the beauties that nature and art can give.
The House at Oxford was thoroughly filled; and students as
Nov. 1784.] JOURNAL. 291
well as townsmen were deeply serious. Thursday, 21. I
preached at Witney, on, “As thou hast believed, so be it
done unto thee.” We had a large congregation at five in the
morning; at twelve I met the children, and was pleased to
find that the impression which was made on them by the
storm last year, is not yet worn out; and the whole society,
still double to what it was, appears to be much in earnest.
After preaching in the evening, I met the select society,
and found many of them who for several years have lost
nothing of what they had received, but do still love God with
all their heart; and, in consequence, “rejoice evermore, pray
without ceasing, and in everything give thanks.” Friday, 22.
I preached at High-Wycomb about noon; and in the after
noon went on to London.
Sun. 24.--I preached at Shadwell church, which was exceed
ingly crowded with rich and poor, who all seemed to receive
the truth in love. In the evening I took coach, and the next
evening preached at Norwich. Afterwards I advised the peo
ple to go away in silence; and they did so: Neither man nor
woman spoke till they were out of the House. The following
days I visited the other societies in the Circuit; and on Tues
day, November 2, returned to London.
Fri. 5.--We had a solemn watch-night. Saturday, 6. I was
an hour or two in conversation with that truly great man, Pascal
Paoli; who is a tall, well-made, graceful man, about sixty years
of age; but he does not look to be above forty. He appears to
have a real regard for the public good, and much of the fear
of God. He has a strong understanding, and seemed to be
acquainted with every branch of polite literature. On my
saying he had met with much the same treatment with that of
an ancient lover of his country, Hannibal, he immediately an
swered, “But I have never yet met with a King of Bithynia.”
Mon. 8.--This week I visited the societies near London; a
very heavy, but necessary, work. Thursday, 18. I visited
two persons in Newgate, who were under sentence of death.
They seemed to be in an excellent temper, calmly resigned to
the will of God. But how much stress can be reasonably laid
on such impressions, it is hard to say: So often have I known
them vanish away as soon as ever the expectation of death
was removed.
Sal. 20.-At three in the morning two or three men broke
292 REv. J. wesley’s [Nov. 1784.
into our house, through the kitchen-window. Thence they
came up into the parlour, and broke open Mr. Moore's bureau,
where they found two or three pounds: The night before I
had prevented his leaving there seventy pounds, which he had
just received. They next broke open the cupboard, and took
away some silver spoons. Just at this time the alarum, which
Mr. Moore, by mistake, had set for half past three, (instead
of four,) went off, as it usually did, with a thundering noise.
At this the thieves ran away with all speed; though their
work was not half done; and the whole damage which we
sustained scarce amounted to six pounds.
Mon. 22.-I preached at Northampton; and on Tuesday,
23, at Whittlebury. Here my servant was seized with a fever,
attended with eruptions all over, as big as pepper-corns. I
took knowledge of the Prickly-heat, as we called it in Georgia,
termed by Dr. Heberden, the Nettle-rash, and assured him
he would be well in four-and-twenty hours. He was so; and
drove us on to Banbury; where, on Wednesday, 24, I met
with a hearty welcome from Mr. George, formerly a member
of the London society. The Presbyterian Minister offering
me the use of his meeting, I willingly accepted his offer. It
was, I believe, capable of containing near as many people as
the chapel at West-Street; but it would not near contain the
congregation: And God uttered his voice, yea, and that a
mighty voice; neither the sorrow nor the joy which was felt
that night will quickly be forgotten.
Thur. 25.--I desired the people would sit below in the
morning, supposing not many would be present; but I was
much mistaken; notwithstanding the darkness and rain, the
House was filled both above and below; and never did I see
a people who appeared more ready prepared for the Lord.
Returning through Brackley, I was informed that notice had
been given of my preaching there at nine in the Town-Hall:
So I began without delay. The congregation was large and
attentive, but seemed to understand me no more than if I had
been talking Greek; but the society seemed alive to God, and
striving to enter in at the strait gate.
In the evening I preached at poor, dead Towcester. But is
not God able to raise the dead? There was a considerable
shaking among the dry bones. And who knows but these
dry bones may live?
Dec. 1784.] JOURNAL. 293
Fri. 26.-I returned to London. Sunday, 28. I preached
a charity sermon at St. Paul’s, Covent-Garden. It is the
largest and the best-constructed parish church that I have
preached in for several years; yet some hundreds were obliged
to go away, not being able to get in. I strongly enforced the
necessity of that humble, gentle, patient love, which is the
very essence of true religion. Monday, 29. In the evening I
preached at Hinxworth, in Miss Harvey’s new House. Tues
day, 30. I visited my old friends at Bedford; but found Mr.
Hill was gone to rest, and Mr. Parker was just quivering on
the verge of life. However, I rejoiced to find him clearly
possessed of that perfect love which he had so long opposed.
Wed. DECEMBER 1.--I preached at St. Neot's, to the largest
congregation I ever saw here; and I know not that ever I knew
them so affected; it seemed as if God touched all their hearts.
Thursday, 2. I preached about noon at Bugden; and in the
evening to a crowded congregation at Binlington. I wondered
that I saw nothing here of a young Clergyman, who last year
professed much love and esteem; but I soon heard that his
eyes were opened to see the decrees. So he knows me no
InOre.
Fri. 3.-Partly riding, and partly walking, through wind
and rain, and water and dirt, we got at last to Luton, where
I found a large congregation; and we greatly rejoiced in God
our Saviour. Saturday, 4. I went on to London.
Mon. 6.--I went to Tunbridge-Wells, but not without diffi
culty; part of the road being made scarce passable, through
the abundance of rain. I preached in the large Presbyterian
meeting-house; but the violent rain thinned the congrega
tion. Yet on Tuesday, 7, we set out in a lovely morning; but
in about an hour, just as a pack of hounds came on in full
cry, a furious storm of hail met them in the teeth, and utterly
silenced them. It soon turned to snow; which so covered
the road, that we could scarce get on, though we walked good
part of the way; so that we could not get to Robertsbridge
till after the time appointed. The snow likewise so retarded
us in our journey to Rye, that we were above an hour in the
night. However, the House was well filled with serious
hearers; so that I did not repent of my labour.
Wed. 8.--With great difficulty, with two pair of good
horses, we got on fifteen miles in five hours; but we could
not reach Sevenoaks till the congregation had been long
294 REv. J. wesley’s [Dec. 1784.
waiting. Thursday, 9. Going on to Shoreham, we found
that venerable man, Mr. Perronet, ninety-one years of age,
calmly waiting for the conclusion of a good warfare. His
bodily strength is gone, but his understanding is little im
paired; and he appears to have more love than ever. After
preaching to an earnest congregation in the evening, and to
great part of them in the morning, I returned to London.
Monday, 13, and the two days following, I preached at Can
terbury, Dover, and Sittingbourne. Thursday, 16. I went to
Sheerness; where Mr. Fox read Prayers, and I preached on
those words in the Second Lesson, “If the righteous scarcely
be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?” I
hardly ever spoke stronger words. May God make the appli
cation / I never before found this society in such a state as
they were now ; being all, in general, athirst for God, and
increasing in number as well as in grace. Friday, 17. I
preached at Chatham, where likewise I found only peace and
love; and on Saturday, 18, cheerfully returned to London.
Mon. 20.--I went to Hinxworth, where I had the satisfac
tion of meeting Mr. Simeon, Fellow of King's College, in
Cambridge. He has spent some time with Mr. Fletcher,
at Madeley; two kindred souls; much resembling each
other, both in fervour of spirit, and in the earnestness of
their address. He gave me the pleasing information, that
there are three parish churches in Cambridge, wherein true
scriptural religion is preached; and several young gentlemen
who are happy partakers of it.
I preached in the evening on Gal. vi. 14. Tuesday, 21. I
spent a little time with the children at Miss Harvey’s school,
whom she likewise carefully instructs herself. After dinner we
set out for Wrestlingworth; and having a skilful guide, who
rode before the chaise, and picked out the best way, we drove
four miles in only three hours. Wednesday, 22. I returned
to London, and concluded my journeys for the present year.
Sat. 25.-We met, as usual, in the new chapel, at four : At
ten, and in the afternoon, I preached in West-Street; and
afterwards spent a comfortable hour in meeting the society.
Sun. 26.--I preached the condemned criminals’ sermon in
Newgate. Forty-seven were under sentence of death. While
they were coming in, there was something very awful in the
clink of their chains. But no sound was heard, either from them
or the crowded audience. after the text was named, “There is
Jan. 1785.] JOUTIRNAL. 295
joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over
ninety and nine just persons, that need not repentance.”
The power of the Lord was eminently present, and most of
the prisoners were in tears. A few days after, twenty of them
died at once, five of whom died in peace. I could not but
greatly approve of the spirit and behaviour of Mr. Villette,
the Ordinary; and I rejoiced to hear, that it was the same on
all similar occasions.
Fri. 31.--We had a solemn watch-night, and ushered in
the new year with the voice of praise and thanksgiving.
Sat. JANUARY 1, 1785.--Whether this be the last or no,
may it be the best year of my life Sunday, 2. A larger num
ber of people were present this evening at the renewal of our
covenant with God, than was ever seen before on the occasion.
Tues. 4.--At this season we usually distribute coals and
bread among the poor of the society. But I now considered,
they wanted clothes, as well as food. So on this, and the four
following days, I walked through the town, and begged two
hundred pounds, in order to clothe them that needed it most.
But it was hard work, as most of the streets were filled with
melting snow, which often lay ankle deep; so that my feet
were steeped in snow-water nearly from morning till evening:
I held it out pretty well till Saturday evening; but I was laid
up with a violent flux, which increased every hour, till, at six
in the morning, Dr. Whitehead called upon me. His first
draught made me quite easy; and three or four more perfected
the cure. If he lives some years, I expect he will be one of
the most eminent Physicians in Europe.
I supposed my journeys this winter had been over; but I
could not decline one more. Monday, 17. I set out for poor
Colchester, to encourage the little flock. They had exceeding
little of this world’s goods, but most of them had a better por
tion. Tuesday, 18. I went on to Mistleythorn, a village near
Manningtree. Some time since, one of the shipwrights of
Deptford-yard, being sent hither to superintend the building of
some men-of-war, began to read sermons on a Sunday evening
in his own house. Afterwards he exhorted them a little, and
then formed a little society. Some time after, he begged one of
our Preachers to come over and help them. ... I now found a
lively society, and one of the most elegant congregations I
had seen for many years. Yet they seemed as willing to be
instructed, as if they had lived in Kingswood. Wednesday, 19.
296 Rev. J. wesley’s [Feb. 1785.
I returned to Colchester; and on Thursday, 20, preached to
a lovely congregation at Purfleet, and the next morning
returned to London.
Sun. 23.--I preached morning and afternoon at West
Street, and in the evening in the chapel at Knightsbridge :
I think, it will be the last time; for I know not that I have
ever seen a worse-behaved congregation.
Tues. 25.-I spent two or three hours in the House of
Lords. I had frequently heard that this was the most vene
rable assembly in England. But how was I disappointed
What is a Lord, but a sinner, born to die!
Sun. 30.--From those words, “Righteous art thou, O
Lord, and true are thy judgments,” I endeavoured to point
out those sins which were the chief cause of that awful trans
action we commemorate this day. I believe the chief sin
which brought the King to the block, was his persecuting the
real Christians. Hereby he drove them into the hands of
designing men, which issued in his own destruction.
Sun. FEBRUARY 6.--We had a love-feast. I could not but
observe the manner wherein several of them spoke one after
another. Not only the matter, but the language, the accent,
the tone of voice, wherewith illiterate persons, men and
women, young and old, spoke, were such as a scholar need
not be ashamed of. Who teacheth like Him?
Sun. 13.--I met the single women, and exhorted them to
consider, to prize, and to improve, the advantages they
enjoyed. On the following days, I visited many of our poor,
to see with my own eyes what their wants were, and how
they might be effectually relieved.
Sun. 20.-I preached in Spitalfields church in the morning,
and in the afternoon at St. Ethelburg's, and in the evening
at the new chapel. On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday,
I visited the residue of the sick and poor. Friday, 25. I
received letters from the Preachers, Stewards, and Leaders at
Plymouth-Dock, informing me, that William Moore had
renounced the Methodists, hired a place to preach in, and
drawn away about forty of our members, to form a society for
himself. They therefore begged I would come down as soon
as possible, to quench the kindling fire. I saw no time was
to be lost, and therefore immediately took places in the
Exeter diligence.
Sun. 2".-I preached in Stepney church, one of the largest
March, 1785.] JOURNAL. 297
parish churches in Dngland. Monday, 28. The diligence
reached Sarum about eight in the evening. About nine we
left it. So keen a frost, I hardly ever felt before: And our
carriage let in the air on all sides, so that we hardly could
preserve life. However, soon after five on Tuesday evening,
we got to Exeter. Wednesday, MARCH 2. We went on to
Plymouth-Dock; and found all that we had heard, confirmed.
But I verily believe, we are better without William Moore,
than with him; as his heart is not right with God.
To quiet the minds of many well-meaning persons, I preached
on those comfortable words, “Even the hairs of your head are
all numbered;” and in the morning, on, “Despise not thou
the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked
of him.” Thursday, 3. In the evening I read to the whole
congregation a plain state of the case, with regard to the
Deed of Declaration, which William Moore had so wonderfully
misrepresented: And I believe they were all fully satisfied.
Fri. 4.--I took a walk through the Royal Hospital for sick
and wounded sailors. I never saw any thing of the kind so
complete: Every part is so convenient, and so admirably meat.
But there is nothing superfluous, and nothing purely orna
mental, either within or without. There seems to be no
thing wanting, but a man full of faith and zeal, to watch
over the souls of the poor patients, and teach them to
improve their affliction.
In the evening I preached to a large congregation at Ply
mouth ; and it pleased God to give me uncommon liberty in
describing the power of faith. What a blessed proof of this
has there been here, since I was in the town before
Preaching at the Dock in the evening, I besought all serious
people not to “grieve the Holy Spirit of God;” but to “put
away all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and
evil-speaking.” I exhorted them, in particular, not to talk
about Mr. Moore at all, but to give him up to God.
Sun. 6.--I preached at the Dock at seven. Between one and
two I began at Plymouth; and as many as could get in seemed
to be deeply affected, with the application of those words, “Go
thy way, and as thou hast believed, so be it done unto thee.”
In the afternoon I accepted of an invitation from Dr. Gench,
the Physician of the Hospital; and passed an agreeable hour
with a man of sense, and, it seems, of considerable learning.
At five I preached in the shell of the new House, on the form
298 REv. J. wesley’s [March, 1785.
and power of godliness. In the evening I met the society
once more, confirmed in the truth more than ever, and more
determined to walk in the good old way wherein they had
continued from the beginning.
Mon. 7.--We had a pleasant journey to Exeter; and on
Tuesday, to Bath. But the coach did not come in soon enough
for me to preach in the evening: Nevertheless, we had a large
congregation in the morning. Wednesday, 9. This society too
is much improved since I was here last. Many stumbling
blocks are removed out of the way, and brotherly love is
increased.
Thur. 10.--After spending a day or two at Bristol, on
Saturday, 12, I returned to Bath, and preached to a nume
rous congregation. Great part of them were present again
sat six in the morning. Sunday, 20. I went over to Kings
wood, and preached the funeral sermon of Ann Noble, an old
member of the society; who, having adorned the Gospel
above forty years, died in the full triumph of faith.
Mon. 21.-I set out early, and dined at Stroud. The death
of Mr. Willis, snatched away in the midst of his years, but a
few days before, brought abundance of people to the preaching
house; and most of them were deeply serious; so that we had
a very solemn hour. Tuesday, 22. I preached in Painswick
at noon, and at six in the Court-House at Gloucester. A
multitude of people flocked together, many of whom were of
the better sort; and most of them appeared to be, for the
present, almost persuaded to be Christians. Wednesday, 23.
About eleven I preached at Tewkesbury, and in the evening
at Worcester. Thursday, 24. I breakfasted at Mrs. Price's,
a Quaker, who keeps a Boarding-School. I was much pleased
with her children, so elegantly plain in their behaviour, as
well as apparel. I was led, I know not how, to speak to them
largely; then to pray; and we were all much comforted. The
society is in great peace, and striving together for the hope
of the Gospel. I have not seen greater earnestness and
simplicity in any society, since we left London.
I was now considering how strangely the grain of mustard
seed, planted about fifty years ago, has grown up. It has spread
through all Great Britain and Ireland; the Isle of Wight, and
the Isle of Man; then to America, from the Leeward Islands,
through the whole continent, into Canada and Newfoundland.
And the societies, in all these parts, walk by one rule, knowing
March, 1785.] JOURNAL. 299
religion is holy tempers; and striving to worship God, not
in form only, but likewise “in spirit and in truth.”
MARCH 25.--(Being Good-Friday.) I hastened to reach
Birmingham before the Church Service began. A sharper
frost I never knew : But indeed our House was hot enough
in the evening; and I have not seen a more earnest people.
Such an advantage it is to be fully employed. In every
place we find labouring men most susceptible of religion.
Such a blessing results from that curse, “In the sweat of thy
brow shalt thou eat bread.”
Sat. 26.-I had designed to rest; but notice had been given
of my preaching at Quinton at noon. As the House would not
hold the people, I was constrained, cold as it was, to preach
abroad; and they all seemed to feel that solemn question,
“How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?”
In the evening my heart was enlarged in such a manner as
I have seldom known ; so that I detained the congregation
considerably longer than I am accustomed to ; and all the
people seemed determined to “glorify God with their body
and their spirit.”
MARCH 27.--(Being Easter-day.) I preached at seven, on,
“The Lord is risen indeed,” with an uncommon degree of
freedom; and then met the Local Preachers, several of whom
seemed to have caught the fashionable disease, desire of
independency. They were at first very warm ; but at length
agreed to act by the Rules laid down in the Minutes of the
Conference.
The weather now changed. Small rain fell some hours, and
then turned into snow. This made it very dirty : However,
the poor people got through, and filled Darlaston church. Hence
I returned to Wednesbury; but could not preach abroad, the
ground being covered with snow. As many as could crowded
into the House. A love-feast followed, at which many plain
people spoke without reserve. The artless propriety with
which they spoke must be truly astonishing to all who do not
consider that promise, “They shall be all taught of God.”
~ Mon. 28.-I preached a kind of funeral sermon on Sarah
Wood, one of the first members of the society. For above
fifty years she adorned the Gospel, being a pattern of all
holiness. She was confined to her bed for several months.
Being asked if time did not hang upon her hands, she answered,
“No ; the Bible is my delight.” “How can that be,” said
300 REv. J. wesley’s [April, 1785.
her friend, “when you cannot see?” “Very well,” said she;
“for the Lord brings it to my remembrance.” So, without
doubt or fear, she delivered up her soul to her merciful and
faithful Creator.
About eleven I preached at Wolverhampton, and spent the
afternoon with the amiable family at Hilton-Park. Tuesday,
29. At noon I preached in the Room at Stafford, to a deeply
affected congregation. This was the more strange, because
there are few towns in England less infected with religion than
Stafford. In the evening I preached at Newcastle, to a very
serious and much affected congregation. Wednesday, 30. We
found a difficulty at Lane-End. Even at noon the House con
tained not a third of the congregation. The wind was piercing
cold; nevertheless, I preached abroad, and God warmed our
hearts. In the evening I was greatly comforted among our
brethren at Burslem, well established in grace ; and such
another congregation I met with, Thursday, 31, at Congleton.
Fri. APRIL 1.--I came to Macclesfield, where Mr. Simpson
had given notice of my preaching in his church. Here I fully
delivered my own soul; and on Saturday, 2, went on to Man
chester. Sunday, 3. Our brethren flocking in from all parts,
the House, large as it is, could not contain them. It was sup
posed we had twelve hundred communicants. Monday, 4. I
preached to our old, loving congregation at Bolton. Tuesday,
5. At noon I preached at Wingate, in the open air. The con
gregation were quite ripe for all the Gospel blessings, devouring
every word. In the evening I preached at Wigan. I never
before saw this preaching-house full; but it was more than full
to-night, and with deeply attentive hearers. Wednesday, 6. I
preached at Liverpool; but I found no ship there ready to sail.
So, Thursday, 7, (after preaching at Warrington in the way,)
I hastened to Chester. Neither was there any ship at Parkgate
ready to sail; so, Friday, 8, we took coach, and reached Holy
head between four and five on Saturday in the afternoon.
Between nine and ten we went on board the Clermont packet:
But it was a dead calm till past ten on Sunday, 10, when the
company desired me to give them a sermon. After sermon I
prayed that God would give us a full and speedy passage.
While I was speaking the wind sprung up; and in twelve
hours brought us to Dublin Bay. Does not our Lord still hear
the prayer? I found such a resting-place at our own house,
as I never found in Ireland before : and two such Preachers.
April, 1785.] JOURNAL. 301
with two such wives, I know not where to find again. In the
evening, and so every evening beside, we had Sunday evening
congregations; and in the morning they were larger, by a
third part, than those I had when I was here last.
On Tuesday, and the three following days, I examined the
society. I never found it in such a state before; many of them
rejoiced in God their Saviour, and were as plain in their apparel,
both men and women, as those in Bristol and London. Many,
I verily believe, love God with all their hearts; and the number
of these increase daily. The number of the whole society is
seven hundred and forty-seven. Above three hundred of these
have been added in a few months;-a new and unexpected
thing ! In various places, indeed, we have frequently felt
The o'erwhelming power of saving grace;
which acted almost irresistibly. But such a shower of grace
never continued long; and afterwards men might resist the
Holy Ghost as before. When the general ferment subsides,
every one that partook of it has his trial for life; and the higher
the flood, the lower will be the ebb; yea, the more swiftly it
rose, the more swiftly it falls: So that if we see this here, we
should not be discouraged. We should only use all diligence
to encourage as many as possible to press forward, in spite of all
the refluent tide. Now, especially, we should warn one another
not to grow weary or faint in our mind; if haply we may see
such another prodigy as the late one at Paulton, near Bath,
where there was a very swift work of God; and yet, a year after,
out of an hundred converted, there was not one backslider'
The number of children that are clearly converted to God is
particularly remarkable. Thirteen or fourteen little maidens, in
one class, are rejoicing in God their Saviour; and are as serious
and stayed in their whole behaviour, as if they were thirty or
forty years old. I have much hopes, that half of them will
be steadfast in the grace of God which they now enjoy.
Sun. 17.-We had such a mumber of communicants at the
cathedral as was scarce ever seen there before. In the evening
many were cut to the heart; and, I believe, not a few com
forted. A love-feast followed; at which many spoke what
God had done for their souls, with all plainness and simplicity.
Mon. 18.-I went through a delightful country to Pros
perous; a little town, begun five years ago by Captain Brooke,
302 Rev. J. Wesley’s [April, 1785.
just returned from the East Indies. Here he introduced
every branch of the cotton manufactory, on a most extensive
plan. He built two rows of commodious houses, with all
convenient appurtenances; and he now employs about two
thousand men, women, and children, on the spot, beside near
the same number in other places.
They had a very large Room, but not near large enough
for the congregation. All that got in seemed much affected,
as they did likewise at five in the morning. About fifty of
them are already joined in a society. Fair blossoms | But
what will the fruit be?
A remarkable circumstance, we were informed, occurred near
this place, about three weeks before:-A poor woman, who owed
her landlord fourteen pounds, scraped seven together, which she
brought him. But he absolutely refused to take less than the
whole, yet detained her in talk till evening. She then set
out on a car. When she was within a mile of home, she over
took a soldier, who said he was exceedingly tired, and earnestly
entreated her to let him ride with her on the car, to which she
at length consented. When they came to her house, finding
there was no town within two miles, he begged he might sit by
the fire-side till morning. She told him she durst not suffer it,
as hers was a lone house, and there was none in it but herself
and her girl: But at last she agreed he should lie in the girl’s
bed, and she and the girl would lie together. At midnight,
two men, who had blackened their faces, broke into the house,
and demanded her money. She said, “Then let me go into
the next room and fetch it.” Going in, she said to the sol
dier, “You have requited me well for my kindness, by bring
ing your comrades to rob my house.” He asked, “Where
are they?” She said, “In the next room.” He started up,
and ran thither. The men ran away with all speed. He
fired after them, and shot one dead; who, being examined,
appeared to be her landlord | So that a soldier was sent to
protect an innocent woman, and punish an hardened villain
Tues. 19.-I preached at ten to an uncommonly large and
serious congregation at Edinderry. In the evening I preached
at Tyrrel’s Pass, where a small, dead society is all that now
remains. Such another I found at Coolylough, on Wednes
day, 20. Thursday, 21. Going to Athlone, I found the scene
entirely changed; there has not been for many years so much
April, 1785.] JOURNAL. 303
life in the society. Many of the old dead members are quick
ened again. Many are added to them; and there is no jar
of any kind among them ; they provoke one another only to
love and to good works.
Fri. 22.-It is just seven years since I was here before;
and I find little change in many, only that they are more
dead to the world, and, consequently, more alive to God;
and for a few that have left them, God has given them
double, that are either alive to God, or athirst for him.
Sun. 24.--In the afternoon I preached at the east end of the
market-house. I scarce ever saw so numerous a congregation
at Athlone; and all were attentive : Not a word was heard,
and scarce any motion was to be seen. I trust the seed now
sown will not wither away, but grow up into everlasting life
Mon. 25.--Being desired to preach at Ballinasloe, in my way
to Aghrim, Istood, about eleven, in the shade of a large house,
and preached to a numerous congregation of Papists and Pro
testants, equally attentive, on, “The kingdom of God is at
hand.” As I entered Aghrim, the Rector, who was waiting at
his gate, welcomed me into the country; and desired me to use
his church, both now, and whenever I pleased : I preached there
at six. It was thoroughly filled with well-behaved hearers. But
the society here, as well as that at Tyrrel’s Pass, is well nigh
shrunk into nothing ! Such is the baleful influence of riches'
The same effect we find in every place. The more men increase
in goods, (very few excepted,) the more they decrease in grace.
Tues. 26.-I went on to Eyre-Court. Here, also, the
Minister gave me the use of his church ; but the people
seemed to understand little of the matter. As I had not
this privilege at Birr, I went to the Square, where the owner
of a large house invited me to preach before it. The con
gregation was exceeding large; but many of them wild as
colts untamed. However, the far greater part of them were
seriously attentive. I am in hopes the work of God will
revive here also ; the rather, because he has fully restored
one of the most eminent backsliders in the kingdom.
When I came to Tullamore, the Minister was willing that I
should preach in the church; where both the soldiers and all
the Officers attended, and our Great Captain was present also.
Thur. 28.--I supposed the house at Portarlington would
lave more than contained the congregation; but it would scarce
304 REv. J. Wesley’s [May, 1785.
contain a third part of them. So I removed to the market
house, and preached on the general judgment. The word was
quick and powerful, so that very few appeared to be unaffected.
In the evening I preached in the church at Mount-Mellick.
Perhaps such a congregation was never there before. But
the greater part of them seemed to be of Gallio’s mind, to
care for none of these things.
Fri. 29.--I preached in our own House at Kilkenny, to
just such another congregation. But those that attended in
the morning were of a nobler spirit, and I found uncommon
liberty among them.
Sat. 30.--I preached at Waterford in the Court-House,
one of the largest in the kingdom. A multitude of people
quickly ran together, which occasioned some tumult at first;
but it was quickly over, and all were deeply attentive,
Surely God will have much people in this city.
Sun. MAY 1.--At eight I preached in the Court-House to
a larger congregation than before. At eleven I went to the
cathedral, one of the most elegant churches in Ireland. The
whole Service was performed with the utmost solemnity.
After Service, the senior Prebend, Dr. Fall, invited me to
dinner; and desired, when I came again, I would take a bed
at his house. I doubt that will never be
At four I preached at the head of the Mall, to a Moorfields
congregation, all quiet and attentive. Monday, 2. The con
gregation at five in the morning was larger than that on
Saturday evening; and all of them appeared to have (for the
present, at least) a real concern for their salvation. O that
it may not pass away as the morning dew
I took a solemn farewell of this affectionate people, con
cluding with those awful words:--
Now on the brink of death we stand ;
And if I pass before,
You all may safe escape to land,
And hail me on the shore.
Tues. 3.−We set out for Dungarvan-Ferry; but in spite
of all the speed we could make, the road was so horrible,
that we could not reach Youghall before six in the evening
At seven, the Court-House was filled from end to end : And
such was the attention of all, high and low, that I hope many
of them will bring forth fruit to perfection.
May, 1785.] JOURNAL. 305
Wed. 4.--At five in the morning the Court-House was
thoroughly filled. So in the evening I preached in the Mall,
where the congregation was much the same as the last at
Waterford; only that they were in general Protestants, as
are most in the town; who are also some of the most cour.
teous and quiet people in the kingdom.
Thur. 5.--Before I came half way to Cork, I was met by
about thirty horsemen. We dined at Middleton, and then
rode on through a pleasant, well-cultivated country to Cork.
In the evening, many in the crowded congregation were
much comforted.
Fri. 6.--I made an exact inquiry into the state of the
society. I found the number was about four hundred, many
of whom were greatly in earnest. Many children, chiefly
girls, were indisputably justified; some of them were likewise
sanctified, and were patterns of all holiness.
But how shall we keep up the flame that is now kindled, not
only in Cork, but in many parts of the nation? Not by sitting
still; but by stirring up the gift of God that is in them; by
uninterrupted watchfulness; by warning every one and exhort,
ing every one; by besieging the throne with all the powers of
prayer; and, after all, some will, and some will not, improve
the grace which they have received. Therefore there must be
a falling away. We are not to be discouraged at this; but to
do all that in us lies to-day, leaving the morrow to God.
Sat. 7.--On this day that venerable saint, Mr. Perronet,
desired his grandaughter, Miss Briggs, who attended him day
and night, to go out into the garden, and take a little air. He
was reading, and hearing her read, the three last chapters of
Isaiah. When she returned, he was in a kind of ecstasy; the
tears running down his cheeks, from a deep sense of the glori
ous things which were shortly to come to pass. He continued
unspeakably happy that day, and on Sunday was, if possible,
happier still. And indeed heaven seemed to be as it were
opened to all that were round about him. When he was in bed,
she went into his room to see if anything was wanting; and
as she stood at the feet of the bed, he smiled, and broke out,
“God bless thee, my dear child, and all that belong to thee!
Yea, He will bless thee!” Which he earnestly repeated many
times, till she left the room. When she went in, the next
morning, Monday, 9, his spirit was returned to God!
306 REv. J. Wesley’s [May, 1785.
So ended the holy and happy life of Mr. Vincent Perronet,
in the ninety-second year of his age. I follow hard after him
in years, being now in the eighty-second year of my age.
O that I may follow him in holiness; and that my last end
may be like his
Sun. 8.--In the afternoon I stood in the vacant space near
the preaching-house, capable of containing many thousands.
An immense number assembled : There was no disturbance:
The days of tumult here are over; and God has now of a long
season made our enemies to be at peace with us.
Mon. 9.--About noon I preached at Kinsale, in the old
Bowling-green, which lies on the top of the hill, and commands
a large prospect, both by sea and land. All behaved well, but
a few Officers, who walked up and down, and talked together
during the whole service. The poor in Ireland in general are
well-behaved: All the ill-breeding is among well-dressed people.
In the evening I preached in the main street at Bandon, to a very
numerous congregation: But some of them were better clothed
than taught; for they laughed and talked great part of the time.
Such a transaction occurred here last week, as has not oc
curred this century. A soldier, walking over the bridge, met
a countryman, and taking a fancy to his stick, strove to
wrench it from him: His companion knocked the soldier
down. News of this being carried to the barracks, a whole
troop of soldiers marched down, and, without any provocation,
fell upon the countrymen coming into the town, pursued
them into the houses where they fled for shelter, and hacked
and hewed them without mercy: Two-and-forty were wounded,
several maimed, and two killed upon the spot.
Wed. 11.--I returned from Bandon to Cork; and after
endeavouring to confirm those that were much alive to God,
on Friday, 13, with some difficulty, I broke loose from my
affectionate friends, and in two long stages reached Kilfinnam.
It being too stormy to preach abroad, I preached in the
Assembly-Room: All the hearers were serious and well
behaved. I trust some will bring forth fruit with patience.
Afterwards I took a survey of the Danish mount near the
town; the first I have seen, surrounded with a triple ditch; but
it is not either so high or so large as that near Dundee. Is it
not strange, that the Irish, as well as the Scots, should so soon
have driven out those merciless robbers who defied all the
strength of England for so long a time? Saturday, 14. I
May, 1785.] JOURNAL. 307
found a far greater curiosity, a large Druidical temple. I
judged by my eye, that it was not less than a hundred yards
in diameter; and it was, if I remember right, full as entire as
Stonehenge, or that at Stanton-Drew. How our ancestors
could bring or even heave these enormous stones, what
modern can comprehend?
In the evening we found many of our old friends at Limerick
were removed to Abraham’s bosom. MAY 15. (Being Whit
Sunday.) The Service at the cathedral began at eleven, and
lasted till three. It concluded a little sooner, by my assist
ing at the Lord's Supper, at the request of the Clergymen.
Between five and six, I took my stand near the Custom-House,
amidst an innumerable multitude of people; but they were
Wild as the untaught Indian's brood.
They made such a wonderful noise, that I judged it best to
give them the ground, and retire to our own House. Mon
day, 16. I restored the select society, which had been quite
neglected. In the evening I earnestly exhorted all our
brethren to set out again in the good old way; and to run
with patience the race that is set before them.
Tues. 17.--In my way to Gort, I was met by some of our
brethren of Killchrist, a village eight miles beyond it, giving
me an invitation from Colonel Pearse, to lodge at his house.
He sent me to Killchrist in one of his own carriages. There
I found a large number of plain people, to whom I preached
in the yard. Thence I returned to the Colonel's; but the
house being full of genteel company, I was as out of my
element; there being no room to talk upon the only subject
which deserves the attention of a rational creature.
Wed. 18.--Learning that a little girl had sat up all night,
and then walked two miles to see me, I took her into the chaise;
and was surprised to find her continually rejoicing in God.
The person with whom the Preachers lodge, informed me, that
she has been two years possessed of his pure love. We break
fasted at Athenry, once a populous city. But now seges est
ubi Troja fuit.* In the afternoon, we went on to Ballinrobe.
Having heard a remarkable account of the Charter-School
here, I resolved to see it with my own eyes. I went thither
* Corn is growing on the spot where Troy formerly stood.--EDIT.
308 REv. J. Wesley’s [May, 1785.
about five in the afternoon, but found no master or mistress.
Seven or eight boys, and nine or ten girls, (the rest being ram
bling abroad,) dirty and ragged enough, were left to the care of
a girl half the head taller than the rest. She led us through
the house. I observed first the school-room, not much bigger
than a small closet. Twenty children could not be taught there
at once, with any convenience. When we came into the bed
chamber, I inquired, “How many children now lodge in the
house?” and was answered, “Fourteen or fifteen boys, and
nineteen girls.” For these boys, there were three beds, and five
for the nineteen girls. For food I was informed, the master
was allowed a penny-farthing a day for each ! Thus they are
clothed, lodged, and fed. But what are they taught? As far
as I could learn, just nothing ! Of these things I informed
the Commissioners for these schools in Dublin. But I do
not hear of any alteration. If this be a sample of the Irish
Charter-Schools, what good can we expect from them?
In my way from Limerick hither, I read and carefully con
sidered Major Wallance’s Irish Grammar, allowed to be the best
extant. And supposing him to give a true account of the Irish
language, it is not only beyond all comparison worse than any
ancient language I know anything of; but below English,
French, German, Italian, Spanish, or any other modern lan
guage. The difficulty of reading it is intolerable, occasioned
chiefly by the insufferable number of mute letters, both of
vowels and consonants; the like of which is not to be found in
any language under heaven. The number of pronouns, and
the irregular formation of the verbs, is equally insufferable.
But nothing is so insufferable as their poetry; the whole con
struction of which is so trifling and childish; and yet requires
more pains to write, than either the modern rhyme, or the
ancient attention to long and short syllables. Friday, 20. I
went on to Castlebar. Here I generally find a welcome
reception. Almost all the inhabitants here love us well, and
believe the Methodists are good men.
Sat. 21.-Mr. Browne of Relins, about three miles from
Castlebar, invited us to his house. It is one of the plea
santest places I have seen in the kingdom: But it was not so
pleasant as when I was there first. For his lovely wife, and
an amiable daughter, are both gone into a better country.
MAY 22,-(Being Trinity-Sunday.) I preached in the morn
May, 1785.] JOURNAL, 309
ing on, “There are three that bear record in heaven.” The
congregation at church were remarkably well-behaved; and
the Rector preached a sound, useful sermon. At five I
preached to an exceeding numerous congregation, and after
wards administered the sacrament to the society. Two
Clergymen were with us, the Curate of Castlebar, and the
Curate of a neighbouring parish; one of whom already enjoys
the peace of God, and the other was earnestly seeking it.
Mon. 23.--After a long day's journey, I preached in the new
Court-House at Sligo, to far the worst congregation that I have
seen since I came into the kingdom. Some (miscalled Gentry)
laughed and talked without fear or shame, till I openly reproved
them: And the rabble were equally rude near the door. In
the morning I preached in our own preaching-house, chiefly for
the sake of Mrs. Simpson, a mother in Israel, who has been
long confined to her room. Walking, about noon, I was catched
in a heavy shower, and contracted a severe cold. However, I
preached in the evening to a far civiller congregation than the
might before. So I think my labour here was not quite in vain.
Wed. 25.-I preached about ten in the Court-House at
Manorhamilton; and then rode over the Black-Mountain, now
clothed with green, and through a delightful road, to Mount
Florence. Here I observed the party-coloured gates (as they
were some years since) to be painted plain red. The wind was
high and piercing cold; yet the multitude of people obliged me
to preach in the open air. Thursday, 26. I preached in the
Assembly-Room at Swadlingbar; but not without difficulty;
my cold being so increased, that I could not sing, nor speak, but
just in one key. However, I made shift to preach in the church
at Bally connel in the evening, though it was very full, and con
sequently very hot. Friday, 27. Feeling myself much as I was
eleven years ago, and not knowing how short my time of work
ing might be, I resolved to do a little while I could : So I
began at five ; and though I could scarce be heard at first, yet
the more I spoke, the more my voice was strengthened. Before
I had half done, every one could hear. To God be all the glory.
About ten I preached at Killeshandra, to a multitude of
people. But my voice was now so strengthened, that every
one could hear. In the evening, there being no house at Kill
more that could contain half the congregation, I was obliged
again to preach abroad. There were several sharp showers;
310 REv. J. WESLEY’s [May, 1785.
but none went away : For it pleased the Lord to send there
with gracious rain on the souls of them that feared him.
Sat. 28.--At five, though I had not quite recovered my
voice, I judged it best to speak as I could. So I preached
in Mr. Creighton's barn, and at seven in the ball-room at
Cavan. I had designed to go straight from hence to Clones;
but a friend sending me word, that Mr. Sanderson was will
ing I should preach in his church at Ballyhays, I altered my
purpose, and went thither. Abundance of people were wait
ing for me: But Mr. Sanderson having changed his mind, I
preached in the inn-yard, to a very well-behaved congregation
of rich as well as poor. Hence I went on to Clones, where I
found such a society, as I had hardly seen in Ireland, making
it a point of conscience to conform to all our Rules, great and
small. The new preaching-house was exceeding neat, but
far too small to contain the congregation. The first time I
preached to-day was with difficulty; the second and third
with less; the fourth with none at all.
Sun. 29.--The Morning Service, so called, began between
twelve and one. At five, the storm was so high, that I could
not preach in the market-place, as I first designed. At
length we pitched upon a sloping meadow near the town,
where we were perfectly sheltered by the hill. I suppose the
congregation would have filled the House at Dublin, more
than twice over. We had several showers; but the people
regarded them not, being wholly taken up with better things.
Mon. 30.--Wewent on to Caladon. A convenient preaching
house is just built here; which (after the forms were removed)
just contained the congregation. The power of God was very
unusually present among them. Many were cut to the heart;
and refused to be comforted, till God spoke peace to their
souls; and many did already rejoice with joy unspeakable.
When we came to Armagh on Tuesday, the wind was
extremely high, and the air as cold as it used to be in Decem
ber. However, we had no place that could contain the con
gregation, but Mr. M'Gough's avenue. And here the people,
crowding close together, did not seem to regard either cold or
wind. Tuesday, 31. We took a walk to the Primate's palace,
and had a full view of the house. It is elegant in the highest
degree, and yet not splendid; and it is furnished throughout
in a handsome, though not in a costly, manner. Since I was
June, 1785.] JOURNAL. 311
here before, he has added an obelisk a hundred feet high;
and dairy-house, with many other conveniences; and a
chapel, never yet used. But we were informed, he designs to
do many things more How well then may it be said to him,
Tu secanda marmora
Locas sub ipsum funus, et sepulchri
Immemor struis domos /*
At eleven I preached in the avenue again. It rained all
the time; yet the congregation was large and attentive.
Afterwards a decent woman, whom I never saw either before
or since, desired to speak with me; and said, “I met you at
Caladon. I had then a violent pain in my head for four
weeks; but was fully persuaded I should be well, if you
would lay your hand on my cheek; which I begged you to
do. From that moment I have been perfectly well.” If so,
give God the glory. In the evening the rain drove us into
the market-house, where we were a little disturbed by two or
three drunken men; but all the rest (numerous congregation)
behaved with deep seriousness.
Wed. JUNE 1.-I took my leave of my coeval, Mr.
M“Gough, whom I scarce expect to see again in this world.
About ten I preached in Blackwater-Town, in Mr. Roe's
yard, to a large and elegant congregation; and in the even
ing to a larger still, at the side of the Fort at Charlemount.
Mrs. T. was an unspeakable blessing to this town, while
Mr. T. was stationed there; and the revival of religion, which
began then, has been increasing ever since.
In the road to and from Charlemount, I had a good deal of
conversation with that amiable woman, Mrs. R. God has
indeed dealt very mercifully with her; and her soul is at pre
sent much alive. I have great hopes that she, and all her
lovely family, will be patterns to all that are round about them.
Thur. 2.-I went to Mr. Caulfield's, the Rector of Kille
man, three miles from Charlemount. His house is agreeably
situated, at the head of a beautiful avenue, in which I preached
to a very numerous congregation; most of whom seemed to be
* The following is Boscawen's translation of these lines from Horace -
Day treads on day with rapid pace;
Moons hasten to their wane by nature's doom;
Whilst thou prepar'st the column's base
To rear thy palace, heedless of thy tomb 1-EDIT.
312 REv. J. Wesley’s [June, 1785.
deeply affected. I sent my horses on to Mr. Cook’s town,
ten Irish miles; Mr. Caulfield sending me thither, Friday, 3,
with a pair of his. At ten I preached there, and then
hastened forward: But I could not reach Londonderry before
seven. We then found (notwithstanding they had but short
notice) a congregation gathered from all parts.
The society here has not been so well established, for many
years, as it is now. What is principally wanting, is, zeal for
God, and entire self-devotion to him.
Sun. 5.-At eight I strongly applied the latter part of the
thirteenth chapter to the Romans. We had a very decent
congregation at church, but not so many communicants as I
expected. At six our Room was thoroughly filled with as
serious hearers as ever I saw. Monday, 6. We had a
numerous congregation, in the morning, of rich as well as
poor. But who is able effectually to warn these to flee from
the wrath to come?
At eleven I preached in an open place at Newtown, sixteen
miles from Londonderry. In the evening we had, at Coleraine,
a larger congregation than at Clones itself; and they seemed a
more intelligent people than most I have met with. Indeed,
the whole town is different from all that I have seen. There
is no hurry or noise, but all quiet and still, both by day and
by night; so that no wonder so many here receive the Gospel
of peace, and “bring forth fruit unto perfection.”
Tues. 7.--I accepted the offer of the Presbyterian meeting;
and preached there at noon, and at six in the evening. Wed
nesday, 8. After preaching in the morning, I left many of the
loving people in tears, and went on to Ballymoney; where I
preached in the Court-House, to a very civil, and a very dull,
congregation. From hence we went to Ballymena. In the after
moon I walked over to Gracehill, the Moravian settlement.
Beside many little houses for them that are married, they have
three large buildings; (on the same plan with that at Fulneck;)
having the chapel in the middle, the house for the single men
on the left hand, that for the single women on the right. We
spent one or two agreeable hours in seeing the several rooms.
Nothing can exceed the neatness of the rooms, or the courtesy
of the inhabitants: But if they have most courtesy, we have
more love. We do not suffer a stranger, especially a Christian
brother, to visit us, without asking him either “to bite or sup.”
“But it is their way.” I am sorry to say, so it is. When I
June, 1785.] JOURNAL. 313
called on Bishop Antone, in Holland, an old acquaintance,
whom I had not seen for six-and-forty years, till both he and
I were grown grey-headed, he did not ask me so much as to
wet my lips. Is not this a shameful way? A way, contrary
not only to Christianity, but to common humanity? Is it
not a way that a Jew, a Mahometan, yea, an honest Heathen,
would be ashamed of 2
Having now finished an ingenious book, Le Vrayer’s “Ani
madversions on the Ancient Historians,” I thought a few
passages worth transcribing, as containing some uncommon
remarks. He says more for the veracity of Herodotus than
ever I saw before ; and convinces me that his authority is more
to be relied on than that of Polybius; who, “ contrary to the
truth of history, makes Scipio an example of continence, in
giving up the fair captive to the Spanish Prince; whereas, in
fact, he never would, nor did, restore her to her husband.”
“There is not a more incredible relation in all the Roman
History, than that Clelia, and all the Roman virgins who were
hostages to the Hetrurians, swam over the river Tiber to Rome.
Surely they would scarce have dared to look upon so rapid a
river, much less to plunge into it; especially when there was
no necessity, for the peace was then almost concluded.
“Some writers affirm, and it is earnestly believed, that
Belisarius was reduced to beggary. But it is a mere fable:
On the contrary, the Emperor Justinian heaped titles and
honours upon him to the last; although he recalled him out
of Italy, after he had been defeated there by the French.
Procopius, who wrote largely concerning him, says not one
word of his being reduced to poverty.”
Thur. 9.--Between nine and ten I preached in the Court
House at Antrim, to a large staring congregation. Thence we
went on to Belfast, through miserable roads. O where is com
mon sense ! At six I preached in the Linen-Hall, to a large
congregation, admirably well-behaved. I often wonder that,
among so civil a people, we can do but little good. Friday,
10. We came to Downpatrick; where, the preaching-house
being too small, we repaired, as usual, to the Grove; a most
lovely plain, very near the venerable ruins of the cathedral.
The congregation was as large as that at Belfast, but abun
dantly more awakened. The people in general were remark
ably affectionate. They filled the large preaching-house at five
314 REv. J. Wesley’s [June, 1785.
in the morning; and we seemed to be as closely united with
them as with one of our old societies in England.
About eleven on Saturday, I preached in the Linen-Hall,
at Ballimahinch, to a numerous congregation. The country,
from hence to Lisburn, is wonderfully pleasant and fruitful. At
six I preached in the Presbyterian meeting, a large and commo
dious building; and I was now with the most lively society that
I have seen for many days; owing chiefly to the good provi
dence of God bringing sister Johnson hither. She came indeed
in an acceptable time; for J W and his wife, who for
many years had been pillars, had left the society. They had
one child, a son, about nineteen years old, of whom they were
fond enough ; by a fall from his horse he was killed in a mo
ment, leaving his parents inconsolable; just then she came to
Lisburn, and visited them. God opened her mouth, both in
exhortation and prayer. They saw and acknowledged his
hand. She was enabled to give up her child to God; he cried
out, “Surely God has sent an angel from heaven to comfort
us!” Both of them joined the society; and are more in
earnest for salvation than they have been for many years.
Sun. 12.--We had a solemn opportunity in the morning.
In the afternoon, as no building could contain the people, I
stood abroad and proclaimed, “There is joy in heaven over one
sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just
persons who need no repentance.” The hearers (allowing five
persons to a square yard) were seven or eight thousand.
At eleven I preached in the church-yard at Lurgan. The
sun shone extremely hot; but we were sheltered from it, partly
by the church, and partly by the spreading trees. In the after
noon I went on to Tanderagee, one of the pleasantest towns
in Ireland, surrounded by woods and fruitful hills, with a
clear river running between them. At six I stood in the
Grove, where the tall elms shaded both me and the numerous
congregation. Several gentlemen and several Clergymen
were among them, and all behaved with serious attention.
I lodged at the Rev. Dr. L ’s, where my time seemed
exceeding short. Wednesday, 15. The scene changed from a
palace to a cottage at Derry-Anvil, a small village surrounded
by a bog; but inhabited by lively Christians. About eleven I
preached in a shady orchard, to an exceeding large congrega
tion; and in the evening to a still larger at the Grange, a small
June, 1785.] JOURNAL. 315
village on the top of a hill. Many showers went to the right
and the left while I was preaching, but only a few drops fell
upon us. Thursday, 16. About eight I preached at Rich
Hill, where there were many backsliders, on, “How shall I
give thee up, Ephraim ** In the afternoon I came to Newry,
where I never before had any tolerable place to preach in ; but
the Presbyterians now offered me the use of their large and
handsome meeting-house: Perhaps it never was filled before.
I believe the occasion required me to speak very plain, which
I did from Elijah's question, “How long halt ye between two
opinions 2° And I applied it to the conscience of each per
son, rich and poor, with all possible plainness.
Fri. 17.--Many of our friends from Dublin gave us the
meeting at Drogheda ; a large, handsome town, which seemed
to me to be little inferior to Waterford. After much opposi
tion, a small society is formed here. I preached in the
Sessions-House, a large commodious room, which was quickly
filled with rich and poor. The Mayor himself and several of
the Aldermen took care that none should make any disturb
ance. God gave us an exceeding solemn season. After
sermon I gave a short account of the rise of Methodism. I
believe all were so satisfied, that there will scarce be any
more persecution of the Methodists at Drogheda.
Sat. 18.--Having visited all the places I proposed, I came
back to Dublin just as well as I set out, my strength having
been as my day.
Sun. 19.--I exhorted a crowded audience to “bring forth
fruits meet for repentance;” and afterwards pressed the exhort
ation on our own society. Monday, 20. I visited one ill of a
violent fever, and calmly triumphing over sickness, and pain,
and death. In the evening I received a letter from a Physician,
whom, the next morning, I carried to see her. He thoroughly
understood her case; and from the dayshe followed his prescrip
tion she began to recover. I feared very many of the society
would be lost beforc my return ; but I found only three: So
that seven hundred and thirty-seven of them remained.
Wed. 22.-I went with twelve or fourteen of our friends on
the canal to Prosperous. It is a most elegant way of travel
ling, little inferior to that of the track-skuits in Holland. We
had fifty or sixty persons in the boat, many of whom desired
me to give them a sermon. I did so; and they were all atten
316 REv. J. Wesley’s [July, 1785.
tion. In the evening I preached at Prosperous, to a numerous
congregation, on the general judgment. After preaching at
five in the morning, Thursday, 23, I took boat with a larger
company than before ; who, about eleven, desired me to
preach ; for which they appeared to be exceeding thankful.
Tues. 28.--By the good providence of God, I finished the
eighty-second year of my age. Is anything too hard for
God? It is now eleven years since I have felt any such thing
as weariness: Many times I speak till my voice fails, and I
can speak no longer: Frequently I walk till my strength fails,
and I can walk no farther; yet even then I feel no sensation
of weariness; but am perfectly easy from head to foot. I dare
not impute this to natural causes: It is the will of God.
Fri. JULY 1.--Most of our Travelling Preachers met to
confer together on the things of God. We began and ended
in much peace and love; being all resolved not to “do the
work of the Lord so lightly.” Sunday, 3. We had a larger
congregation than ever at St. Patrick's, where many of our
brethren found such a blessing, that they will not easily be
so prejudiced against the Church as they were in time past.
Wed. 6.--We concluded our Conference. I remember
few such Conferences, either in England or Ireland : So
perfectly unanimous were all the Preachers, and so deter
mined to give themselves up to God.
Sun. 10.--I went on board the Prince of Wales, one of the
neatest ships I ever was in. We left the work of God in
creasing in every part of the kingdom, more than it has done
for many years. About two in the morning we sailed out of
Dublin-Bay, and came into Holyhead-Bay before one in the
afternoon on Monday, 11. That evening we went on to
Gwendy; Tuesday, 12, to Kimmel, one of the pleasantest
inns in Wales; surrounded with gardens and stately woods,
which their late proprietor must see no more. Wednesday,
13. We reached Chester. After preaching there between five
and six in the evening, I stepped into the stage-coach, which
was just setting out; and, travelling day and night, was
brought safe to London on Thursday, 14, in the afternoon.
Sun. 17.-I preached both morning and evening, on the
education of children. I now spoke chiefly to the parents,
informing them that I designed to speak to the children at five
the next morning. Monday, 18. At five not only the morning
Aug. 1785.] JOURNAL. 317
chapel was well filled, but many stood in the large chapel: I
trust they did not come in vain. The rest of the week I was
fully employed in writing for the Magazine, and preparing for
the Conference. Sunday, 24. I preached at West-Street,
morning and afternoon; when both the largeness and earnest
ness of the congregation gave me a comfortable hope of a
blessing at the ensuing Conference. Tuesday, 26. Our Con
ference began; at which about seventy Preachers were pre
sent, whom I had invited by name. One consequence of this
was, that we had no contention or altercation at all; but
everything proposed was calmly considered, and determined
as we judged would be most for the glory of God.
Mon. AUGUST 1.--Having, with a few select friends, weighed
the matter thoroughly, I yielded to their judgment, and set
apart three of our well-tried Preachers, John Pawson, Thomas
Hanby, and Joseph Taylor, to minister in Scotland; and I
trust God will bless their ministrations, and show that he has
sent them. Wednesday, 3. Our peaceful Conference ended,
the God of power having presided over all our consultations.
Sun. 7.--After preaching in the morning at West-Street,
and in the afternoon at the new chapel, I took a solemn leave
of the society; and on Monday, 8, went in the diligence to
Portsmouth-Common. Here I found a lively, and, conse
quently, an increasing, society. Tuesday, 9. I crossed over
to the Isle of Wight. Here also the work of God prospers:
We had a comfortable time at Newport, where is a very
teachable, though uncommonly elegant, congregation. Wed
nesday, 10. We took a walk to the poor remains of Carisbrook
Castle. It seems to have been once exceeding strong, stand
ing on a steep ascent. But even what little of it is left is now
swiftly running to ruin. The window, indeed, through which
King Charles attempted to make his escape, is still in being;
and brought to my mind that whole train of occurrences,
wherein the hand of God was so eminently seen.
Thur. 11.--About noon I preached in a little court in the
town of Portsmouth. The people were all attention: So there
was a much larger congregation in the evening, in St. George's
Square. Surely, after all the stumbling-blocks which have been
thrown in the way, God will have many souls in this place.
Fri. 12.--I preached at Winchester; and on Saturday, 13,
went on to Salisbury. As Captain Webb had just been there,
3.18 REv. J. Wesley's [Aug. 1785.
I endeavoured to avail myself of the fire which he seldom fails
to kindle. The congregation in the evening was very large,
and seemed to be deeply affected: So they did again at eight
on Sunday morning; but I believe the greatest blessing was
in the evening; particularly during the prayer, wherein God
was pleased to move many in an uncommon manner.
Mon. 15.--I preached in Shaftesbury at nine, to such a
congregation as I had not seen there before. I was glad to
see among them the gentleman who, thirty years ago, sent
his Officer to discharge me from preaching in his borough.
About two I preached at Castle-Carey, to as many as could
well hear; and I believe there were very few who did not feel
that God was with us.
In the evening I preached at Shepton-Mallet, but the
House would not near contain the congregation. For many
years this society was remarkably dead; but it is now one of
the liveliest in England.
Tues. 16.--We went on to Taunton, where I expected little
good. But I was agreeably disappointed: The House was
thoroughly filled. A solemn awe sat upon the whole congrega
tion, and God spoke to their hearts. The House was nearly
filled at five in the morning, a sight never seen here before.
Wednesday, 17. Collumpton House was more than filled,
many being constrained to go away; and I found uncommon
liberty of speech here, as well as at Exeter in the evening.
Thur. 18.--I had a pleasant journey to Plymouth-Dock,
the rain having but just laid the dust. The late separation
here seems to have done little hurt. A few turbulent men
have left us, but men of a more quiet spirit are continually
added in their stead : So that on the whole we are gainers by
our loss. Such is the wisdom of God!
Fri. 19.--In the evening I preached in the new House
at Plymouth. This also was well filled. Sunday, 21. I
preached at the Dock at seven, and the House contained us
pretty well; but in the evening, it was thought, as many
went away as got in. After preaching, I gave them a plain
account of the beginning and progress of that great work of
God, vulgarly called Methodism.
Mon. 22.-I took a cheerful leave of our brethren at the
Dock, leaving them well united together; and on the follow
ing days preached at Liskeard, St. Austle, Sticker, (a new place
Sept. 1785.] JOURNAL. 319
near it,) Helstone, Marazion, and Penzance. Thursday, 25.
About nine I preached at Mousehole, where there is now one
of the liveliest societies in Cornwall. Hence we went to the
Land's End, in order to which we clambered down the rocks,
to the very edge of the water; and I cannot think but the
sea has gained some hundred yards since I was here forty
years ago. In the evening I preached at St. Just, where are
still many of our eldest brethren, although many are gone to
Abraham’s bosom.
Fri. 26.-In the evening I preached in the market-place
at St. Ives, to almost the whole town. This was the first
place in Cornwall where we preached, and where Satan
fought fiercely for his kingdom; but now all is peace. I
found old John Nance had rested from his labours. Some
months since, sitting behind the Preacher, in the pulpit, he
sunk down, was carried out, and fell asleep !
Sat. 27.-About nine I preached at the copper-works, near
the Hayle, in the new preaching-house. I suppose such
another is not in England, nor in Europe, nor in the world.
It is round, and all the walls are brass; that is, brazen slugs.
It seems nothing can destroy this, till heaven and earth pass
away.
At two the Stewards of all the societies met at Redruth.
There is nothing but peace and love among them, and among
the societies from whence they came; and yet no great increase !
At our love-feast in the evening, several of our friends
declared how God had saved them from inbred sin, with such
exactness, both of sentiment and language, as clearly showed
they were taught of God.
Sun. 28.--At half-past eight I preached at St. Agnes, to the
largest congregation I ever saw there. Between one and two
I preached in the street at Redruth, to thousands upon thou
sands; and my strength was as my need: Yet I was afraid, lest
I should not be able to make all those hear that assembled in the
evening. But, though it was supposed there were two or three
thousand more than ever were there before, yet they heard (I
was afterwards informed) to the very skirts of the congregation,
while I applied those solemn words, “One thing is needful.”
Wed. 31.-I preached at Launceston; SEPTEMBER 1, in the
market-place at Tiverton; and on Friday, 2, opened the little
preaching-house at Wellington. At noon I preached in an
ancient, venerable building, once belonging to a Lord Chief
320 REv. J. wesley’s [Sept. 1785.
Justice. It is oddly called Cat-Hanger. Having a stupid
people to deal with, I spoke exceeding plain; and I think
many of them, even Somersetshire farmers, felt as well as
heard. Thence we went on to Ditchet. The people here
are all attentive; so that I had nothing to do but apply the
promises. The society is continually increasing, and more
and more of the hearers are convinced and justified. What
is the strangest thing, is, there is no opposer in the town,
but rich and poor all acknowledge the work of God. Satur
day, 3. In the afternoon the good providence of God brought
us once more well to Bristol.
Sun. 4.--Finding a report had been spread abroad, that I
was just going to leave the Church; to satisfy those that
were grieved concerning it, I openly declared in the evening,
that I had now no more thought of separating from the
Church than I had forty years ago.
Tues. 6.--I preached at Paulton and Coleford; Wednesday,
7, in an open place near the road, at Melis. Just as I began,
a wasp, though unprovoked, stung me upon the lip. I was
afraid it would swell, so as to hinder my speaking; but it did
not. I spoke distinctly, near two hours in all; and was no worse
for it. In the evening I preached with much satisfaction at
Frome, to a mixed multitude of rich and poor; and afterwards
strongly exhorted them that had believed to walk in love, after
the example of our Great Master. On Thursday I preached
at Trowbridge; and on Friday at Bradford, where the work
of God has much increased lately; indeed, it has increased this
year through the whole Circuit, as it has not done for twenty
years before. On Saturday evening I preached at Bath.
Sun. 11.--Mr. Bradburn preached at seven, and Mr. Col
lins about two in the afternoon. I began the service at
eleven, and preached on part of the Epistle, Ephesians iii.
14, &c. Both then and in the evening the word “ distilled
as the dew, and as the rain on the tender herb.”
Tues. 13.--I preached at Stoke; and in the evening at Pens
ford; where, I fear, after all the pains we have taken, the gene
rality of the people know just as much of religion as the Hot
tentots. Wednesday, 14. I preached in the evening in the old
Temple Church, on Psalm lxxiv. 12. In the old translation it
runs, “The help that is done upon the earth, God doeth it him
self.” A glorious and important truth ! In the new, “Working
salvation in the midst of the earth.” What a wonderful emen
Oct. 1785.] JOURNAL. 321
dation 1 Many such emendations there are in this translation:
One would think King James had made them himself.
Thur. 15.--I went over to Hannam once more, and saw poor
disconsolate Louisa, still wrapping herself up naked in her
blanket, and not caring to speak to anyone. The late pretty
tale of her being the Emperor's daughter is doubtless a mere
catch-penny: And her four-and-twenty examinations are as
credible as Mahomet's journey through seventy thousand
heavens.
Sun. 18.-I read Prayers and preached at the new Room in
the morning; at two under the sycamore in Kingswood; and
at five near King's Square in Bristol. In the following week
I visited the classes, and was amazed to find there is no
increase in the society, considering what able and diligent
Preachers they have had the last year.
Tues. 27.--I visited the little flock at Amesbury, humble,
simple, and much devoted to God. Friday, 30. About eleven
I preached in the churchat Midsummer-Norton, to a numerous
congregation. The Curate, Mr. Sims, read Prayers for me, and
read them admirably well. About five I began at Ditchet,
where it rained almost all the time I preached; but this did not
much lessen the congregation: Indeed all of this town, hardly
one excepted, seem to have a liking to the truth. Saturday,
OCTOBER 1. I preached at Shepton to a crowded audience. In
the evening I preached at the Weavers' Hall to such a congre
gation as I had not seen there for many years. Sunday, 2.
After reading Prayers and preaching, I administered the sacra
ment to many hundred communicants. We then solemnly
renewed our covenant with God; and while we solemnly
avouched him to be our God, I believe many felt with holy,
humble joy, that he avouched us to be his people: At four
we went into the mail-coach: At twelve, it being exceeding
dark, the wheel of a waggon touched ours, and the coach was
over in a moment; but just on the spot were some rails which
stopped it, so that it did not fall to the ground; so that it
was easily set right again, without any hurt to man or beast.
About seven we reached Hyde-Park Corner, and the new
chapel at eight. Tuesday, 4. I made a little excursion into
Hertfordshire; and on Friday, 7, returned to London.
Mon. 10.--Setting out for Oxfordshire, I preached at Wal
lingford in the evening, and at five in the morning. I preached
322 REv. J. Wesley’s [Oct. 1785.
in Oxford at noon; and in the evening at Witney, where the
power of God uses to be eminently present. Thursday, 13.
Returning to Oxford, I once more surveyed many of the
gardens and delightful walks. What is wanting but the love
of God, to make this place an earthly paradise? I preached
in the evening to a very serious audience; as also the next
evening at High-Wycomb. In all this Circuit the work
of God appears both to widen and to deepen.
Sat. 15.--I returned to London. Sunday, 16. At nine
in the evening I set out for Norwich. Tuesday, 18, and the
following days, I visited Yarmouth, and the other parts
of the Circuit.
Sat. 22.--I returned to Norwich; and in the evening spoke
home to an uncommonly large congregation; telling them,
“Of all the people I have seen in the kingdom, for between
forty and fifty years, you have been the most fickle, and yet
the most stubborn.” However, our labour has not been lost,
for many have died in peace; and God is able to say to the
residue of these dry bones, “Live!”
Sun. 23.--I administered the Lord's Supper to about a
hundred and sixty communicants.
Tues. 25.--I crossed over to Lynn, which has been, of a
long season, a cold and comfortless place. But the scene is
now entirely changed: Two young, zealous, active Preachers,
strongly urging the people to expect a full and present salva
tion, have enlivened both the society and the congregation.
But the difficulty was, how to get to London. No coach
set out till Friday morning, nor got in before Saturday night.
So I took a postchaise after preaching, and reached Down
ham between ten and eleven : But here we were informed,
that, in so dark a night, we could not travel over Ely roads,
which run between two banks, across which are many bridges,
where the coachman must drive to an inch ; but we knew in
whom we trusted, and pushed forward, till about one on
Thursday we reached London.
Mon. 31.--I set out for Northamptonshire, and in the after
noon came to Luton. For many years I had lodged at Mr.
Cole’s in Luton; but he was now gone to his long home. The
room prepared for me now was very large and very cold, and
had no fire-place in it. After dinner I called upon Mr. Hamp
,son, the Lawyer who had made Mr. Cole's will. He gave me,
Mov. 1785.] JU URNAL. 323
with the utmost courtesy, all the information I wanted; and
afterwards invited me to lodge at his house, which I willingly
did. In the evening the preaching-house was thoroughly filled;
and we had a blessed season, both now and in the morning.
Tues. November 1.--When I came to Northampton, the
new Presbyterian meeting-house was offered me, twice as large
as our own. The congregation was numerous and deeply
attentive. Many attended again in the morning; I trust,
not without a blessing. Wednesday, 2. I preached at
Whittlebury. Thursday, 3. I met with Peru’s “Treatise
upon the Gravel and Stone.” I had long supposed that there
could not be in mature any such thing as a lithontriptic, a
medicine that could dissolve the stone, without dissolving the
bladder; but I am now convinced; there is no arguing against
matter of fact; the facts here alleged are too recent to be
denied, and too clear to be evaded : Therefore I cannot but
earnestly advise every one that has this dreadful distemper, to
try without delay, if he can afford it, this sovereign remedy.
Fri. 4.--I returned to London. Sunday, 6. I preached a
funeral sermon for that great and good man, Mr. Fletcher;
and most of the congregation felt that God was in the midst
of them. In the afternoon I buried the remains of Judith
Perry, a lovely young woman, snatched away at eighteen; but
she was ripe for the Bridegroom, and went to meet him in the
full triumph of faith. Sunday, 13. I preached at Shoreditch
church. The congregation was very numerous, and the
collection unusually large.-
Mon. 14.--This week I read over again, and carefully con
sidered, Mr. Fry’s tract upon Marriage. I wonder it is not
more known, as there is nothing on the head like it in the
English tongue. I still think he has proved to a demon
stration, that no marriages are forbidden, either by the law
of God or of England, but those of brothers and sisters, and
those in the ascending and descending line. The contrary
supposition seems to be built wholly in a misinterpretation
of that expression in Lev. xviii., “Thou shalt not uncover
her nakedness.” But this, he clearly shows, does not mean
to marry a woman, but to deflower her.
Sun. 20.--I preached in Bethnal-Green church, and spoke
as plain as I possibly could, on “having a form of godliness,
but denying the power thereof.” And this I judged to be
324 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Dec. 1785.
far more suitable to such a congregation, than talking
of justification by faith.
Having promised our friends at Winchester to come and open
their preaching-house when it was ready, I set out on Thursday,
24, and preached there in the evening to a numerous congre
gation; but I have not seen a people less affected: They seemed
to be mere stocks and stones. However, I have cast my bread
upon the water: Possibly it may be found again after many
days. On Friday evening we went into the mail-coach, and
reached London at eight in the morning.
Sun. 27.-As soon as I had concluded my sermon at the
aew chapel, I hastened away to preach at St. Luke's, one
of the largest parish churches in London. It was thoroughly
filled, as it was seven years ago, when I preached there before.
God enabled me to speak strong words on the epistle for the
day; and I believe some felt that it was now high “time to
awake out of sleep.”
Mon. 28.-I went to Canterbury: The chapel was more than
filled. On Tuesday I found at Dover also a considerable
increase of the work of God. Wednesday, 30. I went on to
Margate. Some years since we had a small society here; but
a Local Preacher took them to himself: Only two or three
remained, who from time to time pressed our Preachers to
come again; and, to remove the objection, that there was no
place to preach in, with the help of a few friends they built a
convenient preaching-house. Thursday, I opened it in the
evening; the congregation was large, and perfectly well
behaved; and I cannot but hope, that, after all the stumbling
blocks, there will be a people here, who will uniformly adorn
the Gospel of Christ. On Friday I returned to London.
Monday, DECEMBER 5, and so the whole week, I spent
every hour I could spare, in the unpleasing but necessary work
of going through the town, and begging for the poor men who
had been employed in finishing the new chapel. It is true, I
am not obliged to do this ; but if I do it not, nobody else will.
Sun. 11.--I strongly enforced St. James's beautiful descrip
tion of “the wisdom from above.” How hard is it to fix, even
on serious hearers, a lasting sense of the nature of true religion!
Let it be right opinions, right modes of worship, or anything,
rather than right tempers |
Thur. 22.--I preached at Highgate. Considering how
Jan. 1786.] JOURNAL. 325
magnificent a place this is, I do not wonder so little good has
been done here. For what has religion to do with palaces 2
Sun. 25.--(Being Christmas-Day.) I preached at the new
chapel early in the morning, and in the evening; about eleven
at West-Street. Monday, 26. I baptized a young woman
brought up an Anabaptist; and God bore witness to his
ordinance, filling her heart, at the very time, with peace and
joy unspeakable.
This week I endeavoured to point out all the errata in the
eight volumes of the Arminian Magazine. This must be done
by me: Otherwise several passages therein will be unintelligible.
Sun. JANUARY 1, 1786.-We began that solemn service,
the renewing of our covenant with God, not in the evening as
heretofore, but at three in the afternoon, as more convenient for
the generality of people. And God was with us of a truth.
Mon. 9.--At leisure hours this week, I read the Life of Sir
William Penn, a wise and good man. But I was much
surprised at what he relates concerning his first wife; who
lived, I suppose, fifty years, and said a little before her death,
“I bless God, I never did anything wrong in my life I’’
Was she then ever convinced of sin? And if not, could she
be saved on any other footing than a Heathen 2
Tues. 24.--I was desired to go and hear the King deliver
his speech in the House of Lords. But how agreeably was I
surprised He pronounced every word with exact propriety.
I much doubt whether there be any other King in Europe,
that is so just and natural a speaker.
Tues. 31.--I had a more particular account of Joseph Lee
than ever I had before. When I went first to Newcastle-upon
Tyne, I chose him, being a man full of faith and love, to be
one of the Leaders, Steward of the society, and Caterer for
our family. He discharged his trust with the utmost ability
and integrity. He walked humbly and closely with God; and
was a pattern to all the town, as well as to all the society.
But after some time, he was persuaded to quit Newcastle, and
settle at Nottingham. There he fell among Antinomians,
and, trusting in his own strength, gradually sucked in their
opinion, grew less and less strict; and lost first the power,
and then the very form, of religion. After he had lived some
years openly and avowedly without God in the world, while
he was one evening quite merry with his jovial companions,
326 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Feb. 1786.
one of them said, “Why, Mr. Lee, you was once very godly;
you was one of those mad Methodists l’” He answered not a
word, but leaned his arm on the table, and died.
Sun. FEBRUARY 5.--In the morning, while I was applying
at the new chapel that solemn declaration, “The Lord's hand
is not shortened, that it cannot save; nor his ear heavy, that
it cannot hear;” he did indeed speak aloud in his word, so
that the stout-hearted trembled. I broke out into prayer:
The power of God came mightily upon us, and there was a
general cry. But the voice of two persons prevailed over all
the rest; one praying, and the other shrieking as in the
agonies of death. God relieved the former in a few minutes;
the other, not till evening.
This week, in travelling, I read over Dr. Stuart's History
of Scotland. He is a writer indeed ! as far above Dr. Robert
son, as Dr. Robertson is above Oldmixon. He proves beyond'
all possibility of doubt, that the charges against Queen Mary
were totally groundless; that she was betrayed basely by her
own servants, from the beginning to the end; and that she
was not only one of the best Princesses then in Europe, but
one of the most blameless, yea, and the most pious women
Mon. 13.--I went to Mitcham, and found a little company
just started up, who were all on fire for God. The house
being too small, I preached at the front of a house adjoining
to the road; where the earnestness of the people made amends
for the keenness of the north wind.
Sun. 19.--I preached in Horsleydown church, where (to
my no small surprise) no man, woman, or child, seemed to
know me either by face or by name ! But before I had done,
many of the numerous congregation knew that God was
there of a truth.
Mon. 20.--I paid my last visit to that saint of God, Ann
Sharland, dying of a cancer in her breast, in continual pain;
but triumphing over pain and death.
Sun. 26.-I took a solemn leave of the congregation at the
new chapel, at West-Street, and at Brentford. Monday, 27.
We went on to Newbury, with little interruption from the
snow; and I had a comfortable opportunity, with a large and
serious congregation. But I have not passed such a night for
these forty years, my lodging-room being just as cold as
the outward air. I could not sleep at all till three in the
March, 1786.] JOURNAL. 327
morning. I rose at four, and set out at five. But the snow
which fell in the night lay so deep, it was with much difficulty
we reached Chippenham. Taking fresh horses there, we
pushed on to Bath; and found a larger congregation than
could well be expected.
Wed. MARch 1.--I had appointed to preach in Trowbridge
at noon. But we could not get thither till half an hour after.
I then preached without delay; and in the evening in Bristol,
on, “O death, where is thy sting 2 O grave, where is thy
victory?” Afterwards I visited one who could say with Mr.
De Renty, “I bear with me an experimental verity, and a
plenitude of the presence of the ever-blessed Trinity.” In the
afternoon I went over to Kingswood, and found the school in
excellent order. Sunday, 5. I read Prayers and preached,
and administered the sacrament to about five hundred com
municants. At three I preached in Temple church; at five
in the new Room. On Friday, I baptized a young Negro,
who appeared to be deeply serious and much affected; asindeed
did the whole congregation. Saturday, 11. I rode over to
Churchill, about twelve miles from Bristol; where Dr. Barry
read Prayers, and I preached to a serious congregation.
Mon. 13.--I left Bristol, taking Mr. Bradburn with me; as
I judged a change of place and of objects would be a means
of calming his mind, deeply affected with the loss of a beloved
wife. In the evening I preached at Stroud; Tuesday, 14, at
noon in Painswick, with uncommon liberty; and in the evening
at Gloucester. I preached in the old church (now vanished
away) belonging to St. Bartholomew’s Hospital; which I think
was very considerably larger than the new chapel in London.
Wed. 15.--Much snow fell in the night, and quite blocked
up the road. Yet with some difficulty we got through to
Tewkesbury, where I preached at noon. Abundance of snow
likewise fell in the afternoon; but we pushed through it to
Worcester. Thursday, 16. It was not without some diffi
culty, that we made our way through the snow to Bewdley.
Prejudice is here now vanished away. The life of Mr. Clark
turned the tide; and, much more, his glorious death. I
preached about noon; and at Worcester in the evening; where
we had an uncommon blessing while I was enforcing, “Thou
shalt have no other gods before me.”
Fri. 17.-At eleven I preached at Bengeworth; and again at
328 REv. J. WESLEY’s [March, 1786.
six in the evening: I believe, not without effect. Saturday,
18. I went on straight to Birmingham. Sunday, 19. A large
congregation attended in the morning. At ten I went to St.
Mary’s, where the Curate preached an admirable sermon. At
five the preaching-house would not near contain the congrega
tion. Afterwards I administered the Lord's Supper to about
five hundred communicants.
Mon. 20.--I met the select society; most of whom are
clearly perfected in love. Tuesday, 21. At three in the
afternoon I preached at Quinton, in the new preaching-house;
and in the evening at Birmingham. To-day I read Dr.
Withering’s “Treatise on Foxglove.” He says it frequently
cures epilepsies, palsies, insanity, consumptions, and several
other diseases. Sunday, 26. The church, as usual, was far
too small to contain the congregation.
I preached on Rev. xiv. 1-7; and exhorted the congrega
tion to cherish that divine ambition, of being found “faultless
before God.” We had another large congregation in the after
noon; and all serious as death. I spent the evening at a
neighbouring gentleman's house, in close conversation from
the beginning to the end.
Tues. 28.--After calling at Sheriff-Hales, and giving them
a short exhortation, I hastened to Stafford, and found the
congregation waiting. I strongly enforced upon them, “The
kingdom of God is at hand;” and then went on to Lane-End.
It was past seven, and the wind was piercing cold. However,
I was constrained to preach abroad; and none of us seemed
to regard the weather, for God warmed our hearts.
I forgot to mention that, the evening before, Madeley church
was thoroughly filled; and God reserved the great blessing for
the last. We had a glorious opportunity. He poured the dew
of his blessing on many souls; and caused many mourners to
rejoice with joy unspeakable.
Wed. 29.--We came to our old, steady friends at Burslem;
but he with whom I used to lodge is no more seen. He trusted
the Americans with all his substance; and they cheated him
out of all: So he came home and died; leaving an amiable
widow, and six or seven children.
Cold as it was, the multitude of people constrained me to
preach abroad; but I believe none went away. I preached
on, “Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
April, 1786.] JOURNAL. 329
Son Jesus Christ.” We have scarce seen such a time since
we came from London. The place seemed to be filled with
his glory.
After visiting Newcastle and Congleton, on Saturday, APRIL
1, I came to Macclesfield. Here again I had the satisfaction
to find a people much alive to God. Sunday, 2. We had a
large and serious congregation at the new church, both morning
and afternoon. The organ is one of the finest-toned I ever
heard; and the congregation singing with it make a sweet
harmony. Monday, 3. About eleven I preached to a crowded
congregation in the new House near Chapel-en-le-Frith. Many
of these lively people came from among the mountains, and
strongly reminded me of those fine verses wherein Dr. Burton
paraphrases those plain words, “The hills are a refuge for the
wild goats; and so are the stony rocks for the conies:”--
Te, domine, intonsi montes, te sawa loquentur
Summa Deum, dum amat juga pendulus hircus,
Sarorumque colit latebrosa cuniculus antra.
It is chiefly among these enormous mountains that so many
have been awakened, justified, and soon after perfected in
love; but even while they are full of love, Satan strives to
push many of them to extravagance. This appears in several
instances:--1. Frequently three or four, yea, ten or twelve,
pray aloud all together. 2. Some of them, perhaps many,
scream all together as loud as they possibly can. 3. Some
of them use improper, yea, indecent, expressions in prayer.
4. Several drop down as dead; and are as stiff as a corpse;
but in a while they start up, and cry, “Glory ! glory !” perhaps
twenty times together. Just so do the French Prophets, and
very lately the Jumpers in Wales, bring the real work into
contempt. Yet whenever we reprove them, it should be in
the most mild and gentle manner possible.
Tues. 4.--In the evening I preached to a lovely congregation
at Stockport. Friday, 7. I went on, as swiftly as I could,
through Manchester, Wigan, and Bolton. APRIL 16. (Being
Easter-Day.) I crossed over to Warrington; where, having
read Prayers, preached, and administered the Lord's Supper, I
hastened back to Bolton. The House was crowded the more,
because of five hundred and fifty children, who are taught in
our Sunday-Schools: Such an army of them got about me
when I came out of the chapel, that I could scarce disengage
myself from them.
330 REv. J. wesley's [May, 1786.
Mon. 17.--I went on to Blackburn, which was sufficiently
crowded; it being the fair-day. No House would contain the
people; so I stood abroad, and expounded that awful scrip
ture, “I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God.”
All were still as night, unless when they sung; then their
voices were as the sound of many waters.
Tues. 18.--I preached at Padiham, Burnley, Southfield,
and Colne. Thursday, 20. I went to Otley, and found God
was there, both in the evening, and morning service. Friday,
21. I preached at Yeadon; where the work of God is rapidly
going forward. Such a company of loving children I have
nowhere seen, but at Oldham, near Manchester. Sunday, 23.
I preached in Haworth church in the morning; and Bingley
church in the afternoon; but as there were many hundreds that
could not get in, Mr. Atmore preached abroad at the same
time. In the evening I preached to an huge multitude at
Bradford. Surely the people of this town are highly favoured,
having both a Vicar and a Curate that preach the truth.
Mon. 24.--I preached at Halifax; Tuesday, 25, at ten in
Heptonstall church; (the ugliest I know;) and in the afternoon
at Todmorden church. How changed are both the place and
the people since I saw them first
“Lo ! the smiling fields are glad; and the human savages
are tame !”
Thur. 27.--I preached at Greetland at ten; and at Hudders
field in the evening. Friday, 28. I preached at Longwood
House; the owners of which are a blessing to all the poor,
both in spirituals and temporals. Saturday, 29. The wind
drove us in the evening into the Cloth-Hall, in Gildersome ;
where I expounded and applied, “The things that are seen
are temporal; but the things that are not seen are eternal.”
Sun. 30.--I preached in the new House at Dewsbury, as I
had intended. I could not preach abroad at Birstal at noon,
because of the boisterous wind. I got some shelter from it at
Wakefield, while I applied those words in one of the Psalms
for the day, “He healeth them that are broken in heart, and
giveth medicine to heal their sickness.” On Monday, MAY 1,
and Tuesday, I preached at Leeds; on Wednesday, at the
church at Horsforth, with a remarkable blessing. Thursday, 4.
Preaching at Tadcaster in the way, in the evening I preached
at York. Sunday, 7. In the morning I preached at St.
May, 1786.] JOURNAL. 331
Saviour's church, thoroughly filled with serious hearers; and in
the afternoon at St. Margaret's, which was over-filled ; many
being constrained to go away. We had a love-feast in the
evening, at which many artlessly testified what God had done
for their souls. I have not for many years known this society
in so prosperous a condition. This is undoubtedly owing, first,
to the exact discipline which has for some time been observed
among them; and, next, to the strongly and continually
exhorting the believers to “go on unto perfection.”
Mon. 8.-I preached about one in the new House at Easing
wold, and in the evening at Thirsk. Tuesday, 9. Iwent on to
Richmond. I alighted, according to his own desire, at Arch
deacon Blackburne's house. How lively and active was he some
years ago! I find he is two years younger than me; but he is
now a mere old man, being both blind, and deaf, and lame.
Who maketh thee to differ? He durst not ask me to preach
in his church, “for fear somebody should be offended.” So I
preached at the head of the street, to a numerous congregation;
all of whom stood as still, (although it rained all the time,) and
behaved as well, as if we had been in the church.
Wed. 10.--I rode through a lovely country to Barnard
Castle, and found much life in the congregation. Thursday, 11.
About noon we came to Appleby, the county-town of Cumber
land. A very large room being provided, I preached with
much liberty, and then cheerfully went on to Penrith.
In my way hither, I looked over Lord Bacon’s “Ten
Centuries of Experiments.” Many of them are extremely
curious; and many may be highly useful. Afterwards I read
Dr. Anderson’s “Account of the Hebrides.” How accurate
and sensible a writer | But how clearly does he show that,
through the ill-judged salt [duty], the herring-fishery there,
which might be of great advantage, is so effectually destroyed,
that the King's revenue therefrom is annihilated; yea, that
it generally, at least frequently, turns out some thousand
pounds worse than nothing !
Fri. 12.--I preached at Carlisle; and Saturday, 13, after a
long day's journey, at Glasgow. After spending three days here
fully employed, on Wednesday, 17, we went on to Edinburgh.
Here likewise I had much and pleasant work. On Friday, 19,
I went forward to Dundee; and on Saturday, 20, to Arbroath;
where I spent the Lord's Day in the Lord’s work.
332 REv. J. Wesley’s [June, 1786.
Mon. 22.-Having a long day's journey before us, we set
out, at half-hour past three: So we came early to Aberdeen.
Wednesday, 24. We had an exceeding solemn parting, as I
reminded them that we could hardly expect to see each
other's face any more, till we met in Abraham’s bosom.
Thur. 25.--We set out early; but when we came to Bervie,
the inn was full; there was no room for man or beast; so we
were constrained to go a double stage, to Montrose. But the
storm was so high, we could not pass for several hours.
However, we reached Arbroath soon after six; and a large
congregation was deeply attentive, while I applied, “To him
that hath shall be given; but from him that hath not shall
be taken away even what he assuredly hath.”
The storm was still so high, that, unless we set out at night,
we could not pass till nine in the morning. So we went on
board at eleven. The wind was then so strong, that the boat
could scarce keep above water. However, our great Pilot
brought us safe to land between one and two in the morning.
Saturday, 27. About three we came to the New Inn, and
rested till between six and seven. Thence, going gently on
to Kinghorn, we had a pleasant passage to Leith. After
preaching, I walked to my lovely lodging at Coates, and found
rest Was Sweet.
Sun. 28.--I preached first at our own House, and at noon
on the Castle-Hill. I never saw such a congregation there
before. But the chair was placed just opposite to the sun;
But I soon forgot it, while I expounded those words, “I saw
the dead, small and great, stand before God.” In the evening
the whole audience seemed to feel, “Without holiness no man
shall see the Lord.”
Tues. 30.--I had the happiness of conversing with the Earl
of H and his Lady, at Dunbar. I could not but observe
both the easiness of his behaviour, (such as we find in all the
Scottish Nobility,) and the fineness of his appearance, greatly
set off by a milk-white head of hair. Wednesday, 31. I took a
view of the stupendous bridge, about ten miles from Dunbar;
which is thrown over the deep glen that runs between the two
mountains, commonly called the Peas. I doubt whether Louis
the Fourteenth ever raised such a bridge as this.
In the evening I preached at Berwick-upon-Tweed; Thurs
day, JUNE 1, at Aluwick. Friday, 2. I was desired to lay
June, 1786.] JOURNAL. 333
the first stone of the preaching-house there. A very large
congregation attending, we spent some time on the spot, in
solemn prayer, and singing praise to God. About noon I
preached in the Town-Hall at Morpeth; in the evening, at
Newcastle. How different is the spirit of this congregation
to that of most of those I have seen lately
JUNE 4.--(Being Whitsunday.) I preached at eight to an
amazing congregation, at the Ballast-Hills; but it was doubled
by that at the Fell in the afternoon. But it was supposed
that at the Garth-Heads, in the evening, was as large as both
together.
On Monday and Tuesday the congregation was larger than
I ever remember. Wednesday, 7. At five we had a solemn
parting. About noon I preached at North-Shields, in a tent
erected near the town, to a very numerous congregation. In
the evening I preached at Sunderland. About eleven on
Friday I preached in the church at Monkwearmouth, on those
words in the Second Lesson, “If thou canst believe, all
things are possible to him that believeth.” Friday, 9. I
preached at Durham about eleven, and in the evening at
Hartlepool. I preached in the Town-Hall, where many
appeared to be very deeply affected. Surely the seed will
spring up at last even here, where we seemed so long to be
ploughing on the sand.
Sat. 10.--I went to Darlington. Since I was here last,
Mr. died, and left many thousand pounds to an idle
spendthrift, but not one groat to the poor. O unwise steward
of the mammon of unrighteousness How much better for
him had he died a beggar !
Sun. 11.--I was obliged in the evening to preach abroad.
Afterward we had a love-feast; at which many plain people
spoke the height and depth of Christian experience, in the
most plain and artless manner.
Mon. 12.-We found still, at Stockton, much fruit of S.
Brisco's labours among the children. I preached here at noon,
and at Yarm in the evening, Tuesday, 13. The preaching
house at Hutton-Rudby was well filled at nine. When I
came to Guisborough, where I had no thought of preaching, I
found the congregation waiting: So I began without delay;
and it was a time of love. We had a warm ride in the after
noon to Whitby ; where it has pleased God fully to make up
334 * Rev. J. wesley's [June, 1786.
the removal of William Ripley, who was for many years a
burning and a shining light. In the evening the House was
well filled with people, and with the power of God; and,
after preaching four times, I was no more tired than when I
rose in the morning.
Thur. 15.-I found the work of God at Scarborough more
lively than it had been for many years. Friday, 16. In the
evening I preached at Bridlington-quay, to a numerous congre
gation. Saturday, 17. I found Mr. Parker at Beverley, in a
palace. The gentleman that owned it being gone abroad, it
was let at a moderate rent. I preached here at twelve; about
four at Newlands; and at seven in Hull. Sunday, 18. I was
invited by the Vicar to preach in the High Church, one of the
largest parish churches in England. I preached on the Gospel
for the day,+the story of Dives and Lazarus. Being invited
to preach in the afternoon, the church was, if possible, more
crowded than before; and I pressed home the Prophet’s
words, “Seek ye the Lord while he may be found; call ye
upon him while he is near.” Who would have expected, a
few years since, to see me preaching in the High Church at
Hull? I had appointed to preach at Swinfleet; so I went
as far as Beverley this evening, and on Monday, 19, set
out early; but being vehemently importuned to go round by
Malton, I did so, and preached there at nine. Thence I
hastened to Pocklington; and, finding the people ready, step
ped out of the chaise, and preached without delay. We
reached Swinfleet between six and seven, having gone, in all,
seventy-six miles. A numerous congregation was assembled
under the shade of tall trees. Sufficient for this day was the
labour thereof: But still I was no more tired than when I rose
in the morning.-
Tues. 20.--I preached in Crowle at noon; and in the
evening at Epworth.
Wed. 21.--I preached at Scotter at nine; and at one in
Brigg, in an open part of the town. All were still as night;
the very boys and girls standing as quiet as their parents:
Indeed, it seemed that the hearts of all were as melting wax
before the Lord. In the evening, the people flocking together
on every side, I was constrained to preach in the market
place at Grimsby; where every one behaved well, except the
Calvinist Preacher.
June, 1786.] JOURNAL. 335
Thur. 22.--In the evening I preached at Louth. I never
saw this people affected before. Friday, 23. At nine I
preached at Tealby, where many of the people felt that God
was with them in an uncommon manner.
Having now given a second reading to “Fingal,” rendered
into heroic verse, I was thoroughly convinced it is one of the
finest Epic Poems in the English language. Many of the
lines are worthy of Mr. Pope; many of the incidents are
deeply pathetic; and the character of Fingal exceeds any in
Homer, yea, and Virgil too. No such speech comes out of
his mouth as,
Sum pius AEneas, famá super asthera motus : *
No such thing in his conduct as the whole affair of Dido
is in the Trojan Hero. Meantime, who is Ewen Cameron ?
Is it not Doctor Blair? And is not one great part of this
publication to aggrandize the character of the old Highlanders,
as brave, hospitable, generous men?
In the evening I preached to a large congregation at Gains.
borough, in Sir Nevil Hickman’s yard. But Sir Nevil is no
more, and has left no son; so the very name of that ancient
family is lost ! And how changed is the house since I was
young, and good Sir Willoughby Hickman lived here ! One
of the towers is said to have been built in the reign of King
Stephen, above six hundred years ago. But it matters not;
yet a little while, and the earth itself, with all the works of it,
will be burned up.
Sat. 24.--I preached at New Inn; afterwards at Newark,+
one of the most elegant towns in England; and in the evening
at Retford, on, “I saw the dead, small and great, stand before
God.”
Sun. 25.--I preached at Misterton. I was grieved to see
so small a congregation at Haxey church. It was not so when
Mr. Harle lived here. O what a curse in this poor land are
pluralities and non-residence | But these are evils that God
alone can cure.
About one I preached at Overthorpe, where the spreading
trees sheltered both me and the congregation. But we had a
* The following is Warton's translation of this quotation from Virgil:--
The good AEneas am I call'd ; my fame,
And brave exploits, have reach'd the starry frame.--EDIT.
336 REv. J. WESLEY’s Journ AL. [June, 1786.
far larger at Epworth, between four and five in the afternoon.
Surely God will visit this place yet again, and lift up them
that are fallen.-
Mon. 26.--I read Prayers and preached in Owstone church,
thoroughly filled with attentive hearers; and again at nine in
the morning. Tuesday, 27. At one in the afternoon I
preached at Belton. While I was preaching, three little
children, the eldest six years old, the youngest two and a half,
whom their mother had left at dinner, straggled out, and got
to the side of a well, which was near the house. The
youngest, leaning over, fell in : The others striving to pull it
out, the board gave way; in consequence of which, they all
fell in together. The young one fell under the bucket, and
stirred no more; the others held for a while by the side of the
well, and then sunk into the water, where it was supposed
they lay half an hour. One coming to tell me, I advised,
immediately to rub them with salt, and to breathe strongly
into their mouths. They did so, but the young one was past
help; the others in two or three hours were as well as ever.
Wed. 28.--I entered into the eighty-third year of my age.
I am a wonder to myself. It is now twelve years since I have
felt any such sensation as weariness. I am never tired, (such
is the goodness of God!) either with writing, preaching, or
travelling. One natural cause undoubtedly is, my continual
exercise and change of air. How the latter contributes to
health I know not; but certainly it does.
This morning, Abigail Pilsworth, aged fourteen, was born
into the world of spirits. I talked with her the evening before,
and found her ready for the Bridegroom. A few hours after,
she quietly fell asleep. When we went into the room where
her remains lay, we were surprised. A more beautiful corpse
I never saw : We all sung,
Ah, lovely appearance of death !
What sight upon earth is so fair?
Not all the gay pageants that breathe
Can with a dead body compare
All the company were in tears; and in all, except her mother,
who sorrowed, (but not as one without hope,) they were tears
of joy. “O Death, where is thy sting?”
LoNDoN, Jan. 20, 1789.
J Olj R N A L
Thur. JUNE 29, 1786.-I took a cheerful leave of my
affectionate friends at Epworth, leaving them much more
alive than I found them. About one I preached at Thorne,
now one of the liveliest places in the Circuit, to a numerous
congregation; and in the evening at Doncaster. I know not
that ever I saw this preaching-house filled before; and many
of them seemed to feel, as well as hear. It may be, some
will bring forth fruit with patience.
Fri. 30.--I turned aside to Barnsley, formerly famous for
all manner of wickedness. They were then ready to tear
any Methodist Preacher in pieces. Now not a dog wagged
his tongue. I preached near the market-place to a very
large congregation; and I believe the word sunk into many
hearts: They seemed to drink in every word. Surely God
will have a people in this place.
Sat. JULY 1.--I went on to Bramley, about four miles from
Sheffield, where a gentleman has built a meat preaching-house
for the poor people, at his own expense. As the notice was
short, I had no need to preach abroad. The congregation was
deeply serious, while I explained what it was to build upon a
rock, and what to build upon the sand. In the evening l
spoke very plain to a crowded audience at Sheffield, on,
“Now it is high time to awake out of sleep.” One of the
hearers wrote me a nameless letter upon it. But he could
* This part of Mr. Wesley's Journal was not transcribed and published by him
self, but by those persons who had access to his papers after his decease. They
apologize for the imperfect form in which it appears, by saying, at the conclusion,
“We are not sure that Mr. Wesley carried on his Journal any farther; but if any
more of it should be found, it will be published in due time. There are unavoid
able chasms in this Journal, owing to some parts being mislaid; and it is proba
ble that many of the proper names of persons and places are not properly spelled;
as the whole of the manuscript was so ill written as to be scarcely legible.” It
should also be stated, that this part of the Journal contains some passages which
it is probable Mr. Wesley would never have committed to the press, and for the
publication of which he should not be made responsible.--EDIT.
340 Rev. J. Wesley’s [July, 1786.
remember nothing of the sermon but only, that “the rising
early was good for the nerves 1”
Sun. 2-I read Prayers, preached, and administered the
Sacrament to six or seven hundred hearers: It was a solemn
season. I preached soon after five in the evening, on, “There
is joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth.” Afterwards
I gave an account of the rise of Methodism, (that is, old
scriptural Christianity,) to the whole congregation; as truth
will bear the light, and loves to appear in the face of the sun.
Mon. 3.-We had our Quarterly Meeting, followed by a
love-feast, at which many spoke without reserve; and several
of them admirably well; showing that with the fear of the
Lord is understanding.
Tues. 4.--I met the select society, most of them walking in
glorious liberty. Afterwards I went to Wentworth-House, the
splendid seat of the late Marquis of Rockingham. He lately
had forty thousand a year in England, and fifteen or twenty
thousand in Ireland. And what has he now? Six foot of earth,
A heap of dust is all remains of thee!
'Tis all thou art, and all the proud shall be.
The situation of the house is very fine. It commands a
large and beautiful prospect. Before the house is an open view;
behind, a few acres of wood; but not laid out with any taste.
The green-houses are large; but I did not observe anything
curious in them. The front of the house is large and magnifi
cent, but not yet finished. The entrance is noble, the saloon
exceeding grand, and so are several of the apartments. Few
of the pictures are striking : I think none of them to be
compared with some in Fommon Castle. The most extra
ordinary thing I saw was the stables: A Square, fit for a royal
palace, all built of fine stone, and near as large as the old
Quadrangle at Christ-Church in Oxford. But for what use
were these built? To show that the owner had near three
score thousand pounds a year ! O how much treasure might
he have laid up in heaven, with all this mammon of unright
eousness | About one I preached at Thorpe, to three or four
times as many as the preaching-house would have contained;
and in the evening to the well-instructed and well-behaved
congregation at Sheffield. O what has God wrought in this
town | The leopard now lies down with the kid.
ed. 5-Notice was given, without my knowledge, of my
July, 1786.] JOURNAL. 341
preaching at Belper, seven miles short of Derby. I was
nothing glad of this, as it obliged me to quit the turnpike-road,
to hobble over a miserable common. The people, gathered
from all parts, were waiting. So I went immediately to the
market-place; and, standing under a large tree, testified,
“This is life eternal, to know thee, the only true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.” The House at Derby
was throughly filled in the evening. As many of the better
sort (so called) were there, I explained, (what seemed to be
more adapted to their circumstances and experience,) “This
only have I found, that God made man upright; but they
have found out many inventions.”
Thur. 6.--In going to Ilston we were again entangled in
miserable roads. Wegotthither, however, about eleven. Though
the church is large, it was sufficiently crowded. The Vicar read
Prayers with great earnestness and propriety: I preached on,
“Her ways are ways of pleasantness;” and the people seemed
all ear. Surely good will be done in this place; though it is
strongly opposed both by the Calvinists and Socinians.
We went on in a lovely afternoon, and through a lovely
country, to Nottingham. I preached to a numerous and well
behaved congregation. I love this people: There is something
wonderfully pleasing, both in their spirit and their behaviour.
Fri. 7.--The congregation at five was very large, and
convinced me of the earnestness of the people. They are
greatly increased in wealth and grace, and continue increasing
daily. Saturday, 8. I walked through the General Hospital.
I never saw one so well ordered. Neatness, decency, and
common sense, shine through the whole. I do not wonder
that many of the patients recover. I prayed with two of them.
One of them, a notorious sinner, seemed to be cut to the heart.
The case of the other was quite peculiar: Both her breasts
have been cut off, and many pins taken out of them, as
well as out of her flesh in various parts. “Twelve,” the
Apothecary said, “were taken out of her yesterday, and five
more to-day.” And the physicians potently believe, she
swallowed them all; though nobody can tell when or how !
Which is the greater credulity? To believe this is purely
natural 2 Or to ascribe it to preternatural agency?
In the evening many felt
The' o'erwhelming power of saving grace :
342 REv. J. Wesley's [July, 1786.
and many more on Sunday, 9, when we had the largest
number of communicants that ever were seen at this chapel,
or perhaps at any church in Nottingham. I took a solemn
leave of this affectionate congregation, at five in the morning,
Monday, 10, not expecting to meet another such (unless at
Birmingham) till I came to London.
About nine I preached at Mount-Sorrel; and though it was
the fair-day, I saw not one drunken person in the congregation.
It rained most of the way to Leicester, and some were afraid
there would be no congregation. Vain fear ! The House
was extremely crowded with deeply attentive hearers, while I
applied our Lord’s words to the Centurion, in effect spoken to
us also, “As thou hast believed, so be it done unto thee.”
In the afternoon we went on to Hinckley. It rained all the
evening: Yet we had more hearers than the House could
contain; and hardly a trifler among them. A more serious,
well-behaved people, I have seldom seen.
This evening (I believe before I had done preaching) a
remarkable instance of divine justice appeared. A man in the
street was grievously cursing another, and praying God “ to
blast his eyes.” At that instant he was struck blind: So (I
suppose) he continues ever since.
Tues. 11.--The poor, little flock at Coventry have at length
procured a meat, convenient Room: Only it is far too smail. As
many of the people as could get in were all attention. How
is the scene changed here also ! I know not but now the Cor
poration, if it had been proposed, would have given the use
of the Town-Hall to me rather than to the dancing-master
In the evening I went on to Birmingham, and found the usual
spirit in the congregation. They are much alive to God, and
consequently increasing in number as well as in grace.
Wed. 12.--At noon I preached in the new chapel at
Deritend. To build one here, was an act of mercy indeed;
as the church would not contain a fifth, perhaps not a tenth,
of the inhabitants. At six I preached in our chapel at
Birmingham, and immediately after took coach to London.
Thur. 13.--We reached the town at two, and settled all our
business on this and the two following days. Sunday, 16. My
heart was greatly enlarged in exhorting a very numerous con
gregation to “worship God in spirit and in truth.” And we
had such a number of communicants as we have not had before,
July, 1786.] JOURNAL. 343
since the covenant-night. I suppose fifty, perhaps a hundred
of them, never communicated before. In the afternoon I buried
the remains of Thomas Parkinson, (who died suddenly two or
three days before,) one of our first members, a man of an excel
lent spirit, and unblamable conversation. Monday, 17. After
preaching at West-Street, where many were impressed with a
deep sense of the presence of God, I took coach for Bristol.
We had a delightful journey; but having the window at my
side open while I slept, I lost my voice, so that I could scarce
be heard across a room. But before Wednesday morning (by
applying garlic as usual) it was instantly restored.
Thur. 20.--I preached at the new Room, on, “We have
this treasure in earthen vessels.” And the hearts of many, who
had been vexed with needless scruples, were mightily refreshed.
Fri. 21.--I walked over to Kingswood School, now one
of the pleasantest spots in England. I found all things just
according to my desire; the Rules being well observed, and the
whole behaviour of the children showing that they were now
managed with the wisdom that cometh from above.
Sun. 23.--I preached in the morning on those words in the
Second Lesson, “Lazarus, come forth;” and I believe, many
that were buried in sin heard the voice of the Son of God. In
the evening I preached abroad on Matt. v. 20. In the middle
of the sermon it began to rain; but not many went away. This
put me in mind of that remarkable circumstance respecting the
late Pope. On that solemn day when the Pope rides on horse
back to St. Peter's, a violent storm scattered his whole retinue.
When it abated, His Holiness was missing; but they soon
found him sitting quietly in the church. Being asked how
he could ride through such a storm, he very calmly replied,
“I am ready to go, not only through water, but through fire
also, for my Lord’s sake.” Strange, that such a man should
be suffered to sit two years in the Papal chair
Tues. 25.--Our Conference began: About eighty Preachers
attended. We met every day at six and nine in the morning,
and at two in the afternoon. On Tuesday and on Wednesday
morning the characters of the Preachers were considered,
whether already admitted or not. On Thursday in the after
noon we permitted any of the society to be present, and
weighed what was said about separating from the Church:
23ut we all determined to continue therein, without one
dissenting voice; and I doubt not but this determination will
344 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Aug. 1786.
stand, at least till I am removed into a better world. On
Friday and Saturday most of our temporal business was
settled. Sunday, 30. I preached in the Room morning and
evening; and in the afternoon at Kingswood, where there is
rather an increase than a decrease in the work of God.
Mon. 31.-The Conference met again, and concluded on
Tuesday morning. Great had been the expectations of many,
that we should have had warm debates; but, by the mercy
of God, we had none at all: Everything was transacted with
great calmness; and we parted, as we met, in peace and love.
Tues. AUGUST 8.--At seven Mr. Brackenbury, Broadbent,
and I, took coach for Harwich, which we reached about eight in
the evening. Wednesday, 9. Between two and three in the
afternoon we went on board the Besborough packet, one of
the cleanest ships I ever saw, with one of the most obliging
Captains. We had many gentlemen on board, whom I was
agreeably surprised to find equally obliging. Thursday, 10.
The wind continuing small, and the sea calm, they desired me
to give them a sermon. They were all attention. Who knows
but some among them may retain the impressions they then
received 2 Friday, 11. For some time we had a dead calm; so
that we did not reach Helvoetsluys till the afternoon, nor Rot
terdam till between ten and eleven at night. We found Mr.
Loyal was not returned from a journey, which he had begun a
week or two before; but Mrs. Loyal gave us a hearty welcome.
Sat. 12.--Mr. Williams, Minister of the Episcopal church,
and Mr. Scott, Minister of the Scotch church, both welcomed
me to Holland; but their kindness involved me in an awkward
difficulty: Mr. Scott had asked the consent of his Consistory,
for me to preach in his church on Sunday afternoon; but Mr.
Williams had given notice of my preaching in his church,
both morning and afternoon; and neither of them being
willing to give up his point, I would fain have compromised
the matter; but each seemed to apprehend his honour con
cerned, and would not in anywise give up his point. I saw no
possible way to satisfy both, but by prolonging my stay in
Holland, inorder to preach one Sunday, morning and afternoon
in the Episcopal, and another in the Scotch church: And
possibly God may have more work for me to do in Holland,
than I am yet aware of.
Though Mr. Loyal, with whom I lodged when I was at
Rotterdam before, was not in town, being gone with a friend
Aug. 1786.] JOURNAL. 345
to Paris, yet I was quite as at home, and went on in my work
without any interruption. Sunday, 13. The Service began
about ten. Mr. Williams read Prayers exceedingly well, and
I preached on those words in the first Lesson, “How long
halt ye between two opinions?” All the congregation gave
a serious attention; but I fear they only heard, but did
not feel: But many seemed to be much affected in the
afternoon, while I opened and applied those words, “There
hath no temptation taken you, but what is common to men.”
In the evening, Mr. Scott called upon me, and informed me,
that the Elders of his church would not desire me to stay in
Holland on purpose to preach, but would dismiss my promise.
I then determined to follow my first plan; and (God willing)
to return to England in a fortnight.
Mon. 14.--Taking boat at eight, we went at our ease through
one of the pleasantest summer countries in Europe, and reached
the Hague between twelve and one. Being determined to lodge
at no more inns, I went with brother Ferguson to his own lodg
ing, and passed a quiet and comfortable night. A few pious
persons came to us in the evening; with whose spirits we quickly
took acquaintance. I have not found any persons, since we
crossed the sea, who seemed so much devoted to God.
Tues. 15.--Making the experiment when we took boat, I
found I could write as well in the boat as in my study : So
from this hour I continued writing whenever I was on board.
What mode of travelling is to be compared with this? About
moon we called on Professor Roers, at Leyden, a very sensible
and conversable man : As he spoke Latin very fluently, I could
willingly have spent some hours with him; but I had appointed
to be at Amsterdam in the evening. We came thither between
seven and eight, and tookup our abode with William Ferguson,
who continued to lodge us all with tolerable convenience.
Wed. 16.--I spent the day very quietly in writing, and visit
ing a few friends, who knew not how to be affectionate enough.
In the evening I spoke to a little company at my own lodgings,
on, “It is appointed unto men once to die.”
Thur. 17.--I breakfasted with a little company of truly pious
people, and afterwards went to see the manner wherein the
Deacons of Amsterdam relieve their poor weekly. I suppose
there were two or three hundred poor, but the whole was
transacted with the utmost stillness and decency.
To-day likewise I visited more of my friends, who showed all
346 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Aug. 1786.
possible affection. Friday, 18. We went to Haerlem, and
spent an agreeable day with a few agreeable friends. We
lodged at Mr. Vancampen's, a florist, and were perfectly at
home. Both Mr. and Mrs. Vancampen seemed deeply devoted
to God, as much as any I have seen in Holland.
In the afternoon we met a little company in the town, who
seemed to be truly alive to God: One Miss Rouquetin particu
lar, whose least recommendation was, that she could speak both
Dutch, French, and English. She spent the evening at Miss
Falconberg’s, the chief gentlewoman in the town. Here we
supped. The manner was particular: No table-cloth was
used, but plates, with knives and forks, and napkins, to each
person, and fifteen or sixteen small ones; on which were
bread, butter, cheese, slices of hung beef, cakes, pancakes,
and fruit of various kinds. To these were added music upon
an excellent organ, one of the sweetest tones I ever heard.
Sat. 19.--We took a walk in Haerlem wood. So delightful
a place I scarce ever saw before. I judged it to be about a
mile broad, and two or three miles, deep. This is divided into
almost innumerable walks, some broad and some narrow, but
diversified in a wonderful manner, and skirted with elegant
houses on both sides. In the afternoon we returned to
Amsterdam. In the evening Mr. Shranten, a bookseller,
(whose daughter had come with us in the boat to Amsterdam,)
an Elder of the Holland's church, invited us to supper, and
desired me to expound a portion of Scripture, which I did
with liberty of spirit. Afterward Mr. Brackenbury repeated
to them in French the substance of what I had said.
Sun. 20.--I expected to have preached in the English church,
as I did before ; but some of the Elders were unwilling : So I
attended there as a hearer; and I heard as miserable a sermon
as most I have heard in my life. It might have been preached
either among Jews, Turks, or Heathens, without offending them
at all. In the afternoon I expounded, to a company of serious
Christians, our Lord’s account of building our house upon a
rock. Jonathan Ferguson interpreted sentence by sentence;
and God applied it to the hearts of the hearers.
Mon. 21.-I spent an hour with great satisfaction at Mr.
Noltanu's country-house. Such a couple as him and his wife,
I never saw since I left London; and both their children
appeared to be worthy of their parents, both as to person,
understanding, and temper.
Aug. 1786.] JOURNAL. 347
Tues. 22.-I spent great part of the day at Mr. Wankennel’s
country-house, having agreed with him to give me a private
room to write in, before and after dinner. At ten, a very
sensible Clergyman came in, with whom I conversed very
largely, as he talked elegant Latin, and exceeding fluently,
beyond any I have lately seen on the Continent.
Having seen all the friends I proposed to see, on Thursday,
24, I took my leave of this loving people, and the pleasant
city of Amsterdam, very probably for ever ; and, setting out
at seven in the morning, between two and three in the after
noon came to Utrecht. Mr. Vanrocy, the gentleman who
had engaged me to lodge, sent a coach to wait for me at my
landing; and received me with the courtesy and cordiality
of an old Yorkshire Methodist.
Fri. 25.--I kept close to my work all the day. I dined at
Mr. Loten's, where was such variety of food as I never saw
at any Nobleman’s table, either in England or Ireland. In the
afternoon we took a view of a widow lady’s gardens in the
suburbs of Utrecht. I believe, from the house to the end of
the grand vista is about a mile. I think the gardens are not
half as broad; but such exquisite beauty and symmetry I never
saw before. In grandeur it is not to be named with a few places
in England; but in elegance and variety, I verily believe it
equals, if not exceeds, any place of the size in Europe.
In the evening I expounded to a select company of very
honourable ladies, Matt. vii. 24; Miss Loten interpreting for
me sentence by sentence: And I know not but God might
bless this poor way of preaching to the Dutch, as he did that
to the Indians by David Brainerd.
Sat. 26.-I had a long conversation with a gentleman whom
almost all the religious world take for a madman. I do not
know that I have found one of so deep experience since I left
London. I have no doubt of his being perfected in love : He
has a clear witness of it, and has had many years, without any
interruption. I had now an opportunity of being throughly
informed concerning the University of Utrecht. As the young
gentlemen are scattered over this town, and live without the
least control, they do anything, or nothing, as they please;
and as they have no tutors, they have none to check them.
Most of them lounge from morning to night, doing nothing, or
doing worse. Well, bad as they are, Oxford and Cambridge
are not Utrecht yet.
348 Rev. J. Wesley’s [Sept. 1786.
Sun. 27.--I attended the Service at the English church;
where about thirty persons were present. At five in the
evening I believe I had eighty or ninety hearers; and I had
much liberty of speech among them. I cannot doubt but
some of them found the word of God to be sharper than a
two-edged sword.
After Service I went once more to Mr. Loten’s. Both Mrs.
Loten and he came to town on purpose to see me; otherwise,
he could find little comfort there, during the present state
of affairs. The Burghers have all agreed to depose their
Burgomasters, and elect new ones in their stead ; who are
to-morrow to take an oath on a scaffold erected in the open
market-place, not to the Prince of Orange, but to the city
of Utrecht. To this end, they had displaced all the Prince's
Guards, and placed Burghers at all the gates. It is thought
the example will spread; and it will not be strange if all
Holland should soon be a field of blood.
Mon. 28.--We took boat at seven, being informed that at
eight all the city-gates would be shut. In the evening we
reached Rotterdam, and rejoiced to meet good Mr. Loyal
once more. Here we rested on Tuesday. Wednesday, 30.
We set out early, and went twelve miles in a coach, for which
we had to pay six guilders and no more. We then crossed
the river, which cost four stivers, and hired an open waggon
for twenty-three stivers, which brought us to the other river
in half an hour. At the Brill we hired another coach, which
cost us four guilders. I set down these little things that
others may not be cheated.
We found company enough in our inn at Helvoetsluys,
genteel, good-natured, and sensible; but finding our conversa
tion was not suited to their taste, we only dined with them on
this and the following days. Both on this, Thursday, and
Friday, the wind was quite contrary; but, otherwise, we could
not have sailed, for it blew a storm; so I took the opportunity
of writing a sermon for the Magazine.
Sat. SEPTEMBER. 2.-The storm abating, we set sail about
nine, though the wind was contrary; but in the afternoon it fell
calm. The rolling of the ship made us sick. I myself was
sick a few minutes; Mr. Broadbent, by times, for some hours;
Mr. Brackenbury, (who did not expect to be at all,) almost
from the beginning of the voyage to the end.
Sun. 3.--When we had been twenty-four hours on board, we
Sept. 1786.] JOURNAL. 349
were scarce come a third of our way. I judged we should not
get on unless I preached, which I therefore did, between two
and three in the afternoon, on, “It is appointed unto men
once to die;” and I believe all were affected for the present.
Afterwards, we had a fair wind for several hours; but it then
fell dead calm again. This did not last long; for as soon as
prayer was over, a fresh breeze sprung up, and brought us
into the Bay. It being then dark, we cast anchor; and it
was well ! for at ten at night we had a violent storm. I
expected little rest; but I prayed, and God answered ; so that
I slept sound till my usual hour, four o’clock. The wind being
again quite contrary, we were obliged to tack continually;
but about nine were brought safe to Harwich. After resting
about an hour, we took chaise, and about one came to
Colchester; where, Mr. Brackenbury being exceeding weak,
we thought it best to stay till the morning.
In the evening the House was throughly filled; and many
received the truth in the love thereof; so that I did not at all
regret my stopping here. Setting out early in the morning,
Tuesday, 5, I reached London before one o’clock, and
transacted most of my business in the afternoon. In the
evening I preached on Psalm xxix. 9, 10; and the voice
of the Lord was indeed with power. Wednesday, 6. I
answered my letters; and on Thursday, 7, set out for Bristol.
In the evening I preached at Newbury. It rained and blew
vehemently; yet the House was throughly filled; and I found
uncommon liberty in pushing the inquiry, “Who of you are
building on the sand, and who upon a rock P” Friday, 8.
In the evening I preached at Bath, to a more numerous
congregation than I expected; and more serious, for I do
not find there were any careless or inattentive hearers.
Saturday, 9. We had a good congregation at five; although
the weather continued stormy. Afterward I searched to the
bottom a story I had heard in part; and found it another
tale of real woe:--Two of our society had lived together in
uncommon harmony; when one who met in Band with E. F.,
to whom she had mentioned that she had found a temptation
toward Dr. F., went and told her husband she was in love
with him, and that she had it from her own mouth. The
spirit of jealousy seized him in a moment, and utterly took
away his reason; and some one telling him his wife was at
350 REv. J. Wesley’s [Sept. 1786,
Dr. F.'s, (on whom she had called that afternoon,) he took a
great stick and ran away; and meeting her in the street,
called out, “Strumpet, strumpet !” and struck her twice or
thrice. He is now throughly convinced of her innocence; but
the water cannot be gathered up again He sticks there, “I
do throughly forgive you; but I can never love you more.”
Sun. 10.--Our service began at ten. Mr. Creighton (whose
health is a little recovered by rest, and drinking the mineral
waters) read Prayers and assisted at the sacrament. I preached
on, “The children are brought to the birth, and there is not
strength to bring forth.” At half an hour past two we had a
far larger congregation, and I think equally serious; on whom
I enforced the exhortation, “Come unto me, all ye that are
weary and heavy-laden.” In the evening I opened and largely
applied those words in the Gospel for the day, “Verily I say
unto you, Many Prophets and Kings have desired to see the
things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear
those things that ye hear, and have not heard them.”
Mon. 11.--Leaving the society here well united together,
I went on, and preached at Bristol in the evening; and on
Tuesday, 12, retired to a friend's house, where I went on with
Mr. Fletcher's Life without interruption; but on Wednesday,
13, I could not resist the desire of my friends, to preach at
Temple church in the evening. I never saw it so full in an
evening before, nor felt so much of the power of God there.
Fri. 15.-I had much satisfaction in the evening at the
chapel in Guinea-Street. It was throughly filled; and most
of the people seemed much affected, while (from Heb. xii. 1)
I described what I take to be the chief besetting sins
of Bristol, love of money, and love of ease. Indeed God
has already wrought a great deliverance for many of them;
and we hope a far greater will ensue.
Sun. 17.--I preached morning and evening at the Room; and
in the afternoon at Kingswood, where the work of God seems
to stand nearly at one stay; not sensibly increasing or
decreasing. On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I met
the classes at Bristol; and on the remaining days of the
week transcribed the society, considerably increased since last
year; and I hope in grace as well as in number.
Sat. 23.--I read the general plan of Monsieur Gebalin's vast
work, designed to consist of twelve very large quarto volumes:
Oct. 1786.] JOURNAL. * 351
eight of which are published :--“The Primitive World
Analyzed, and compared with the Modern.” He is a man
of strong understanding, boundless imagination, and amazing
industry. I think his first volume is a beautiful castle in the
air. I admire it ; but I do not believe one word of it, because
it is wholly built on the authority of Sanchoniathon, whom no
one could ever yet prove to have had a being: And I fear he
was a Deist: 1. Because he nowhere lays the least stress upon
the Bible: 2. Because he supposes the original confusion
of tongues to have been a merely natural event. Sunday, 24.
God was eminently present with us at the morning service, as
well as at Temple church in the afternoon, which I never
saw so filled before; which is not at all strange, considering
the spirit of the Vicar, and the indefatigable pains which he
takes with rich and poor. At five I took the opportunity
of a fair evening to preach once more near King's Square;
and once more I declared to a huge multitude the whole
counsel of God.
Mon. 25.-We took coach in the afternoon ; and on
Tuesday morning reached London. I now applied myself in
earnest to the writing of Mr. Fletcher's Life, having procured
the best materials I could. To this I dedicated all the time
I could spare, till November, from five in the morning till
eight at night. These are my studying hours; I cannot write
longer in a day without hurting my eyes.
Sat. 30.-I went to bed at my usual time, half an hour past
nine, and, to my own feeling, in perfect health. But just
at twelve I was waked by an impetuous flux, which did not
suffer me to rest many minutes together. Finding it rather
increased than decreased, though (what I never knew before)
without its old companion, the cramp, I sent for Dr. White
head. He came about four; and, by the blessing of God, in
three hours I was as well as ever. Nor did I find the least
weakness or faintness; but preached, morning and afternoon,
and met the society in the evening, without any weariness.
Of such a one I would boldly say, with the son of Sirach,
“Honour the Physician, for God hath appointed him.”
Mon. OCTOBER 2.-I went to Chatham, and had much
comfort with the loving, serious congregation in the evening,
as well as at five in the morning. Tuesday, 3. We then ran
down, with a fair, pleasant wind, to Sheerness. The preaching
352 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Oct. 1786.
house here is now finished, but by means never heard of.
The building was undertaken a few months since, by a little
handful of men, without any probable means of finishing it.
But God so moved the hearts of the people in the Dock, that
even those who did not pretend to any religion, carpenters,
shipwrights, labourers, ran up, at all their vacant hours, and
worked with all their might, without any pay. By this means
a large square House was soon elegantly finished, both within
and without; and it is the neatest building, next to the new
chapel in London, of any in the south of England.
I preached in the evening, on, “Stand in the old paths,” to a
lovely congregation; and then showed the society of how great
importance it was, that their light should shine before men.
And indeed it does shine: They are of one heart and of one
mind, striving for the hope of the Gospel. I preached at
Chatham on Thursday evening; and the next day, Friday, 6,
returned to London.
Tues. 10.-Having promised to preach in their new House,
at Lynn, I thought it best to go while the good weather
continued. I had ordered two places to be taken in the coach,
which would have reached Lynn on Tuesday noon; but my
messenger, mending my orders, took them in the diligence,
which came in between nine and ten at night. By this means
I lost one of three evenings, which I proposed to spend there.
I spent Wednesday and Thursday with much satisfaction,
with a very loving and lively people, increasing in grace as well
as in number, and adorning the doctrine of God our Saviour.
I had appointed to preach Mrs. Shewell’s funeral sermon, at
Barnet, on Friday evening; and as we had only two light
persons in the diligence, and no baggage, I hoped we should
have come in time. But they were vain hopes: We did not
reach Hoddesdon till after sunset. I them took a post-chaise;
for the diligence went the other road. But as we had a rough
by-road across the country, without either moon or stars, we
could not reach the chapel till half an hour after seven. About
half the congregation were gone away; an officious man having
informed them I would not come. With the other half, which
pretty well filled the house, we had a solemn opportunity.
So I have lived to see the large family at Hadley, two
brothers and three sisters, all removed. So does “the earth
drop its inhabitants, as the tree its leaves.”
Oct. 1786.] JOURNAL. 353
Mon. 16.--I went to Hinxworth, and preached in the
evening to a more numerous congregation than I ever had
seen there before. At length Miss Harvey sees some fruit
of all the pains she has taken. Tuesday, 17. I met her poor
children in the morning, twenty of whom she keeps at school
in the village, as she is unwearied in doing good. In the
evening I preached in Mr. Hicks's church, at Wrestling
worth. I have not seen such a congregation there for many
years: Neither have I found so much of the power of God.
Surely all our labour here will not be in vain.
Thur. 19.--I returned to London. In this journey I had
a full sight of Lord Salisbury's seat, at Hatfield. The park
is delightful. Both the fronts of the house are very hand
some, though antique. The hall, the assembly-room, and
the gallery, are grand and beautiful. The chapel is ex
tremely pretty; but the furniture in general (excepting the
pictures, many of which are originals) is just such as I should
expect in a gentleman’s house of five hundred a year.
Sun. 22.--I preached at West-Street, morning and after
noon, and at Allhallows church in the evening. It was much
crowded; and God gave us so remarkable a blessing, as I
scarce ever found at that church. Tuesday, 24. I met the
classes at Deptford, and was vehemently importuned to order
the Sunday service in our Room at the same time with that
of the church. It is easy to see that this would be a formal
separation from the Church. We fixed both our morning
and evening service, all over England, at such hours as not to
interfere with the Church; with this very design,-that those
of the Church, if they chose it, might attend both the one and
the other. But to fix it at the same hour, is obliging them
to separate either from the Church or us; and this I judge to
be not only inexpedient, but totally unlawful for me to do.
Wed. 25.-I went to Brentford, but had little comfort
there. The society is almost dwindled to nothing. What
have we gained by separating from the Church here 2 Is not
this a good lesson for others?
Thur. 26.-Mr. Holbrook carried us to Hampton-Court, far
the finest palace which the King of England has. The build
ings are a little town; and nothing can be pleasanter than the
park. But above all, the three fronts of the house, the stair
case, and the furniture and pictures in the apartments, are
354 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Nov. 1786.
worthy of a King, and not equalled by any in the kingdom, in
some respects; not by Blenheim itself, which exceeds it only
in its front, in tapestry, and in shockingly immodest pictures.
In the evening I preached to a large and serious congrega
tion, at Wandsworth. I think it was about two in the morn
ing that a dog began howling under our window, in a most
uncommon manner. We could not stop him by any means.
Just then William B r died.
Fri. 27.--I preached once more at Barnet, probably for the
last time. Sunday, 29. After preaching at West-Street, I
went directly to St. Giles's ; where I preached before I went
abroad, two or three and fifty years ago. And are they not
passed as a watch in the night? My subject was the joy in
heaven over one sinner that repenteth : And truly God con
firmed his word. Many seemed to be partakers of that joy;
and a solemn awe sat on the whole congregation.
Monday, 30, and the ensuing days, I visited the classes.
I was careful to take an exact account of the society. I was
surprised to find only a hundred and fifty-nine. I thought
they had been double the number. I hope, by the assistance
of God, within four months to see that none of these want
either food or raiment.
Fri. November 3.--Taking the advantage of a moonlight
evening, I went down to the chapel at Rotherhithe. I never
saw it so well filled before, nor with such serious and atten
tive hearers. Is anything too hard for God? Shall this
wilderness blossom and bud as the rose?
Sun. 5.--I buried the remains of John Cowmeadow, another
martyr to loud and long preaching. To save his life, if possi
ble, when he was half dead, I took him to travel with me. But
it was too late: He revived a little, but soon relapsed; and,
after a few months, died in peace. He had the ornament of a
meek and quiet spirit, and was of an exemplary behaviour.
Tues. 7.-Ivisited the classes, and found them much increased
both in grace and number. The House was, as usual, well
filled in the evening, and many were refreshéd and comforted.
Thur. 9.--In the evening I preached at Stratford; and under
standing I had many good sort of people to deal with, I endea
voured to stir them up, by strongly showing what it is to build
upon a rock; after showing them the various ways whereby the
generality of good men (so called) usually build upon the sand.
Dec. 1786.] JOURNAL. 355
Sun. 12.--I preached, morning and afternoon, for the use
of our little charity-school, where forty boys and twenty girls
are trained up both for this world and the world to come.
Mon. 13.--I retired, for a few days, to Highbury-Place, that
I might go on in my work without interruption. I returned
to town on Thursday, 16; and after preaching on 1 Tim. vi.
20, had a comfortable meeting with the Bands. Their shy
mess is vanished away; and we have only one inconvenience,
--we have not time to hear all those that are willing to speak.
Sun. 26.-After officiating at West-Street morning and after
noon, I took coach at seven in the evening. We had a clear,
pleasant night, and reached Norwich about eleven on Monday,
27. I found all things in peace, through the zeal and prudence
of Jasper Robinson and his fellow-labourers. The congregation
in the evening was nearly as large as it usually is on Sunday;
and more than twice as large at six in the morning as it is accus
tomed to be. Tuesday, 28. About moon I preached at Cayster,
a little town twenty miles east of Norwich, to a little, serious
congregation; the greater part of them seemed to be ripe for a
blessing. The House at Yarmouth was throughly filled in the
evening, and many attended in the morning likewise. Once
more the combatants here have laid down their arms, and
solemnly promise to continue in peace and love.
Wednesday and Thursday I spent comfortably at Lowestoft,
among a quiet, loving people. Friday, DECEMBER 1. I took
a solemn leave of them at six. At nine I preached at North
Cove, with much enlargement of spirit; and about eleven at
Beccles, to more than their preaching-house could contain;
and all of them appeared as serious and attentive as the con
gregation at Yarmouth. In the evening there seemed to be
a considerable shaking even among the dry bones at Loddon;
and such a company attended at Mr. Crisp's in the morning,
as I never saw there before.
Sat. 2.-I returned to Harwich, and was much pleased in the
evening with the largeness and seriousness of the congregation.
Sunday, 3. I administered the Lord's Supper at eight, and
afterwards attended our parish church. Besides the little com
pany that went with me, and the Clerk and Minister, I think we
had five men and six women: And this is a Christian country !
Our House could in nowise contain the congregation, either
in the afternoon or in the evening; and at both times, great was
356 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Dec. 1786.
the power of God in the midst of them. I have not seen, for
many years, such a prospect of doing good in this city.
Mon. 4.--I was strongly importuned by our friends at Long
Stratton, to give them a sermon there. I heard of a young
woman in that country who had uncommon fits, arid of one
that had lately preached; but I did not know that it was one
and the same person. I found her in the very house to which
I went, and went and talked with her at large. I was sur
prised. Sarah Mallet, two or three and twenty years old, is
of the same size that Jane Cooper was; and is, I think, full
as much devoted to God, and of as strong an understanding.
But she is not likely to live; having a species of consumption
which I believe is never cured. Of the following relation,
which she gave me, there are numberless witnesses:-
Some years since it was strongly impressed upon her, that
she ought to call sinners to repentance. This impression she
vehemently resisted, believing herself quite unqualified, both
by her sin, and her ignorance, till it was suggested, “If you
do it not willingly, you shall do it whether you will or no.”
She fell into a fit; and while utterly senseless, thought she was
in the preaching-house in Lowestoft, where she prayed and
preached for near an hour, to a numerous congregation. She
then opened her eyes, and recovered her senses. In a year or
two she had eighteen of these fits; in every one of which she
imagined herself to be preaching in one or another congrega
tion. She then cried out, “Lord, I will obey thee; I will
call sinners to repentance.” She has done so occasionally
from that time; and her fits returned no more.
I preached at one to as many as the House could contain,
of people that seemed ready prepared for the Lord. In the
evening the hearts of the whole congregation at Norwich
seemed to be bowed as the heart of one man. I scarce ever
saw them so moved. Surely God will revive his work in this
place, and we shall not always find it so cold and comfortless
as it has long been.
Tues. 5.--In the afternoon I took coach again, and returned
to London at eight on Wednesday morning. All the time I
could save to the end of the week I spent in transcribing the
society; a dull, but necessary, work, which I have taken upon
myself once a year for near these fifty years.
Wed. 13.-I retired to Peckham, where, the next evening. I
Jan. 1787.] JOURNAL. 357
preached to as many as the House would well contain, and found
much liberty of spirit in enforcing upon them, the glorying only
in the cross of Christ. Saturday, 16. I returned to London.
Sun. 17.--We had, as usual, a very solemn and comfortable
season at Spitalfields. Wednesday, 20. I retired to Highbury
Place; but how changed Where are the three amiable
sisters? One is returned to her father; one deprived of her
reason; and one in Abraham’s bosom
Sat. 23.−By great importunity I was induced (having little
hope of doing good) to visit two of the felons in Newgate, who
lay under sentence of death. They appeared serious; but I
can lay little stress on appearances of this kind. However, I
wrote in their behalf to a great man; and perhaps it was in
consequence of this that they had a reprieve.
Sun. 24.--I was desired to preach at the Old Jewry. But
the church was cold, and so was the congregation. We had a
congregation of another kind the next day, Christmas-Day, at
four in the morning, as well as five in the evening at the new
chapel, and at West-Street chapel about noon.
Sun. 31.-From those words of Isaiah to Hezekiah, “Set
thy house in order,” I strongly exhorted all who had not done
it already, to settle their temporal affairs without delay. It is
a strange madness which still possesses many, that are in other
respects men of understanding, who put this off from day to
day, till death comes in an hour when they looked not for it.
Mon. JANUARY 1, 1787.-We began the service at four in
the morning, to an unusually large congregation. We had
another comfortable opportunity at the new chapel at the usual
hour, and a third in the evening at West-Street. Tuesday, 2.
I went over to Deptford; but it seemed, I was got into a den
of lions. Most of the leading men of the society were mad for
separating from the Church. I endeavoured to reason with
them, but in vain; they had neither sense nor even good
manners left. At length, after meeting the whole society, I
told them, “If you are resolved, you may have your service
in church-hours; but, remember, from that time you will see
my face no more.” This struck deep; and from that hour I
have heard no more of separating from the Church.
Friday, 5, and in the vacant hours of the following days, I
read Dr. Hunter's Lectures. They are very lively and ingeni
ous. The language is good, and the thoughts generally just.
358 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Feb. 1787.
But they do not at all suit my taste. I do not admire that
florid way of writing. Good sense does not need to be so
studiously adorned. I love St. John’s style, as well as matter.
Sun. 7.--At the desire of many of our friends, we began
that solemn work of renewing our covenant with God at three
in the afternoon, two hours earlier than usual.
Monday, 8, and the four following days, I went a begging
for the poor. I hoped to be able to provide food and raiment
for those of the society who were in pressing want, yet had no
weekly allowance: These were about two hundred: But I
was much disappointed. Six or seven, indeed, of our
brethren gave ten pounds apiece. If forty or fifty had
done this, I could have carried my design into execution.
However, much good was done with two hundred pounds,
and many sorrowful hearts made glad.
Sun. 21.-I preached at St. Swithin's church, to a numerous
and serious congregation. Thursday, 25. I went to Dorking,
and found a lively and well-established people. Saturday, 27.
I began the heavy work of meeting the classes in London.
Fri. FEBRUARY 2.--I endeavoured to reconcile two of our
brethren that were at variance; and one of them was very will
ing; but the other raged like a bear bereaved of her whelps.
Sun. 4.--While I applied the parable of the Sower at the
new chapel, God was with us of a truth. The stout-hearted
trembled; as they did, likewise, in the evening, while I
applied, “Many are called, but few are chosen.”
Wed. 7.--I preached at Brentford; and in the morning;
Thursday evening at Lambeth. At both places I found many
who promise not to be forgetful hearers, but doers of the word.
Being earnestly desired by our brethren at Newark, one
hundred and twenty-four miles from London, to come and
open their new House, I took the mail-coach, Friday, 9, in
the evening, and reached Newark the next day about four in
the afternoon. But having a great cold, and being so hoarse
that I could not preach, I desired Mr. Mather to supply my
place, till I had recovered my voice.
Sun. 11.-Having partly recovered my voice, I preached in
the new House at nine,--a lightsome, cheerful building, and
gave notice of preaching at five in the afternoon. But it was
not long before I received a message from the Mayor, to desire
me to begin preaching a little later, that himself and several of
Feb. 1787.] JOURNAL. 359
the Aldermen might the more conveniently attend. They all
came at half an hour past five, and as many people as could
possibly squeeze in ; and God opened my mouth to speak
strong words, and the hearts of many to receive them.
Surely God will have a people in this place, that will adorn
the doctrine of God our Saviour.
Mon. 12.--There being no places to be had in the York
coach, Mr. Broadbent and I went across the country to Hinck
ley. I now inquired concerning the poor wretch who, when
I was here last, while he was praying to God to damn his
eyes, was in the instant struck blind. So, it seems, he con
tinued for some time. But as soon as he recovered his sight,
he was just as profane as before. Although it rained, and the
people had no notice till we came, yet the preaching-house
was quickly filled; and many, I believe, were filled with peace
and joy in the Holy Ghost.
Tues. 13.--Leaving the society here much alive to God, I
went on to Coventry. Here finding places vacant in the Liver
pool mail-coach, we set out in the evening, and reached London
the next morning, Wednesday, 14. Thursday, 15. I preached
at Deptford, and was agreeably surprised to find the threaten
ing storm blown over, and all our brethren in peace and love
with each other. From hence, on Friday, 16, I went to Rother
hithe, which used to be one of the most uncomfortable places
in England. But it was far otherwise now. Many of the
people seemed much alive to God; and his presence was mani
fested in the congregation, in a very uncommon manner.
Sat. 17.-I went on in reading that odd book, entitled, “A
Chinese Fragment.” As to the Chinese themselves, I believe
they are almost as religious, but nothing near so honest, as the
Turks; so that I account the contrasting them with the Chris
tians, to be a mere pious fraud. Du Halde’s word I will not
take for a straw ; but there are many and just remarks in the
treatise, to which few impartial men would have any objection,
in whatever form they were proposed.
Sun. 18.-The power of God was, as usual, eminently pre
sent during the service at Spitalfields. In the evening I met
the single women of the society, and advised them to make
full use of the advantages they enjoy: But I doubt, not many
had ears to hear;
For when had youth the leisure to be wipe f
360 REv. J. wesley’s [March, 1787.
*
Fri. 23.--I met our family, and was pleased to find that we
are a family of love. There is not at present one jarring string,
but we all hold the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
Sun. 25.--After taking a solemn leave of our friends, both at
West-Street and the new chapel, I took the mail-coach, and the
next evening reached Exeter, a little after ten o’clock. Tues
day, 27. We went on to Plymouth-Dock. The large, new
House, far the best in the west of England, was well filled,
though on so short a warning; and they seemed cordially to
receive the exhortation, “Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous.”
I had the satisfaction to find the society here in a more
flourishing state than ever. Notwithstanding all the pains
that have been taken, and all the art that has been used, to
tear them asunder, they cleave close together; and con
sequently increase in number as well as in strength.
Wed. 28.--We went over to Plymouth, and found the
society doubled since I was here before; and they are both
more loving than they were then, and more earnest to save
their souls. It rained most of the afternoon. However, we
had a crowded congregation in the evening; and all of them
seemed to feel that God was in the midst of them; for his
word was sharper than a two-edged sword. In consequence of
this, a large number attended at five on Thursday morning,
MARCH 1. Surely this is a time of love for poor Plymouth
also. O that they may know the day of their visitation 1
In the evening I preached again at the Dock; and again
the power of God was present to heal. The people seemed to
be all struck, while I opened and strongly applied the parable
of the Sower; especially while I was warning them to beware
of “the cares of the world, and the desires of other things.”
Fri. 2.--I was desired to go over to Torpoint, a village on
the Cornish side of the water. We were attended by a large
company from the Dock, and a great multitude from all quar
ters. I suppose a great part of these had never heard this
sort of preaching before: They now heard with inexpressible
attention; and I believe not in vain. God opened, as it were,
the windows of heaven, and sent a gracious rain upon his
inheritance. I am in hopes, a plentiful harvest will spring
from the seed which was sown this hour.
In the afternoon I went over to Plymouth, and drank tea at
Mr. Hawker’s, the Minister of the new church. He seems to be
w
March, 1787.] JOURNAL. 361
a man of an excellent spirit, and is a pattern to all the Clergy
round about. It rained all the evening; but that did not
hinder the House from being throughly filled with people
that heard as for life. This congregation likewise seemed to
be, “all but their attention, dead.” The like has hardly
been seen here before. What! is God about to work in
Plymouth also 2
Sat. 3.-Many attended at five in the morning, although
it rained sharply. It likewise blew a storm. So it did all
the day, as well as in the evening. The House was then
crowded indeed; yet there was attention still as might. But
God uttered his voice; yea, and that a mighty voice, inso
much that the stout-hearted trembled ; and it seemed as if
he would send none empty away; but of these, too, though
many were called, I fear few were chosen.
Sun. 4.--I began the service at half an hour past nine, and
concluded it before one. I suppose such a number of com
municants were never seen before at Plymouth-Dock; but
there was no disorder or hurry at all. There was more diffi
culty in the evening: The throng was so great that it was
impossible for me to get through them to the pulpit; so at
length they made shift to lift me over the seats. Again God
spoke in his word, I believe to all that could get in; but some
could not, and were constrained to go away.
Mon. 5.--The House was well filled again, both above and
below; and after a solemn parting, we took coach at six, leav
ing such a flame behind us as was never kindled here before.
God grant it may never be put out !
We reached Exeter between two and three. In the even
ing I preached on, “By grace are ye saved through faith,”
to as many as could possibly squeeze into the Room. It was
a glorious opportunity. God uttered his voice, and that a
mighty one. It seemed to break the rocks in pieces, to make
the stout-hearted tremble. I know not that I ever saw such
an impression made on the people of Exeter before.
Wed. 7.-It rained much while we were at Plymouth, and
at the Dock, and most of the way from the Dock to Exeter;
but we had lovely weather to-day, and came into Bath early
in the evening. So crowded a House I had not seen here
for many years. I fully delivered my own soul, by strongly
enforcing those awful words, “ Many are called, but few are
chosen.” I believe the word sunk deep into many hearts. The
362 REV. J. WESLEY’s [March, 1787.
next evening we had another large congregation equally serious.
Thursday, 8. I went on to Bristol; and the same afternoon
Mrs. Fletcher came thither from Madeley. The congregation
in the evening was exceeding large. I took knowledge what
spirit they were of Indeed the work of God has much in
creased in Bristol since I was here last, especially among the
young men, many of whom are a pattern to all the society.
Fri. 9.--I went over to Kingswood, and found the school
in a better state than I expected, considering the want of a
second master, which they had for some time laboured under.
Sat. 10.--I had the pleasure of an hour's conversation with
Mrs. Fletcher. She appears to be swiftly growing in grace, and
ripening for a better world. I encouraged her to do all the good
she could during her short stay in Bristol. Accordingly she
met, in the following week, as many of the classes as her time
and strength would permit; and her words were as fire, con
veying both light and heat to the hearts of all that heard her.
, Sun. 11.--We had a solemn season at the Room, both in
the morning and evening; and also in the afternoon at Kings
wood, where the work of God revives as well as at Bristol. I
strongly warned the people of Bristol of their indolence,
through which the Preacher had twelve, ten, or five hearers
in a morning; and advised them to shake it off. Many of
them did so; and I suppose we had three hundred on Mon
day morning, one hundred and fifty on Saturday, and between
two and three hundred every morning of the week besides.
Monday, 12, and on the four days following, I met the
society. They were considerably increased both in grace and
number. In the evening we had a Sunday’s congregation, and
a very uncommon pouring out of the Spirit. If this continues,
the society in Bristol will soon vie with that in Dublin. On
Thursday, 15, we had such another shower of grace. Many
were wounded, and many healed. Yesterday that blessed saint,
Sarah Bulgin, went to rest in the full triumph of faith. Sun
day, 18. I preached her funeral sermon to a listening multitude,
and had such a number of communicants as was never seen
together at Bristol Room before. In the evening we had a love
feast, at which Mrs. Fletcher simply declared her present expe
rience. I know no one that is so changed for the better in a few
years, even in her manner of speaking. It is now smooth, easy,
and natural, even when the sense is deep and strong.
Mon. 19.-I left Bristol with much satisfaction, expecting to
March, 1787.] JOURNAL, 363
hear of a plentiful harvest there; and in the evening preached
at Stroud. The House was unusually filled, both with people
and with the power of God. Tuesday, 20. We had a large con
gregation at five. Afterwards I met the select society, many
of them enjoying the pure love of God, and constantly walking
in the light of his countenance. We then visited one that was
always sick and in pain, and always rejoicing in God. Another
man we found nearly in the same condition,-always afflicted,
and always happy. Mrs. Wathen, a few doors from them, left
by a most affectionate husband with six children, is a pattern to
all about her. I walked from hence through one of the loveliest
valleys I ever saw, running, with a clear stream in the midst
of it, between two lofty and fruitful mountains, sprinkled all
over with little white houses. Between eleven and twelve I
reached Cirencester; and, no larger place being to be procured,
I preached at one in our own Room, to as many as could hear,
either in or near it. And the labour was not lost: They all
drunk in the word, as the thirsty earth the showers.
In the evening I preached to a multitude of people, in the
Tolbooth, at Gloucester. High and low, rich and poor, behaved
well. I trust a good blessing is coming to Gloucester also.
Wed. 21.--We had a numerous congregation at six, on
whom I strongly enforced the great salvation. About eleven
I had the satisfaction of spending an hour with the Bishop;
a sensible, candid, and, I hope, pious man. The palace in
which he lives (once the Priory) is a venerable place, quite
retired and elegant, though not splendid; the chapel, in par
ticular, fitted up by good Bishop Benson. The hall is noble;
as are also two or three of the bedchambers. But how soon
must all these change their possessor |
Finding prejudice was now laid asleep, the tide running the
contrary way, our friends thought it time to prepare for build
ing their preaching-house; and a hundred pounds are already
subscribed. In the evening I preached to a larger congrega
tion than ever; but all was still as night: And once more in
the morning, on, “Whosoever doeth the will of God, the
same is my brother, and sister, and mother.”
Thur. 22.-About noon I preached at Tewkesbury, to the
largest congregation I have seen there for many years; and in
the evening, to our lovely and loving people, at Worcester;--
plain, old, genuine Methodists.
364 Rev. J. wesley’s [March, 1787.
Fri. 23.--Notice having been given, though without my
knowledge, I went over to Stourport, a small, new-built village,
almost equally distant from Bewdley and from Kidderminster.
I had seen Mr. Heath before, a middle-aged Clergyman, who
is going over to Cokesbury-College, and is, I believe, throughly
qualified to preside there. I met his wife and two daughters
here, who are quite willing to bear him company; and I think
their tempers and manners, so “winning soft, so amiably mild,”
will do him honour wherever they come.
At noon, abundance of people being gathered together from
all parts, I preached on Isaiah liii. 6, 7. We have not had
such an opportunity since we left Bristol. The stout-hearted
trembled; and every one seemed almost persuaded to be a
Christian. The congregation at Worcester, in the evening,
seemed to be of the same spirit; and God spoke to every heart.
Sat. 24.--I went on to Birmingham : But my hoarseness
increased; so that I was afraid the people would not hear me
in the evening. But they did, though the congregation was
uncommonly large. Sunday, 25. Having promised to read
Prayers and administer the sacrament, I knew not how I
should do. . But as we were going to the House, Mr. Heath,
just come to town, overtook us. So he read Prayers, and
assisted me in delivering the sacrament to seven or eight
hundred communicants.-
In the evening the House at Birmingham, as it was rainy,
contained half (I suppose) of those that would willingly have
come in. Those that could get in found it an acceptable
time; and we all praised God with joyful lips.
Mon. 26.-I spent an agreeable hour with the select society.
Most of them still enjoy the pure love of God, and the rest are
earnestly panting after it. I preached in the evening (at the
request of a friend) on 2 Cor. v. 19, &c. Many seemed to
receive the word with all readiness, and I trust will bring forth
fruit with patience.
Tues. 27.--I went on to Wednesbury. As it rained great
part of the afternoon, most of the congregation could get into
the House; and I took knowledge of the ancient spirit,
although most of our first hearers are gone to rest.
Wed. 28.-About ten Mr. Horne (from Madeley) read
Prayers in the church, at Darlaston; and I preached on those
words of Ruth, in the First Lesson, “Thy people shall be my
March, 1787.] JOURNAL. 365
people, and thy God shall be my God.” We have had no
such time since I left Bristol. The flame of love seemed to
melt many hearts. What has God done for Darlaston How
are the last become first
In the evening I opened the new House at Wolverhamp
ton, nearly as large as that at Newcastle-upon-Tyne. It would
not near contain the people, though they were wedged toge
ther as close as possible. I believe such a congregation was
never seen in Wolverhampton before; not only so serious, but
so well-behaved. I hope this is a token for good.
Thur. 29.-About twelve I preached at Lane-End. It being
too cold to stand abroad, the greater part of the earnest congre
gation squeezed into the preaching-house. Herewe entered into
the country which seems to be all on fire, that which borders
on Burslem on every side: Preachers and people provoking one
another to love and good works, in such a manner as was never
seen before. In the evening I preached at Burslem. Observing
the people flocking together, I began half an hour before the
appointed time. But, notwithstanding this, the House would
not contain one half of the congregation: So, while I was
preaching in the House to all that could get in, John Broad
bent preached in a yard to the rest. The love-feast followed;
but such a one as I have not known for many years. While the
two or three first spoke, the power of God so fell upon all that
were present, some praying, and others giving thanks, that their
voices could scarce be heard : And two or three were speaking
at a time, till I gently advised them to speak one at a time; and
they did so, with amazing energy. Some of them had found
peace a year ago, some within a month or a week, some within
a day or two; and one of them, a potter's boy, told us, “At
the prayer-meeting I found myself dropping into hell; and I
cried to the Lord, and he showed me he loved me. But Satan
came immediately, and offered me a bag of money, as long as
my arm; but I said, “Get thee behind me, Satan.’” Several
also testified that the blood of Christ had cleansed them from all
sin. Two declared, after bitter cries, that they knew their sins
were just then blotted out by the blood of the Lamb; and I
doubt not but it will be found, upon inquiry, that several more
were either justified or sanctified. Indeed there has been, for
some time, such an outpouring of the Spirit here, as has not
been in any other part of the kingdom; particularly in the
366 REV. J. W. ESLEY S [April, 1787.
meetings for prayer. Fifteen or twenty have been justified
in a day. Some of them had been the most notorious, aban
doned sinners, in all the country; and people flock into the
society on every side; six, eight, or ten, in an evening.
Fri. 30.-I had appointed to preach at five in the morning;
but soon after four I was saluted by a concert of music, both
vocal and instrumental, at our gate, making the air ring with
a hymn to the tune of Judas Maccabeus: It was a good prelude.
So I began almost half an hour before five ; yet the House was
crowded both above and below. I strongly, but very tenderly,
enforced that caution, “Let him that standeth take heed lest
he fall.” And is not God able to make them stand 2 Yea,
and he will do it, if they walk humbly with God.
In the evening I preached at Congleton to a serious and
well-established people. Here I found my coeval, Mr.2
two months (I think) younger than me, just as a lamp going
out for want of oil, gently sliding into a better world: He
sleeps always, only waking now and then just long enough to
say, “I am happy.”-
Sat. 31.-I went on to Macclesfield, and found a people
still alive to God, in spite of swiftly increasing riches. If
they continue so, it will be the only instance I have known,
in above half a century. I warned them in the strongest
terms I could, and believe some of them had ears to hear.
Sun. APRIL 1.--Fearing nothing so much as lest a people so
much at ease should settle upon their lees, I preached at the
new church, in the most awakening manner I could, on Rev.
xx. 11: “I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it,” &c.
I then hastened to Manchester; and endeavoured to convince
a crowded congregation of the full spiritual meaning of those
important words, “By grace are ye saved, through faith.”
Mon. 2.--About noon I preached at Stockport, and in the
evening at Manchester; where I fully delivered my own soul,
both then, and the next day. Wednesday, 4. I went to Chester,
and preached in the evening on Heb. iii. 12. Finding there
was no packet at Parkgate, I immediately took places in the
mail-coach for Holyhead. The porter called us at two in the
morning, on Thursday, but came again in half an hour, to
inform us the coach was full; so they returned my money, and
at four I took a post-chaise. We overtook the coach at Conway;
and, crossing the ferry with the passengers, went forward with.
April, 1787.] JOURNAL. 367
out delay. So we came to Holyhead an hour before them,
and went on board the Le Despenser between eleven and
twelve o’clock. At one we left the harbour; and at two the
next day came into Dublin-Bay. On the road and in the
ship I read Mr. Blackwell’s “Sacred Classics Illustrated and
Defended.” I think he fully proves his point, that there are
no expressions in the New Testament which are not found in
the best and purest Greek authors. In the evening we had
a Sunday’s congregation, and a blessing from on high : I
then retired to my lodgings which were at Arthur Keene's,
about half a mile out of town; a pleasant, healthy spot, where
were peace and love, and plenty of all things.
APRIL 8.--(Being Easter-Day.) I preached in Bethesda,
Mr. Smyth's new chapel. It is very neat, but not gay; and I
believe will hold about as many people as West-Street chapel.
Mr. Smyth read Prayers, and gave out the hymns, which were
sung by fifteen or twenty fine singers; the rest of the congre
gation listening with much attention, and as much devotion,
as they would have done to an opera. But is this Christian
worship 2 Or ought it ever to be suffered in a Christian
church? It was thought we had between seven and eight hun
dred communicants; and indeed the power of God was in the
midst of them. Our own Room in the evening was well filled
with people, and with the presence of God. Afterward we
had a love-feast, which I suppose might have continued till
midnight, if all had spoken that were ready to speak.
On Monday and Tuesday I preached again at Bethesda, and
God touched several hearts, even of the rich and great: So that
(for the time at least) they were “almost persuaded to be Chris
tians.” It seems as if the good Providence of God had prepared
this place, for those rich and honourable sinners, who will not
deign to receive any message from God but in a genteel way.
Wed. 11.--By conversing with many of our friends, I found
they were still increasing in grace as well as in number. The
society now contains upwards of a thousand members; so
that it has outrun all in England, but that of London. After
this amazing flow, we must expect an ebb : It will be well if
only two hundred of these fall away. On Thursday and
Friday the congregations were still uncommonly large, and
seemed to feel all that was spoken.
Sat. 14.--Even at the Gravel-Walk, where the congregation
368 REv. J. WESLEY’s [April, 1787.
used to be small enough, the House was crowded in the evening;
although the soldiers (seventy or eighty of whom are in the
society) could not attend, it being the hour of their roll-calling.
Sun. 15.--I preached first at the new Room, and afterwards
at Bethesda: Many fair blossoms we see here also; and surely
some fruit will follow ! In the evening our House could not
contain the congregation, though they squeezed together as
close as possible. I believe few of them heard in vain: Such
attention sat on every face, as I seldom see even in Bristol or
London.
Mon. 16.--I set out early, and preached at Prosperous about
ten, to a numerous congregation; and although I had come ten
miles out of my way, I did not regret my labour. In the even
ing we came to Philipstown, which we had forsaken for near
forty years; yet at length there is a prospect of good. A little
society is formed; and some troopers, who are part of it, keep all
the town in awe. The congregation was as quiet as that in Dub
lin, both in the evening and at seven in the morning. Here is
seed sown once more; and God is able to give a plentiful harvest.
Tues. 17.--I crossed over to my old friends at Tyrrel's Pass.
It was supposed the House would hold the congregation in the
evening, but it would hardly contain a fourth part of them:
So I preached in the yard, not only to Protestants, but (I was
informed) most of the Papists in the town; and we found God
was no respecter of persons. Wednesday, 18. The House was
well filled in the morning, and we had a comfortable season; as
also at Coolylough in the evening, where God spoke to many
hearts. Thursday, 19. About noon I preached at Kenagh, to
a numerous congregation: For many years we seemed to be
beating the air here; but a few months since, God so blessed
the preaching of poor John Bredin, just tottering over the grave,
that we have now a lively society, swiftly increasing both in
grace and number. We went hence to Longford, where a
multitude of people soon assembled in the Town-Hall. I
found much liberty of speech, and I have seldom seen a con
gregation more affected. I observed one genteel woman, who
kept her eyes fixed, from the beginning to the end; and was
agreeably surprised, when she called upon me, to find one of
my old flock at Castlebar. Once more she has set her hand
to the plough : May she never look back
Fri. 20.--I went to Athlone, and preached in the evening to
April, 1787.] JOURNAL. 369
3.
a congregation of deeper experience than any I had seen since
I left Dublin. Yet the next day I thought it expedient to press
upon them the advice of the Apostle, “Let him that assuredly
standeth'' (so it should be rendered) “take heed lest he fall.”
Sun. 22.-I opened and applied that glorious text, “The
help that is done upon earth, he doeth it himself.” Is it not
strange that this text, Psalm lxxiv. 12, is vanished out of the
new translation of the Psalms? I found the work of God
much increased here ; and it is a favourable circumstance,
that of the three Ministers in the town two are our fast
friends, and the third no enemy. The wind driving us into
the House at six, we were crowded sufficiently. Afterwards
I administered the sacrament to the society; and not without
a remarkable blessing.
Mon. 23.--Having taken leave of our affectionate friends at
Athlone, I went on to Balinasloe; but here we were at a loss;
the usual preaching-place would not contain half the people;
and the wind was so high, and so extremely cold, that they
could not stand abroad. However, we made the best shift
we could with two rooms, together with the passage and
staircase. I strongly explained what it is to build upon the
sand ; and all that could hear seemed to receive the word
gladly : Some, I hope, will bring forth fruit with patience.
The church at Aghrim was so filled in the evening as it
scarce ever was before. I believe God enabled me to find
the way to the hearts both of Protestants and Roman Catho
lics. I never saw so general an impression made on the peo
ple of this town before. In the morning, Tuesday, 24, the
preaching-house was well filled; and I exhorted them in St.
John’s words, “Look to yourselves, that ye lose not the things
which ye have gained, but that ye receive a full reward.”
I did not find either so large or so serious a congregation in
the church at Eyre-Court. I preached between ten and eleven
to a number of unconcerned hearers, and then went on to Birr.
There has been lately a great shaking among the dry bones
here. The congregations are much increased, and hear with
deep attention; and several members have been added to the
society. I would fain have preached in the Square, as I did
before; but the wind and rain did not permit; so as many as
could, crowded into the preaching-house. I preached on, “I
am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ;” a subject which, it
370 REv. J. Wesley's [April, 1787.
w
seemed, suited the hearers ; many of whom are hindered
chiefly by evil shame from being altogether Christians.
Wed. 25.-I once more visited my old friends at Tullamore.
Have all the balloons in Europe done so much good as can
counterbalance the harm which one of them did here a year
or two ago? It took fire in its flight, and dropped it down on
one and another of the thatched houses so fast that it was not
possible to quench it till most of the town was burned down.
I preached in the assembly-room, to a large congregation, a
few of whom are still alive to God. In the morning, for the
sake of good old Matthew Moore, who is not likely to hear me
again, I preached in his parlour, to as many as that and the
other rooms would contain, on, (Luke xx. 34, &c.,) “They
neither marry, nor are given in marriage: Neither can they
die any more : For they are equal unto the angels; and are
the children of God, being the children of the resurrection.”
Thur. 26.--About noon I preached at Portarlington, not
in the noisy market-place, but in our own House, throughly
filled with attentive hearers. In the evening I preached in
the church at Mount-Mellick, larger than either that at Eyre
Court or Aghrim; and the whole congregation behaved well:
I have seen few such since I left Dublin. Friday, 27. We
went to Kilkenny, nine-and-twenty Irish miles from Mount
Mellick. Religion was here at a low ebb, and scarce any
society left, when God sent three troops of horse, several of
whom are full of faith and love. Since they came, the work
of God has revived. I never saw the House so filled since it
was built; and the power of God seemed to rest upon the con
gregation, as if he would still have a people in this place.
Sat. 28.-I preached in the morning to about a hundred
people at Kilkenny, on the general judgment. They seemed
to feel what was spoken. I left Mr. Kane behind me for
two or three days, to follow the blow; and I trust before he
leaves the town, God will lay such a foundation even there
as shall never be overthrown.
We reached Carlow before noon; and were much refreshed
with the hearty affection of our brethren, who had not forgotten
me, though I had not visited them for near sixteen years. In the
evening I preached at theassembly-room, to alarge and tolerably
serious congregation. They seemed more serious in the morning,
Sunday, 29, when I spoke in a manner more suited to their
May, 1787.] JOURNAL. 371
capacities, in largely explaining and strongly enforcing our
Lord’s words, “One thing is needful.” The church is far the
neatest (though not fine) of any I have seen since we left
Dublin. The Rector came after Service, and spent near an hour
with us in friendly conversation. In the evening I would have
preached in the open air; but the wind was too cold and too
high: So I applied the thirteenth of the Corinthians in the
assembly-room, to the most affected congregation I have seen at
Carlow : And here is a plentiful harvest; the rather, because
several of the troopers quartered here are much alive to God,
and “adorn in all things the doctrine of God our Saviour.”
Mon. 30.--We went over high and steep mountains, inter
spersed with lovely valleys, to Bunklody; now called Newtown
Barry, one of the pleasantest towns which I have seen in the
kingdom. Here we rejoiced to meet Mrs. Cookman, with sister
(Henry) Moore, and Miss Acton from Dublin, who came on
purpose, and willingly accompanied us to Waterford, and thence
to Clonmell. I preached in the assembly-room here also; but
to a congregation very little awakened. But how soon can
our Lord say to any of these, “Lazarus, come forth !”
About noon we reached Enniscorthy. Here likewise the
use of the assembly-room was promised; but a Clergyman
(whose father died in black despair, crying out the room was
full of devils) caused that promise to be retracted: So I stood
in a large yard; and, though it blew a storm, we had an
exceeding large congregation, three or perhaps four times as
many as the assembly-room would have contained. I preached
on, “If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him.”
To avoid the ferry, we went the mountain-way, and about five
came to Wexford.
Were ever assembly-rooms put to better use? That in
Wexford, wherein I preached, was one of the largest I ever
saw ; and high and low, rich and poor, flocked together; and
it seemed as if many of them were ripe for the Gospel. I
expect there will be a good harvest in this place.
Tues. MAY 1.--Setting out early in the morning, between
nine and ten I preached in the church at Old-Ross, to a large
company of as plain country-people as ever I saw in Yorkshire.
We reached Waterford between two and three. At six I
preached in the Court-House, to an immense congregation,
while a file of musketeers, ordered by the Mayor, paraded at the
372 REv. J. Wesley’s [May, 1787.
door. Two or three hundred attended in the morning, and
gladly received the whole truth. In the evening the congrega
tion was larger than before, and equally attentive. Thursday,
3. I took my leave of this earnest, loving people, and went on
through a delightful country to Clonmell. At six I preached
in the Court-House. I was much surprised. I know not when
I have seen so well-dressed and ill-behaved a congregation;
but I was told it was the same way that they behaved at church.
Pity them they do not turn Papists. The Church of England
needs no such members: They are no honour to it.
Fri. 4.--With great difficulty we got over a most horrid road
to Capperquin; but that from thence to Tallagh (eight miles)
was exceeding pleasant. The remaining ten miles were very
tolerable; so that we reached Youghall in good time. The
Court-House was throughly filled at six, and above half filled at
five in the morning. Saturday, 5. We went on to Cork. The
latter was pleasant beyond description. At a very small distance
on the left hand, the river “rolled its sinuous train;” beyond
which were shady trees, covering a steep hill, and rising row
above row. On the right we had another sloping mountain,
tufted over with trees, sometimes forming one green, even wall,
sometimes scattered up and down. Between these appeared
several beautiful seats, some of them fit for Noblemen.
At six in the evening the preaching-house would ill contain
the congregation; and many of the rich and honourable were
among them ' Who hath warned these to flee from the
wrath to come 2
Sun. 6.--We had an evening congregation at seven, whom
I warned to order their conversation aright. At three in the
afternoon I preached on the road to a numerous congregation;
but many of them, especially the genteeler sort, were rude as
colts untamed. We stowed the people together in the evening
as close at it was possible; but still many were constrained to
go away, finding no place even at the door. Monday, 7. The
congregation at five in the morning was little inferior to that
we used to see on Sunday evening. This time also we had
many of the gay and honourable, who seem, at present,
almost persuaded to be Christians. O what shoals of half
awakened sinners will be broad awake when it is too late 1
On Tuesday likewise the congregations were exceeding large,
and deep attention sat on every face.
May, 1787.] JOURNAL. 373
Wed. 9.-We went to Bandon. Here also there has been a
remarkable work of God; and yet not without many backsliders.
It was therefore my chief business here to strengthen the weak,
and recall the wanderers: So in the evening I preached in the
assembly-room, (which was offered me by the Provost,) on,
“How shall I give thee up, Ephraim P’’ and God applied his
word. I believe there was a general melting among the people,
and many purposed to return to God. But the Room was
exceeding hot, and extremely crowded; and yet would not near
contain the congregation. Thursday, 10. The preaching-house
was filled at five in the morning; and again I applied directly to
backsliders, and found a strong hope that “the times of refresh
ing” will soon “come from the presence of the Lord.”
At noon we took a walk to Castle-Barnard. Mr. Barnard
has given it a beautiful front, nearly resembling that of Lord
Mansfield's house at Caen-Wood, and opened part of his
lovely park to the house, which, I think, has now as beautiful
a situation as Rockingham-House, in Yorkshire. Mr. Barnard
much resembles, in person and air, the late Sir George Saville.
Though he is far the richest person in these parts, he keeps
no race-horses, or hounds; but loves his wife and home, and
spends his time and fortune in improving his estate, and em
ploying the poor. Gentlemen of this spirit are a blessing to
their neighbourhood. May God increase their number
In the evening, finding no building would contain the
congregation, I stood in the main street, and testified, to a
listening multitude, “This is not your rest.” I then admi
nistered the Lord's Supper to the society; and God gave us
a remarkable blessing.
Fri. 11.--I took an affectionate leave of our friends at five.
I left them full of good desires and resolutions. Calling on one
that was ill at Innishannon, word was quickly brought me, that
the people were flocking together to the preaching-house. It
was soon filled from end to end; and I preached to them “Jesus
Christ, made of God to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption.” About noon I preached in the Court-House
at Kinsale, to a very large congregation. But how different
from that which I had in the bowling-green, two years ago !
That was one of the most indecent, ill-mannered congregations
that ever I saw in Ireland. This was as eminently well-behaved;
the sovereign and many genteel persons being among them. It
374 REv. J. wesley’s [May, 1787.
was no wonder to see the congregation at Cork in the evening
equally well-behaved. So they always are; the chief of the
city being no longer bitter enemies, but cordial friends.
Sat. 12.--A gentleman invited me to breakfast, with my old
antagonist, Father O'Leary. I was not at all displeased at being
disappointed. He is not the stiff, queer man that I expected; but
of an easy, genteel carriage, and seems not to be wanting either
in sense or learning. In the afternoon, by appointment, Iwaited
on the Mayor, an upright, sensible man, who is diligently
employed, from morning to night, in doing all the good he can.
He has already prevailed upon the Corporation to make it a fixed
rule, that the two hundred a year, which was spent in two enter
tainments, should for the future be employed in relieving indi
gent freemen, with their wives and children. He has carefully
regulated the House of Industry, and has instituted a Humane
Society for the relief of persons seemingly drowned ; and he is
unwearied in removing abuses of every kind. When will our
English Mayors copy after the Mayor of Cork? He led me
through the Mayoralty-House,_a very noble and beautiful
structure. The dining-room and the ball-room are magnificent,
and shame the Mansion-House in London by their situation;
commanding the whole river, the fruitful hills on every side, and
the meadows running between them. He was then so good as to
walk with me quite through the city to the House of Industry,
and to go with me through all the apartments; which are quite
sweet and commodious. An hundred and ninety-two poor are
now lodged therein; and the master (a pious man, and a mem
ber of our society) watches over them, reads with them, and
prays with them, as if they were his own children.
Sun. 13.--We had a very comfortable opportunity at eight
in Cork. At three Mr. Broadbent preached on the parade.
At five (as we removed the benches, and stowed the people
close together) the Room contained most of the people; and
I took a solemn leave of them, after closely applying our
Lord’s question, “Do ye now believe?”
Mon. 14.--We went to Kilfinnan, about twenty Irish miles
(so I compute) from Mallow. I preached in the Court-House,
about seven, to a large and serious audience; and again at five
in the morning, Tuesday, 15. We then went on, through a
delightful country, to Limerick. Here were always an affec
tionate people; but I never found them so much so as now. It
May, 1787.] JOURNAL, 375
was too cold in the evening to stand abroad; so we squeezed as
many as possible into the preaching-house. I preached on,
“Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart.” Many
here once experienced this ; but few, if any, retain it now !
Wed. 16.--The congregation at five filled the House almost
as well as it was filled in the evening. Finding a remarkable
deadness, I inquired what were the reasons of it; and found, 1.
There had been, for several months, a deep misunderstanding
between the Preachers and the chief of the society. Hence, on
the one hand, the Preachers had little life or spirit to preach;
and, on the other, the congregation dwindled away. 2. Many
had left off meeting their bands, and many others seldom
met their classes. 3. Prayer-meetings were entirely given up.
What wonder if all the people were grown dead as stones?
In the evening I endeavoured to re-awaken those that were
settling upon their lees, by strongly applying those solemn
words, “The first shall be last, and the last first; for many
are called, but few are chosen.” In the morning, Thursday,
17, I endeavoured to stir them up once more to hunger and
thirst after righteousness, after the whole image of God,
without which they will still remain
Cold, languid, weary, heartless, dead.
After morning service I met the Stewards and Leaders, and
inquired into the rise of the late misunderstanding. I found
the matter itself was nothing; but want of patience on both
sides had swelled the mole-hill into a mountain. O how
patient, how meek, how gentle toward all men ought a
Preacher, especially a Methodist, to be
In the afternoon I walked through all the parts of the
Workhouse, called, in Ireland, the House of Industry. It
is pleasantly situated on a rising ground near the river;
and, I believe, would contain about three hundred persons.
(That at Dublin contains six hundred.) At present there are
about eighty persons there, the contributions falling short.
The apartments are large, airy, and sweet; and the poor
(most of whom are employed) seem contented.
Every time I preached I found more and more hope that
God will revive his work in this city. I know he will, if the
prayer-meetings are restored; these are never without fruit.
Fri. 18.--I set out early in the morning, and reached
376 REv. J. Wesley’s [May, 1787.
Castlebay about four in the afternoon. I had much conver
sation with Mrs. Persse, a woman of many sorrows. But
when she has been tried, she shall come forth as gold.
In the evening I preached at Killchrist, about four miles
from Castlebay. The number of the people constrained me
to stand in the open air, though the wind was high and cold.
They were all attentive and serious, except one young gentle
man, who would fain have laughed, if he could. But his
sport was quickly spoiled; and before the sermon was half
over, he was as serious as his neighbours.
Sat. 19.-In two hours and a half we came to Athenry, the
rival of Killmallock, once a flourishing city, now a heap of ruins:
But even these are now covered with earth. It was built by King
John, as well as the other; and seems, by its walls, to have been
one of the largest cities in the kingdom. Being wrong directed
when we left this, we got almost to Galway, going about six
miles out of our way to Cahir-Morress. However, I reached Bal
linrobe in time to preach to a large and well-behaved (although
genteel) congregation. I preached again at eight in the morn
ing, Sunday, 20, and then hastened on to Castlebar. We went
straight to church. I preached at five in our new House; I
think, larger than that at Limerick, and throughly filled with
as attentive a congregation as any I have seen in the kingdom.
Mon. 21.--Little misunderstandings between themselves
have continually hindered the work of God in this society. This
morning I heard the contending parties face to face, and once
more made them friends. A numerous congregation listened
with all attention, in the evening, to that important word of our
Lord, “Whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my
brother, and my sister, and mother.” Tuesday, 22. One of the
men confined for murder, earnestly importuned me to visit him.
I did so; but he seemed as dead as a stone. And I did not
wonder; for such an action, performed in cool blood, I never
heard of before. Mr. M'Donnel, who had his leg wounded by
one shot, and both his arms broke by another, was sitting on the
ground, when this wretch came and presented a blunderbuss.
He begged only five minutes to say his prayers. Andrew swore,
“No, not one;” and instantly shot him through the heart |
This whole transaction, from the beginning to the end, contain
ing such a series of calm, deliberate murder, perpetrated with
so shocking circumstances, is hardly to be paralleled in history.
May, 1787.] JOURNAL. 377
Some time since a shrewd man said, “This country will
never be in quiet, till one of these men has murdered the
other, and then is hanged for it.”
Wed. 23.--Leaving our little society in peace and love, we
went by Swineford to Sligo. At six I preached in the new
Court-House, a very spacious and commodious building, to a
more numerous and more attentive congregation than I have
seen here for many years. A large congregation was present
again at five in the morning, Thursday, 24; so that I am not
without hope, the work of God may at length revive here also.
I had purposed going straight from hence to Annadale; but
notice had been given of my preaching at Manorhamilton.
It is true, this was five or six miles out of my way, and abun
dantly worse road. However, I would not disappoint the
poor people; although by this means Mr. Slack’s dinner was
delayed till near six o'clock. I preached at seven to a very
serious congregation, and passed a comfortable evening.
Fri. 25.--I had a day of rest in this lively family, only
preaching morning and evening. Saturday, 26. I preached
at Ballyconnel about eleven : In the afternoon I took a walk
in the Bishop of Kilmore's garden. The house is finely
situated ; has two fronts, and is fit for a nobleman. We then
went into the church-yard, and saw the venerable tomb, a
plain flat stone, inscribed, Depositum Gulielmi Bedel, quon
dam Episcopi Kilmorensis : * Over whom even the rebel army
sung, Requiescat in pace ultimus Anglorum. “Let the last of
the Englishmen rest in peace.” At seven I preached to a
large congregation. It blew a storm, but most of the con
gregation were covered by a kind of shed raised for the
purpose; and not a few were greatly comforted.
Sun. 27.--I preached in Cavan at seven, and then hastened
forward to Clones, leaving Mr. Broadbent to preach at Bally
hays; which he did with good effect. But I needed not to have
been in such haste; for the Church Service did not begin till
twelve. Such a number of communicants, I suppose, was never
seen at this church before. The Service ended about half past
three. The question then was, where I should preach. The
furious wind and violent rain made it impracticable to preach
(where I intended) at the head of the market-place; but I
* Here are deposited the remains of WILLIAM BE DEL, formerly Bishop of
Kilmore.--EDIT.
378 REv. J. wesley’s [May, 1787.
made shift to stand on one side of it in a door-way, where I was
pretty well sheltered: Although the poor people were exposed
to heavy rain during the whole sermon, none of them seemed
to regard it; and God did indeed send a gracious rain upon
their souls, so that many rejoiced with joy unspeakable.
Mon. 28.-Having all the parties together, I inquired into an
odd affair which occurred here a few months ago. F. B., Leader
of the class of single women, and always hitherto of an unblem
ished character, was accused of immodesty by Mr. A , in
whose house she had lived for several years. I found this accu
sation to be totally groundless. 2. John Carr, one of our oldest
members, with a few others, spent an hour in reading and
prayer, while a Local Preacher was reading a sermon at the
Room; this was represented to the Assistant as done in a spirit
of opposition, and as an intention of leaving the society; (a thing
which never entered into their thoughts;) and he was urged to
read them out of the society. Accordingly, he read out four
teen at once: I could not find, upon the strictest inquiry, that
they had been guilty of any fault but meeting together that
evening ; so I willingly received them all again, requiring
only one condition of the contenders on both sides, to say not
one word of anything that was past. The spirit of peace and
love gloriously descended on them all, at the evening preach
ing, while I was explaining the “fruit of the Spirit.” They
were again filled with consolation at the Lord's Supper; and
again in the morning, while Mr. Broadbent applied, “Com
fort ye, comfort ye my people, saith the Lord.”
Tues. 29.--The old murderer is restrained from hurting me;
but, it seems, he has power over my horses. One of them I was
obliged to leave in Dublin, and afterwards another, having
bought two to supply their places; the third soon got an ugly
swelling in his shoulder, so that we doubted whether we could
go on; and a boy at Clones, riding (I suppose galloping) the
fourth over stones, the horse fell and nearly lamed himself.
However, we went on softly to Aughalun, and found such a con
gregation as I had not seen before in the kingdom. The tent,
that is, a covered pulpit, was placed at the foot of a green, slop
ing mountain, on the side of which the huge multitude sat (as
their manner is) row above row. While I was explaining, “God
has given unto us his Holy Spirit,” he was indeed poured out
in a wonderful manner. Tears of joy, and cries were heard
May, 1787.] JOURNAL. 379
on every side, only so far suppressed as not to drown my
voice. I cannot but hope, that many will have cause to bless
God for that hour to all eternity.
I preached at Lisbelaw, another little village, about six in
the evening. The small rain continued all the time; but
that did not hinder the people from mightily rejoicing in
Him who causes “the earth to bring forth at once,” and “a
nation ” to be “born in a day.”
Wed. 30.-A large room, designed for an assembly-room,
was filled in the morning; and the poor people appeared to be
quite ripe for the highest doctrine of the Gospel; so I exhorted
them, leaving the first principles, to “go on unto perfection.”
About eleven I preached in the market-house at Enniskillen,
formerly a den of lions; but the lions are become lambs. They
flocked together from every part, and were all attention. Before
I had half done, God made bare his arm, and the mountains
flowed down at his presence. Many were cut to the heart,
and many rejoiced with joy unspeakable: Surely the last
shall be first; and poor Enniskillen shall lift up its head above
many of the places where the Gospel has been long preached.
In the evening I preached to another numerous congrega
tion, at Sidare, a large house at the foot of the mountains.
One would wonder whence all the people came : They seemed
to spring out of the earth. Here also there were once many
bitter persecutors; but they are vanished away like smoke.
Several of them, indeed, came to a fearful end, and their
neighbours took warning by them.
Thur. 31.-We travelled through a pleasant, well-cultivated
country to Omagh, the shire town of Tyrone. It being
market-day, a multitude of people presently flocked together
to a tent, as they call it, on the side of the Green. At first
they were innocently noisy; (this being a new thing at
Omagh;) but they were soon still as night: I suited my sub
ject to their experience, preaching on, “It is appointed unto
men once to die.” God applied it to their hearts. Not a
smile was to be seen; but all seemed to feel the solemn truth.
Thence we went over mountains and dales to Kerlish Lodge,
where we met with a hearty welcome, both from Alexander
Boyle, and his amiable wife, who are patterns to all the country.
Although we were at a lone house ten miles from any town,
and although the weather was both rainy and stormy, we had
380 REv. J. wesley’s [June, 1787.
a large congregation in the evening, and afterwards a com
fortable love-feast. I do not wonder the work of God spreads
in these parts; the spirit and behaviour of Mr. Boyle and his
wife, continually employed in doing good, have an amazing
influence on all their neighbourhood. Some time ago she
went to his uncle's at Killrail, who has four daughters grown
up. They began conversing in the evening; they prayed,
and sung, and talked and prayed again, till about seven in the
morning. By that time all four of them found a clear sense
of pardon ; and two believed they were saved from all sin.
Mr. Boyle had spoke to Dr. Wilson, the Rector of a
neighbouring town, concerning my preaching in the church;
who wrote to the Bishop, and received a letter in answer,
giving a full and free consent. The Doctor desired me to
breakfast with him. Meantime one of his parishioners, a
warm Seceder, took away the key of the church. So I preached
in a neighbouring orchard: I believe, not in vain. The
Rector and his wife were in the front of the congregation.
Afterward we took a view of Lord Abercorn’s place. The
house has a lovely situation; and the front of it is as elegant as
any I have seen either in Great Britain or Ireland. The grounds
are delightful indeed, perhaps equal to any in the kingdom,
About five in the evening I preached at Killrail. No house
would contain the congregation; so I preached in the open
air. The wind was piercing cold; but the people regarded it
not. Afterward I administered the Lord’s Supper to about a
hundred of them, and then slept in peace.
Sat. JUNE 2.--It was with difficulty we reached Strabane;
my new horse quite failing. I had no thought of preaching
there, till word was sent, that the Town-Hall was at my service:
I then went to it without delay; and had a genteel, yet seri
ous, congregation. In the afternoon my horse failed again;
but one of the Preachers tried his ; and he drew, as if he had
been bred to it. Our House at Londonderry not being ready,
I preached at six in the Town-Hall, a beautiful and spacious
room, to a deeply serious congregation. Sunday, 3. It was
more numerous in the morning, and equally serious; so was the
great congregation in the evening. Surely we shall see more
fruit in this city; but first we shall have need of patience.
Mon. 4.--Mr. Broadbent preached at five, and I at eleven,
and he in the evening. He did the same on Tuesday, 5. At
June, 1787.] JOURNAL. 381
->
noon we took a walk in the Bishop's garden, and saw his
delightful summer-house; a room fifty feet long, finished
with the utmost elegance; and situated on the point of a hill
that commands the river and all the country: But his Lord
ship has utterly forsaken it; for it is no longer new.
Wed, 6-I took leave of my dear friends at Londonderry,
and drove to Newtown Limavaddy. I had no design to preach
there; but while we were at breakfast, the people were gathered
so fast, that I could not deny them: The House was soon
filled from end to end. I explained to them the fellowship
believers have with God. Thence I went on to Coleraine, and
preached at six (as I did two years ago) in the barrack-yard.
The wind was high and sharp enough; but the people here
are good old soldiers. Many attended at five in the morning,
and a huge congregation about six in the evening; most of
whom, I believe, tasted the good word; for God was with us
of a truth. Friday, 8. I could willingly have stayed a little
longer with this steady, affectionate people; but I broke from
them between six and seven; and went forward, as well as the
heavy rain and a tired horse would permit. About two we
reached Ballymena, where we have a small and poor, but well
established, society. The Presbyterian Minister offering his
meeting-house, I willingly accepted his offer; and explained
to a large congregation, “God was in Christ, reconciling the
world unto himself.” And I believe his word fell on many
“as the rain, and as the dew upon the tender herb.”
Sat. 9.--We went through a lovely country to Antrim.
Here likewise the Presbyterian Minister offered me the use of a
large and commodious House. The Bible in the pulpit lying
open, I chose, for the subject of my discourse, the words which
first met my eye; namely, “When they had nothing to pay, he
frankly forgave them both.” The greatest part of the country
from hence to Belfast is likewise exceeding pleasant. At six I
preached in the Linen-Hall, to a numerous and seriously atten
tive congregation. A gentleman invited me to lodge at his
house, and showed me the new Presbyterian meeting-house. It
is nearly seventy-two feet by fifty, and is far the most beautiful
of any I have seen in Ireland; but I doubt whether it equals
Dr. Taylor's, in Norwich. That is the most elegant I ever saw.
I preached atten in the Linen-Hall, to double the congrega
tion that attended in the evening; and the power of God came
REv. J. wesley’s [June, 1787.
382t
wonderfully upon them, melting their hearts, and breaking the
rocks in pieces. In the afternoon I preached in the Linen-Hall
at Lisburn, to a still more numerous congregation; I think the
largest that I have seen since we left England: And all, except
ing a few giddy children, behaved as men that heard for life.
Mon. 11.--It being the Quarterly Meeting, I preached at
eleven in the Presbyterian meeting-house; a large and hand
some building, freely offered both by the Minister and his
Elders; and it then contained the congregation. But in the
evening the multitude of people constrained me to return to
my old stand in the Linen-Hall: And I have hardly had so
solemn an opportunity since we came into the kingdom.
Tues. 12.--We came through a most beautiful country to
Downpatrick; a much larger town than I imagined; I think not
much inferior to Sligo. The evening was uncommonly mild and
bright, there not being a cloud in the sky. The tall firs shaded
us on every side, and the fruitful fields were spread all around.
The people were, I think, half as many more as were at Lisburn
even on Sunday evening; on whom I enforced those important
words, “Acquaint now thyself with Him, and be at peace.”
Wed. 13.--Being informed we had only six-and-twenty miles
to go, we did not set out till between six and seven. The
country was uncommonly pleasant, running between two high
ridges of mountains. But it was up hill and down, all the way;
so that we did not reach Rathfriland till near noon. Mr. Barber,
the Presbyterian Minister, (a princely personage, I believe six
feet and a half high,) offering me his new spacious preaching
house, the congregation quickly gathered together. I began
without delay to open and enforce, “Now God commandeth all
men everywhere to repent.” I took chaise the instant I had
done; but the road being still up hill and down, we were two
hours going what they called six miles. I then quitted the
chaise, and rode forward. But even then four miles, so called,
took an hour and a half riding; so that I did not reach Dr.
Lesley's, at Tanderagee, till half an hour past four. About
six I stood upon the steps, at Mr. Godly's door, and preached
on, “This is not your rest,” to a larger congregation, by a
third, than even that at Downpatrick. I scarce remember to
have seen a larger, unless in London, Yorkshire, or Cornwall.
Thur. 14.--Mr. Broadbent and I walked round Dr. Lesley's
domain. I have not seen anything of the size in England that
June, 1787.] JOURNAL, 383
is equal to it. The house stands in the midst of a fruitful hill,
which is part beneath, and part above it. In approaching it,
you see no walls, nothing but green trees and shrubs of vari
ous kinds. Enter the court-yard and gate, and you still see
no stone walls; but on either hand,
The verdurous wall of Paradise upsprings;
and that summer and winter; consisting wholly of ever-greens,
that bloom all the year round. On the upper side of the house,
the gently rising hill yields the loveliest scene that can be con
ceived; such a mixture of shady walks, and lawns sprinkled
with trees; at the top of which is a natural rock, under which
you may sit and command a most beautiful and extensive
prospect: And all this variety has arisen from a rough, furzy
heath, by the industry of Dr. Lesley, in thirty years.
I expected the congregation would not be so large this
evening as it was the last; but it was far larger, and, if possi
ble, more attentive. I have scarce ever seen a more pleasing
sight. We were covered round with tall, shady trees; only
an opening on one side afforded a view of the wide-extended
country. The people were as motionless as the trees; for the
power of God was upon them; and I believe few of them will
forget that hour, till their spirits return to God.
Fri. 15.-About eight I preached at Rich-Hill, to a deeply
serious congregation. At eleven I preached in the Castle-yard,
at Charlemount, to a large congregation, gathered from all
parts; it being the Quarterly Meeting. Immediately followed
the love-feast. But the preaching-house would not contain one
half of the people: So we borrowed the Green in the Fort, and let
the people through the wicket, one by one. They then sat down
on the grass, being full as private as in the House; and many
spoke their experience quite freely. But the rain obliged us to
break off our meeting sooner than we intended. It began in the
evening, before I had finished the hymn, but stopped in two or
three minutes, and left us a fair and tolerably pleasant evening.
Sat. 16.--I went on to Dungannon; but the town seemed
to be in an uproar. One would have thought Bedlam had
broke loose. The cause was this:--A cock-fight was at hand.
A gentleman asked the Presbyterian Minister for the use of
his meeting-house; but he gave a reason for his denial, viz., that
Mr. Hall, one of the society, had said he had played at cards all
384 REv. J. Wesley’s [June, 1787.
night; (which, it seems, was true;) and therefore he could not
allow him to come into his meeting-house. So we removed all
the benches out of our own; and it contained most of the
congregation. I preached there again in the evening, and
then held a love-feast; at which many were greatly comforted.
Sun. 17.--We knew not what to do at Armagh; The rain
would not suffer us to preach in the avenue; and our House
would not contain half of the congregation, many of whom
came from far. The best shift we could make was to squeeze
into the House as many as possible, and keep both the windows
and doors open; by which means many more could hear.
In the evening the Seceders (who would think it?) freely
gave me the use of their large meeting-house. It was filled
from end to end: But a wise young gentleman observed, that
I had quite mistook my subject; my sermon being calculated
for the vulgar, not for gentlefolks.
I permitted as many as our House would contain to stay at
the meeting of the society; and gave them a plain account of
the Methodists, both as to their rise, principles, and practice.
Mon. 18.--Many seemed not a little moved, while I enforced
the words of Eliphaz, (it seems, the eldest and most honourable
of Job’s three friends,) “Acquaint now thyself with him, and
be at peace.” Afterwards we took a view of the Primate's
lodge and chapel, elegant in the highest degree; and of the
domain surrounding them, which is laid out and planted in
the most beautiful manner. And what hath the owner there
of? Not so much as the beholding thereof with his eyes.
Probably he will behold it no more. He is fully taken up in
building a large seat near Dublin, at above eighty years of age
Tu secanda marmora
Locas sub ipsum funus, et sepulchri
Immemor struis domos /*
In the evening I preached once more in Mr. M'Gough’s
avenue, and a listening multitude seriously attended. Surely
there will be a harvest here also by and by, although hitherto
we see but little fruit.
Tues. 19.--We went on through horrible roads to Newry.
s wonder any should be so stupid as to prefer the Irish roads
to the English. The huge unbroken stones, of which they are
* For a translation of these lines see p. 31 l of this volume.--EDIT.
June, 1787.] JOURNAL. 385
generally made, are enough to break any carriage in pieces.
No, there is nothing equal to good English gravel, both for
horses, carriages, and travellers.
In the evening I preached to a numerous congregation in
the large meeting-house. I believe many felt the edge of the
word sharper than a two-edged sword: One consequence
of which was, that our new Room would not contain the
congregation even at five in the morning, but many were con
strained to stand without. Between mine and ten I preached
in the market-house at Dundalk. We expected a tumult; but
there was none at all : A very large congregation of rich and
poor behaved with the utmost decency, while I enforced,
“Now is the accepted time; now is the day of salvation.” At
six in the evening I preached in the Court-House at Drogheda
to a crowded congregation, on, “I saw the dead, small and
great, stand before God.” Even in this turbulent town, all
were quiet, and seemed to feel that God was there.
Thur. 21.-Several of our friends from Dublin met us at
the Man-of-War, with whom we went on to Swords ; a town
famous from time immemorial for all manner of wickedness.
However, finding a congregation waiting, I began without
delay; and all were still as night: So salvation is come to
the sinners of Swords also. In the afternoon it pleased God
to bring us safe to Dublin, when we had been absent a little
above two months.
Fri. 22.--I began visiting the classes, which employed me
to the Thursday following. We found it necessary to exclude
one hundred and twelve members; there remained eleven
hundred and thirty-six.
Sun. 24.--At seven I preached in the Room; at eleven the
Service began at Bethesda. I found uncommon liberty there,
even among the rich and great. I think some of them felt our
Lord present, both to wound and to heal. In the evening I
preached at the new Room, and it was just as much as I could
do without weariness.-
Tues. 26.-We were agreeably surprised with the arrival
of Dr. Coke, who came from Philadelphia in nine-and-twenty
days, and gave us a pleasing account of the work of God in
America. Thursday, 28. I had the pleasure of a conversa
tion with Mr. Howard, I think one of the greatest men in
Europe. Nothing but the mighty power of God can enable
WCT. IV. C c
386 REv. J. Wesley’s [July, 1787.
him to go through his difficult and dangerous employments.
But what can hurt us, if God is on our side?
Sat. 30.-I desired all our Preachers to meet me, and
consider the state of our brethren in America, who have been
terribly frightened at their own shadow, as if the English
Preachers were just going to enslave them. I believe that
fear is now over, and they are more aware of Satan's devices.
Sun. July 1.--At seven I strongly exhorted a large con
gregation, not to be conformed either to the wisdom, spirit,
or fashions of this world, if ever they desired to be transformed
in the spirit of their mind, according to the perfect and accept
able will of God. In the evening I opened and applied those
awful words, “Lord, are there few that be saved?”
Tues. 3.−A few friends took me to Merino, a seat of Lord
Charlemount's, four miles from Dublin. It contains a lovely
mixture of wood, water, and lawns, on which are several kinds
of foreign sheep, with great plenty of peacocks; but I could
not hear any singing-birds of any kind. I a little wondered at
this, till I afterwards recollected, that I had not heard any
singing-bird, not even a lark, a thrush, or a blackbird, within
some miles of Dublin. In the evening I strongly enforced
those awful words, “Strive to enter in at the strait gate,”
upon a numerous congregation; who had ears to hear, and
hearts to receive the whole Gospel.
Wed. 4.--I spent an hour at the New-Dargle, agentleman's
seat four or five miles from Dublin. I have not seen so beauti
ful a place in the kingdom. It equals the Leasowes in Warwick
shire; and it greatly exceeds them in situation; all the walks
lying on the side of a mountain, which commands all Dublin
bay, as well as an extensive and finely-variegated land-prospect.
A little river runs through it, which occasions two cascades, at
a small distance from each other. Although many places may
exceed this in grandeur, I believe none can exceed it in beauty.
Afterwards I saw the Parliament-House. The House of Lords
far exceeds that at Westminster; and the Lord-Lieutenant’s
throne as far exceeds that miserable throne (so-called) of the
King in the English House of Lords. The House of Commons
is a noble room indeed. It is an octagon, wainscoted round with
Irish oak, which shames all mahogany, and galleried all round
for the convenience of the ladies. The Speaker's chair is far
more grand than the throne of the Lord Lieutenant. But what
July, 1787.] JOURNAL. 387
surprised me above all, were the kitchens of the House, and the
large apparatus for good eating. Tables were placed from one
end of a large hall to the other; which, it seems, while the Par
liament sits, are daily covered with meat at four or five o'clock,
for the accommodation of the members. Alas, poor Ireland 1
Who shall teach thy very senators wisdom ? War is ceased;
Sed savior armis,
Lururia incubuit 1 +
Thur. 5.--Most of our Preachers came to town. Friday, 6.
Our Conference began; and ended as usual on Tuesday, 10.
We had no jarring string, but all, from the beginning to the
end, was love and harmony.
Sun. 8.--I preached at our Room at seven. At eleven the
Service began at Bethesda. The congregation was exceeding
large. I preached on part of the Second Lesson, Luke xx. 34;
and many had a large taste of the powers of the world to come.
At the love-feast in the evening, many spoke freely, who were
deeply experienced in the ways of God. Indeed they have
fairly profited in the divine life. I have rarely heard such a
conversation even in England. On Tuesday evening likewise,
many spoke with equal fire, tempered with meekness of wisdom.
Wed. 11.--At five I took an affectionate leave of this loving
people; and, having finished all my business here, in the
afternoon I went down with my friends, having taken the
whole ship, and went on board the Prince of Wales, one of the
Parkgate packets. At seven we sailed with a fair, moderate
wind. Between nine and ten I lay down, as usual, and slept
till near four, when I was waked by .; , uncommon noise, and
found the ship lay beating upon a large rock, about a league
from Holyhead. The Captain, who had not long lain down,
leaped up; and, running upon the deck, when he saw how
the ship lay, cried out, “Your lives may be saved, but I am
undone !” Yet no sailor swore, and no woman cried out.
We immediately went to prayer; and presently the ship, I
know not how, shot off the rock, and pursued her way,
without any more damage, than the wounding a few of her
outside planks. About three in the afternoon we came safe
to Parkgate; and in the evening went on to Chester.
* This quotation from Juvenal is thus translated by Gifford:-
Now all the evils of long peace are ours;
Luxury, more terrible than hostile powers. --EDIT.
388 REv. J. WESLEY’s [July, 1787.
Fri. 13.--I spent a quiet day; and in the evening enforced
to a crowded audience the parable of the Sower. I know not
that ever I had so large a congregation.
Sun. 15.-I preached at the new church in the morning,
on Matt. v. 20; in the afternoon, on 1 Cor. xv. 35 ; Mr.
Broadbent in the Room at eight in the morning, and between
five and six in the evening.
Mon. 16.--The House was well filled at five in the morning.
At noon I took a view of Mr. Ryle's silk-mill, which keeps two
hundred and fifty children in perpetual employment. In the
evening I preached on Mark iii. 35 ; and we had a comfort
able opportunity. Tuesday, 17. About noon I preached in
the new chapel at Bullocksmithy; and in the evening at
Stockport. Being informed that the people in general were
dead and cold, I strongly applied, “Now it is high time to
awake out of sleep.” God was pleased to speak in his word,
and that with a mighty voice; but still more powerfully at
five in the morning, Wednesday, 18, while I was enforcing
that promise, “The Lord whom ye seek will suddenly come
to his temple.” I then retired to a little house of Mr.
Brocklehurst's, two miles beyond Manchester. Here Adam
Oldham lived O what did riches profit him How strange
the Providence which put me in his place |
The rest of this week I spent in writing. On Saturday, 21,
I returned to Manchester. Sunday, 22. Our service began
at ten. Notwithstanding the severe cold which has continued
many days, the House was well filled; but my work was easy,
as Dr. Coke assisted me. As many as could, crowded in in
the evening; but many were obliged to go away. Afterwards
I spent a comfortable hour with the society.
Mon. 23.--I preached morning and afternoon. In the
evening I met the Bands, and admired their liveliness and
simplicity. After preaching on Tuesday morning I retired
again to Bruton. Thursday, 26. About noon I preached in
the new preaching-house, to as many as it would well contain,
on Isaiah lv. 5, 6. To-day I read upon the road a very
agreeable book, Mr. Dobb’s “Universal History.” It gave
me a clearer view of ancient times than ever I had before ;
but I still doubt of many famous incidents, which have passed
current for many ages. To instance in one:--I cannot believe
there was ever such a nation as the Amazons in the world.
Aug. 1787.] JOURNAL. 389
The whole affair of the Argonauts I judge to be equally
fabulous; as Mr. Bryant has shown many parts of ancient
history to be : And no wonder, considering how allegories and
poetic fables have been mistaken for real histories.
After preaching at Rochdale, I was agreeably surprised by a
young woman that called upon me. Several years, agirl thirteen
or fourteen years old was remarkable for piety; but a year or
two after, when I called upon her with great expectation, she
had not the least savour of it left. She came on purpose to
inform me that God had restored her; and she was now deter
mined to live and die to Him. God grant she may! She will
either be an abandoned apostate, or a shining Christian.
Fri. 27.--The House was well filled at five. I have not
seen so large a morning congregation, in proportion to the size
of the town, since I returned to England. I was invited to
breakfast at Bury, by Mr. Peel, a calico-printer; who, a few
years ago, began with five hundred pounds, and is now
supposed to have gained fifty thousand pounds. O what a
miracle if he lose not his soul |
Thence we went on to Bolton. Here are eight hundred poor
children taughtinour Sunday-schools, by about eighty masters,
who receiveno pay but what they are to receivefrom their Great
Master. About a hundred of them (part boys and part girls)
are taught to sing; and they sang so true, that, all singing
together, there seemed to be but one voice. The House was
throughly filled, while I explained and applied the first com
mandment. What is all morality or religion without this?
A mere castle in the air. In the evening, many of the children
still hovering round the House, I desired forty or fifty to come
in and sing, Vital spark of heavenly flame.
Although some of them were silent, not being able to sing
for tears, yet the harmony was such as I believe could not be
equalled in the King's chapel.
Sun. AUGUST 5.--In the morning I met the select society;
a lovely company of humble, simple Christians. Several of them
appeared to have sound and deep experience of the things of
God, and to stand steadfast in the liberty wherewith Christ had
made them free. The House was at ten full and warm enough.
Mr. Horne read Prayers, and read them well. I preached on
those words in the First Lesson, “How long halt ye between
two opinions?” and was enabled to press the question home on
390 REv. J. W. Esley’s [Aug. 1787.
the consciences of the hearers. We had five Clergymen,
(although three only could officiate,) and twelve or thirteen
hundred communicants; and the Master of the feast was in
the midst of us, as many found to their unspeakable comfort.
After preaching in the evening, I took a solemn leave of the
affectionate society. Here, at least, it undeniably appears that
we have not run in vain, neither laboured in vain.
Mon. 6.--Having taken the whole coach for Birmingham,
we set out at twelve o’clock, expecting to be there, as usual,
about five in the evening; but having six persons within, and
eight without, the coach could not bear the burden, but broke
down before three in the morning: But having patched it
together, as well as we could, we went on to Congleton, and
got another. But in an hour or two this broke also; and one
of the horses was so throughly tired, that he could hardly set
one foot before the other. After all these hinderances, we got
to Birmingham just at seven. Finding a large congregation
waiting, I stepped out of the coach into the House, and began
preaching without delay; and such was the goodness of God,
that I found no more weariness when I had done than if I
had rested all the day.
Here I took a tender leave of Mrs. Heath and her lovely
daughters, about to embark with Mr. Heath for America;
whom I hardly expect to see any more till we meet in
Abraham’s bosom.
Tues. 7.--Setting out a little before five, we reached
Worcester between ten and eleven: Resting till half-past
twelve, and taking fresh horses at Tewkesbury, we reached
Gloucester before five o’clock. About seven I preached to a
numerous congregation in the new House, on, “I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ;” and strongly applied the
words to those whom they concerned. This night was one
of the hottest I ever felt in Europe.
Wed, 8.-We set out at two; and, from the time it was light,
rode through one of the pleasantestcountries I ever saw. Before
five we came to Rodbury-Place; but we were far too early for so
genteel a family. Before we reached Malmsbury, one of my
horses fell lame; so I sent my own chaise and horses directly
to Bristol, and took post-chaises the rest of the day.
About half-hour after four we came to Salisbury, designing
to go straight forward to Southampton; but, to our great
surprise, there was not a post-chaise to be hired in the town.
Aug. 1787.] JOURNAL, 391
After waiting some time, we were informed that notice had
been given of my preaching in the evening. I then saw the
providential reason why we could not leave Sarum. The
House was full enough in the evening, and great was the
power of God in the midst of them.
Thur. 9.--Desiring to be at Southampton as soon as pos
sible, we took chaise at four in the morning, and (making but
a short stay at Romsey) came thither between eight and nine.
We found two sloops nearly ready to sail. The Captain of one
promised to sail the next morning; so we sat down content. At
seven in the evening I preached in Mr. Fay's school-room, to
a small, but deeply serious, congregation, on, “It is appointed
unto men once to die.” I believe some of these will not be
forgetful hearers, but will bring forth fruit with patience.
Fri. 10.--At six I preached to nearly the same number, on
Heb. iv. 14. In the afternoon I went with a gentleman (Mr.
Taylor) to hear the famous musician that plays upon the
glasses. By my appearing there, (as I had foreseen,) an heap
of Gentry attended in the evening; and I believe several
of them, as well as Mr. T. himself, did not come in vain.
Sat. 11.--We went on board the Queen, a small sloop, and
sailed eight or nine leagues with a tolerable wind. But it then
grew foul, and blew a storm; so that we were all glad to put
in at Yarmouth harbour. About six Dr. Coke preached in the
market-house, to a quiet and tolerably attentive congregation.
The storm continuing, at eight in the morning, Sunday, 12,
I preached to a much larger congregation. I had uncommon
liberty of speech, and I believe some of them felt that God was
there. At eleven we went to church. There was a tolerable
congregation, and all remarkably well-behaved. The Minister
read Prayers very seriously, and preached on, “Blessed are the
poor in spirit.” At four I preached again, on Luke xix. 42,
(part of the Second Lesson in the morning,) “If thou hadst
known, even thou,” &c. The market-house was now more
than filled ; and not a few seemed to hear as for life. In the
evening Dr. Coke preached again. We have now delivered
our own souls at Yarmouth, and trust God will suffer us to
go on to Guernsey.
Mon. 13.--We set out from Yarmouth with a fair wind ; but
it soon turned against us, and blew so hard that in the afternoon
we were glad to put in at Swanage. I found we had still a little
392 BEv. J. WESLEY’s [Aug. 1787.
society here. I had not seen them for thirteen years, and had
no thought of seeing them now; but God does all things well.
In the evening I preached in the Presbyterian meeting-house,
not often, I believe, so well filled; and afterwards passed half an
hour very agreeably with the Minister, in the parsonage-house,
which he rents; a neat retired house, with a delightful garden.
Thence we adjourned to the house of our old brother Collins,
and between eight and nine went on board.
Tues. 14.--Sailing on, with a fair wind, we fully expected
to reach Guernsey in the afternoon; but the wind turning
contrary, and blowing hard, we found it would be impossible.
We then judged it best to put in at the Isle of Alderney; but
we were very near being shipwrecked in the bay. When we
were in the middle of the rocks, with the sea rippling all round
us, the wind totally failed. Had this continued, we must have
struck upon one or other of the rocks: So we went to prayer,
and the wind sprung up instantly. About sunset we landed;
and, though we had five beds in the same room, slept in peace.
About eight I went down to a convenient spot on the
beach, and began giving out a hymn. A won an and two little
children joined us immediately. Before the hymn was ended,
we had a tolerable congregation; all of whom behaved well:
Part, indeed, continued at forty or fifty yards’ distance; but
they were all quiet and attentive.
It happened (to speak in the vulgar phrase) that three or
four who sailed with us from England, a gentleman with his
wife and sister, were near relations of the Governor. He came
to us this morning, and, when I went into the room, behaved
with the utmost courtesy. This little circumstance may
remove prejudice, and make a more open way for the Gospel.
Soon after we set sail, and, after a very pleasant passage,
through little islands on either hand, we came to the venerable
Castle, standing on arock, about a quarter of amile from Guern
sey. The isle itself makes a beautiful appearance, spreading as
a crescent to the right and left; about seven miles long, and
five broad; part high land, and part low. The town itself is
boldly situated, rising higher and higher from the water. The
first thing I observed in it was, very narrow streets, and exceed
ing high houses. But we quickly went on to Mr. De Jersey's,
hardly a mile from the town. Here I found a most cordial
welcome, both from the master of the house, and all his family.
Aug. 1787.] JöUlo, NAL. 393
I preached at seven in a large room, to as deeply serious a
congregation as I ever saw, on, “Jesus Christ, of God made
unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.”
Thur. 16.--I had a very serious congregation at five, in
a large room of Mr. De Jersey’s house. His gardens and
orchards are of a vast extent, and wonderfully pleasant; and I
know no Nobleman in Great Britain that has such variety
of the most excellent fruit; which he is every year increasing,
either from France, or other parts of the Continent. What
quantity of fruit he has, you may conjecture from one sort
only:-This summer he gathered fifty pounds of strawberries
daily, for six weeks together.
In the evening I preached at the other end of the town, in
our own preaching-house. So many people squeezedin, (though
not near all who came,) that it was as hot as a stove. But this
none seemed to regard; for the word of God was sharper than
a two-edged sword.
Fri. 17.--I waited upon the Governor, and spent half an
hour very agreeably. In the afternoon we took a walk upon
the pier, the largest and finest I ever saw. The town is swiftly
increasing; new houses starting up on every side.
In the evening I did not attempt to go into the House, but
stood near it, in the yard surrounded with tall, shady trees, and
proclaimed to a large congregation, “God is a Spirit; and they
that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth.” I
believe many were cut to the heart this hour, and some not a
little comforted.
Sat. 18.--Dr. Coke and I dined at the Governor’s. I was
well pleased to find other company. We conversed seriously,
for upwards of an hour, with a sensible, well-bred, agreeable
man. In the evening I preached to the largest congregation I
have seen here, on Jer. viii. 22; and they were all attention.
Surely God will have a people in this place.
Sun. 19.--Joseph Bradford preached at six in the morning,
at Mont-Plaisir les Terres, to a numerous congregation. I
preached at half an hour past eight, and the House contained
the congregation. At ten I went to the French church, where
there was a large and well-behaved congregation. At five we
had the largest congregation of all; of whom I took a solemn
and affectionate leave, as it is probable I may not see them any
more till we meet in Abraham’s bosom.
394. REv. J. Wesley’s [Aug. 1787.
Mon. 20.--We embarked between three and four in the morn
ing, in a very small, inconvenient sloop, and not a swift sailer;
so that we were seven hours in sailing what is called seven
leagues. About eleven we landed at St. Helier, and went
straight to Mr. Brackenbury's house. It standsvery pleasantly,
near the end of the town; and has a large convenient garden,
with a lovely range of fruitful hills, which rise at a small
distance from it. I preached in the evening to an exceeding
serious congregation, on Matt. iii. ult.: And almost as many
were present at five in the morning; whom I exhorted to go on
to perfection; which many of them, Mr. Clarke informs me, are
earnestly endeavouring to do. Tuesday, 21. We took a walk
to one of our friends in the country. Near his house stood what
they call the College. It is a free-school, designed to train up
children for the University; exceeding finely situated, in a quiet
recess, surrounded by tall woods. Not far from it stands, on the
top of a high hill, (I suppose a Roman mount,) an old chapel,
believed to be the first Christian church which was built in the
island. From hence we had a view of the whole island, the
pleasantest I ever saw ; as far superior to the Isle of Wight as
that is to the Isle of Man. The little hills, almost covered with
large trees, are inexpressibly beautiful: It seems they are to be
equalled in the Isle of Guernsey. In the evening I was obliged
to preach abroad, on, “Now is the day of salvation.” I think
a blessing seldom fails to attend that subject,
Wed. 22.--In the evening, the Room not containing the
people, I was obliged to stand in the yard. I preached on
Rom. iii.22, 23; and spoke exceeding plain: Even the Gentry
heard with deep attention. How little things does God turn
to his own glory ! Probably many of these flock together,
because I have lived so many years. And perhaps even this
may be the means of their living for ever !
Thur. 23.--I rode to St. Mary’s, five or six miles from St.
Helier, through shady, pleasant lanes. None at the house
could speak English, but I had interpreters enough. In the
evening our large Room was throughly filled: I preached on,
“By grace are ye saved, through faith.” Mr. Brackenbury
interpreted sentence by sentence; and God owned his word,
though delivered in so awkward a manner; but especially in
prayer: I prayed in English, and Mr. B. in French.
The houses here are exactly like those in the interior parts
Aug. 1787.] JOURNAL. 395
of Wales, equal to the best farmers’ houses in Lincolnshire;
and the people in general are far better behaved than our
country farmers in England.
Fri. 24.--I returned to St. Helier. The high wind in the
evening prevented my preaching abroad. However, on more
than the House would contain, I enforced those awful words,
“It is appointed unto men once to die.” I believe the word
fell heavy on all that heard; and many wished to die the
death of the righteous.
Sat. 25.--Having now leisure, I finished a sermon on
discerning the “Signs of the Times.” This morning I had a
particular conversation (as I had once or twice before) with
Jeannie Bisson of this town; such a young woman as I have
hardly seen elsewhere. She seems to be wholly devoted to
God, and to have constant communion with him. She has a
clear and strong understanding; and I cannot perceive the least
tincture of enthusiasm. I am afraid she will not live long.
I am amazed at the grace of God which is in her: I think she
is far beyond Madame Guion, in deep communion with God;
and I doubt whether I have found her fellow in England.
Precious as my time is, it would have been worth my while to
come to Jersey, had it been only to see this prodigy of grace.
In the evening God was with us in a very uncommon
manner, while I opened and enforced those comprehensive
words, “We preach Christ crucified.” I know not when we
have had such an opportunity; it seemed as if every soul
present would have found the salvation of God!
Sun. 26.--Dr. Coke preached at five, and I at nine o'clock.
Afterwards I heard the English Service at church; but the
congregation was nothing near so large as ours at five in the
morning. We had a French sermon in our Room at three.
Afterwards I met the society; many of whom came from the
country, and had no English; so Mr. Brackenbury interpreted
for me again: Afterwards we both prayed. Many of the
people seemed greatly affected. Between five and six I began
preaching in the yard; but before I had finished my sermon, it
poured down with rain; so I was obliged to conclude abruptly.
Mon. 27.-Captain Cabot, the master of a Guernsey sloop,
called upon us early in the morning, and told us, if we chose
to go that way, he would set out between five and six. But
the wind being quite contrary, we judged it best to wait a little
396 REv. J. Wesley’s [Aug. 1787.
longer. In the evening, being appointed to preach at seven, I
was obliged to preach within. We were extremely crowded;
but the power of God was so manifested while I declared,
“We preach Jesus Christ, and him crucified,” that we soon
forgot the heat, and were glad of being detained a little
longer than we intended.
I thought when I left Southampton, to have been there
again as this day; but God’s thoughts were not as my thoughts.
Here we are shut up in Jersey; for how long we cannot tell.
But it is all well; for thou, Lord, hast done it. It is my
part to improve the time, as it is not likely I shall ever have
another opportunity of visiting these islands.
Tues. 28.--Being still detained by contrary winds, I
preached at six in the evening to a larger congregation than
ever, in the assembly-room. It conveniently contains five or
six hundred people. Most of the Gentry were present; and
I believe felt that God was there in an uncommon degree.
Being still detained, I preached there again the next evening,
to a larger congregation than ever. I now judged, I had
fully delivered my own soul: And in the morning, the wind
serving for Guernsey, and not for Southampton, I returned
thither not unwillingly; since it was not by my choice, but
by the clear providence of God; for in the afternoon I was
offered the use of the assembly-room; a spacious chamber in
the market-place, which would contain at least thrice as many
as our former Room. I willingly accepted the offer, and
preached at six to such a congregation as I had not seen
here before; and the word seemed to sink deep into their
hearts. I trust it will not return empty.
Wed. 29.--I designed to have followed the blow in the morn
ing; but I had quite lost my voice. However, it was restored
in the evening; and I believe all in the assembly-room (more
than the last evening) heard distinctly, while I explained and
applied, “I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God.”
In the morning, Thursday, 30, I took a solemn leave of the
society. We set out about nine, and reached St. Peter's in
the afternoon. Good is the will of the Lord. I trust he has
something more for us to do here also. After preaching to a
larger congregation than was expected on so short a notice, on,
“God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself.” I
returned to Mont-Plaisir, to stay just as long as it should
Sept. 1787.] JOURNAL. 397
please God. I preached there in the morning, Friday, 31,
to a congregs'ion serious as death. Afterwards I looked over
Archbishcp Usher's Letters; and was surprised to find that
great man was fully convinced, l. That the Septuagint
translation continually adds to, takes from, and changes, the
Hebrew text at pleasure: 2. That this could not possibly be
owing to mistake, but must have been done by design : 3. That
the original translation of it was lost long ago; and what has
ever since gone under that name is a spurious copy, abounding
with omissions, additions, and alterations of the Hebrew text;
yet not such as any way destroy the foundation.
I designed to preach abroad in the evening, but the furious
wind drove us into the House. However, our labour was not
lost; for many felt the sharpness of the two-edged sword,
while I was expounding Gal. vi. 14.
Sat. SEPTEMBER 1.--This day twelvemonth I was detained
in Holland by contrary winds. All is well, so we are doing
and suffering the will of our Lord. In the evening the
storm driving us into the House again, I strongly exhorted
a very genteel audience (such as I have rarely seen in England)
to “ask for the old paths, and walk therein.”
Sun. 2.-Being still pent up by the north-east wind, Dr.
Coke preached at six in the morning to a deeply affected
congregation. I preached at eight, on Rom. viii. 33. At
one, Mr. Vivian, a Local Preacher, preached in French, the
language of the island. At five, as the House would not
contain half the congregation, I preached in a tolerably
sheltered place, on the “joy there is in heaven over one
sinner that repenteth;” and both high and low seemed to
hear it gladly. I then designed to meet the society, but
could not. The people pressed so eagerly on every side, that
the House was filled presently; so that I could only give a
general exhortation, to walk worthy of their profession.
I was in hopes of sailing in the morning, Monday, 3; but
the storm so increased, that it was judged impracticable.
The congregation in the evening increased every day; so
I trust we were detained for good purpose. They appeared
to be more and more affected; so that I believe we were not
detained for nothing.
Tues. 4.--The storm continued, so that we could not stir. I
took a walk to-day, through what is called the New-Ground,
where the Gentry are accustomed to walk in the evening. Both
398 REv. J. wesley’s [Sept. 1787.
the upper ground, which is as level as a bowling-green, and
the lower, which is planted with rows of trees, are wonderfully
beautiful. In the evening I fully delivered my own soul, by
showing what it is to build upon a rock. But still we could
not sail; the wind being quite contrary, as well as exceeding
high. It was the same on Wednesday. In the afternoon we
drank tea at a friend's, who was mentioning a Captain just
come from France, that proposed to sail in the morning for
Penzance; for which the wind would serve, though not for
Southampton. In this we plainly saw the hand of God; so we
agreed with him immediately; and in the morning, Thurs
day, 6, went on board with a fair, moderate wind; but we had
but just entered the ship when the wind died away. We
cried to God for help, and it presently sprung up, exactly fair,
and did not cease till it brought us into Penzance bay.
We appeared to our friends here, as men risen from the dead.
Great was their rejoicing over us; and great was the power
of God in the midst of the congregation, while I explained
and applied those words, “Whosoever doeth the will of God,
the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.”
Sat. 8.--Dr. Coke preached at six to as many as the
preaching-house would contain. At ten I was obliged to take
the field, by the multitude of people that flocked together.
I found a very uncommon liberty of speech among them;
and cannot doubt but the work of God will flourish in this
place. In the evening I preached at St. Ives, (but, it being
the market-day, I could not stand, as usual, in the market
place,) in a very convenient field at the end of the town, to a
very numerous congregation: I need scarce add, and very
serious; for such are all the congregations in the county
of Cornwall.
Sun. 9.--About nine I preached at the Copper-works, three
or four miles from St. Ives, to a large congregation gathered
from all parts; I believe, “with the demonstration of the Spirit.”
I then met the society in the preaching-house; which is unlike
any other in England, both as to its form and materials. It
is exactly round, and composed wholly of brazen slags; which,
I suppose, will last as long as the earth. Between one and two
I began in the market-place at Redruth, to the largest congre
gation I ever saw there; they not only filled all the windows,
but sat on the tops of the houses. About five I began in the
pit at Gwennap. I suppose we had a thousand more than ever
Sept. 1787.] JOURNAL. 399
were therebefore: But it was all one; my voice was strengthened
accordingly, so that every one could hear distinctly.
Mon. 10.--I had a large congregation at five, and a peculiar
blessing. Thence I went to Mr. Mill's, the Rector of Kenwyn,
half a mile from Truro; a house fit for a Nobleman; and the
most beautifully situated of any I have seen in the county. At
moon I preached in the preaching-house at Truro. It was well
filled with deeply attentive hearers. Thence we went on through
a swiftly improving country to St. Austle; and preached in the
new House, though not quite finished, to a crowded audience,
who seemed all sensible that God was there. The old House
was well filled at five in the morning, Tuesday, 11. I did not
design to preach at Liskeard, but finding a few people gathered
together, I gave them a short discourse; and then went on to
Torpoint, where several of our brethren from the Dock were
waiting for us; so we crossed over without loss of time, to an
earnest affectionate people. The House would ill contain the
congregation in the evening, and a joyful meeting it was.
Wed. 12.--We went over to Mount Edgecomb, and walked
through all the improvements. The situation is fine indeed.
The lofty hill, nearly surrounded by the sea, and sufficiently
adorned with trees, but not crowded, is uncommonly pleasant;
but it did not strike me like Lord Harcourt’s seat at Newnham.
And are all these things to be burned up?
At noon I preached at Plymouth. The House was crowded
enough, and a solemn awe sat on all the people; as likewise
in the evening at Plymouth Dock. There is an excellent
spirit in this people; and such general peace and unanimity
as never was before.
Thur. 13.--We set out early, and dined at Exeter. In
the evening we had a crowded congregation, that drank in
every word. This society likewise increases both in number
and strength. Friday, 14. We took the mail-coach, and in
the afternoon came to Bath. Considering the uncertain
notice which had been given, we had a larger congregation
than was expected; and many found it a comfortable season,
particularly those that were in heaviness.
Sat. 15.-With the assistance of two of my friends, I
answered abundance of letters. In the evening we had an
uncommon congregation, on whom I strongly enforced the
first principles, (which indeed never can be too much
enforced,) “By grace are ye saved through faith.”
400 Rev. J. Wesley’s [Oct. 1787.
Sun. 16.-I read Prayers at ten, and preached with a
peculiar blessing; and administered the Lord’s Supper to an
unusual number of deeply serious communicants. At half.
past two I began again. The chapel was more than filled.
Many could not get in; and it was the same case at six in
the evening. At both times I preached considerably longer
than I usually do. Surely the time is come, when God will
cause his power to be known here also.
Mon. 17.--Leaving this society in a better state than it has
been in for many years, I went to Bristol, where my brother has
been for some weeks. By the way I preached at Wintanburn,
on the foundation of a new preaching-house. There was much
rain before I began, and a violent wind all the time I was
preaching; yet some of these I trust did come to the marriage.
I had now two or three days to answer my letters. Every
evening our Room was well filled with deeply attentive hearers.
Fri. 21.--I spent the evening at the School, and was much
pleased with the management of it.
Sun. 23.−In the morning my brother read Prayers, and
I preached. In the afternoon I preached in Temple church,
to a very large and serious congregation. My brother desired
to preach in the evening: So by the mouth of two or three
witnesses shall every word be established.
On Monday and the following days I visited the country
societies; and had the satisfaction to find most of them
growing in grace, and not decreasing in number.
Thur. 27.--About noon I preached at Castle-Carey. How
are the times changed 1 The first of our Preachers that came
hither, the zealous mob threw into the horse-pond: Now high
and low earnestly listen to the word that is able to save their
souls. In the evening I preached at Ditcheat. Friday, 28.
I preached at Ditcheat again, at Shepton-Mallet; and at
Pensford to such a congregation as I have not seen there for
many years; and on Saturday returned to Bristol.
Sun. 30.--I read Prayers, and my brother preached. I
preached in the avenue at Kingswood about two; and at five
near King's Square; probably the last time this year that I
shall preach in the open air.
Monday, October 1, and the three following days, I spoke
to the society one by one, and was much refreshed; as the
love of many was not grown cold, and their number
considerably increased.
Oct. 1787.] JOURNAL. 401
Fri. 5.--I preached at noon in Keynsham; and the power
of God was present in an uncommon degree : So it was
when I met the children at Miss Bishop's, and afterwards
those at Mr. Simpson's. I verily think, the spirit and
behaviour of these two sets of children gradually affect the
whole place; which now retains scarce anything of the
brutality and savageness for which it was eminent some years
ago. In the evening we had a watchnight at Kingswood.
The weather was exceeding rough: Yet the House was filled;
and few went away till after the noon of night.
Sun. 7.-I preached morning and evening, and took a
solemn leave of the affectionate people. Monday, 8.
Having taken the whole mail-coach on Saturday, I went to it
on Monday between three and four; and found, to my great
surprise, it was filled with other passengers; and the clerk
faced me down, I had taken the coach for Sunday: But some
of our friends speaking strong words, they thought good to
provide us another coach; only it did not reach town quite so
soon. I was, however, soon enough to meet a large congregation
on Tuesday evening, and praise the Lord together.
Wed. 10.--I retired, and spent the rest of the week in
answering letters, and preparing matter for the Magazine.
Sun. 14.--I preached in West-Street chapel morning and
afternoon; and at St. Swithin's church in the evening. Mon
day, 15. I began a little tour through Oxfordshire. I preached
at Wallingford in the evening, with much enlargement of heart.
Mr. Pentycross called upon me in the morning. Tuesday, 16.
Calvinism and bitterness are fled away together, and we will
ingly gave each other the right hand of fellowship. About one
I preached at Oxford, to a very quiet, deeply serious congrega
tion. The House at Witney would nothing near contain the
people in the evening: It was well filled at five on Wednesday
morning. Idearly love this people; they are so simple of heart,
and so much alive to God. After dinner we returned to Oxford.
Half an hour before the hour of preaching, a heavy rain began;
by this means the House was filled, and not overfilled. I found
great liberty of speech in enforcing the first and great command
ment; and could not but hope there will be a great work of
God here, notwithstanding all the wisdom of the world,
Thur. 18.-We went on to High-Wycomb. The work of
God is so considerably increased here, that although three
402 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Oct. 1787.
galleries are added to the preaching-house, it would scarce
contain the people. Even at five in the morning, Friday, 19,
it was throughly filled. Never before was there so fair a
prospect of doing good at this place. I dined in London.'
Sun. 21.--I preached in the morning at Spitalfields, with
the usual success; in the afternoon at the new chapel, on the
remarkable answer of Balaam to Balak’s question. (Micah
vi. 8.) How clear light had Balaam at that time ! But he
Joon turned back, and “loved darkness rather than light.”
Mon. 22.--I went to Canterbury, and preached in the
evening on the first and great commandment; in the morning,
Tuesday, 23, on the second. We then went on to Dover.
In the evening I strongly applied the parable of the Sower
to a crowded audience. Wednesday, 24. I spoke equally
plain in the morning. About noon (after an intermission
of fifteen years) I preached at Sandwich, to more than the
House contained, on Luke ix. 62. God applied his word to
many hearts, so that I have at length a hope for Sandwich
also. In the evening I preached at Margate. The word
was quick and powerful. So it was likewise, in the morning,
Thursday, 25. A good work has been wrought here since
I was here before. Here is now a lively, loving society, who
adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour.
In returning to Canterbury, I called upon Mr. Kingsford, a
man of substance as well as piety. He informed me, “Seven
years ago, I so entirely lost the use of my ankles and knees,
that I could no more stand than a new-born child. Indeed,
I could not lie in bed without a pillow laid between my legs,
one of them being unable to bear the weight of the other. I
could not move from place to place, but on two crutches. All
the advice I had profited me nothing. In this state I
continued above six years. Last year I went on business to
London, then to Bristol and Bath. At Bath I sent for a
Physician; but before he came, as I sat reading the Bible, I
thought, ‘Asa sought to the Physicians, and not to God;
but God can do more for me than any Physician.’ Soon after
I heard a noise in the street; and, rising up, found I could
stand. Being much surprised, I walked several times about the
room; then I walked into the Square, and afterwards on the
Bristol road: And from that time I have been perfectly well,
having as full a use of all my limbs as I had seven years ago.”
Nov. 1787.] JOURNAL. 403
We had a comfortable opportunity in the evening, and early
in the morning; and I left Canterbury, Friday, 26, with a
strong hope that the work of God will flourish here, as it has
not done for many years. In the evening I preached to a
lovely congregation at Chatham; and on Saturday returned
to London.-
Mon. 29.--I looked over all the manuscripts which I had
collected for the Magazine, destroyed what I did not think
worth publishing, and corrected the rest. Tuesday, 30. I
went down to Miss Harvey’s, at Hinxworth, in Hertfordshire.
Mr. Simeon, from Cambridge, met me there; who breathes
the very spirit of Mr. Fletcher. The chapel was quite crowded
in the evening. I preached on that inexhaustible text, and
with much liberty of spirit, “By grace are ye saved through
faith.” In the morning, Wednesday, 31, 1 preached on the
Woman of Canaan; and in the afternoon went over to Mr.
Hick’s, at Wrestlingworth, through such roads as no chaise
could pass: So we had the pleasure of riding in a farmer's
cart. It was such a motion as I never felt before : But, to
make amends, the church was so filled as I never had seen it;
and I was enabled to speak with unusual plainness. Surely
some received the truth in the love thereof
Thur. November 1.--I gave a fair reading to Dr. Gerard’s
“Essay on Taste.” I should have wondered, but that I had
read his “Plan of Education;” wherein he advises to read
Logic last. Such an advice could never have been given but
by one that knew nothing about it. Indeed, he has hardly
a clear idea of anything. Hence it was natural for him to
produce this strange performance, wherein he talks prettily,
but quite wide of the mark, stumbling at first setting out;
for genius is no more invention, than it is sense or memory.
Fri. 2.-I set out early, and about noon preached at Barnet,
to a small, serious congregation. I then went on to London.
Sat. 3.-I had a long conversation with Mr. Clulow, on that
execrable Act, called the Conventicle Act. After consulting
the Act of Toleration, with that of the fourteenth of Queen
Anne, we were both clearly convinced, that it was the safest
way to license all our chapels, and all our Travelling Preachers,
not as Dissenters, but simply “Preachers of the Gospel;”
and that no Justice, or Bench of Justices, has any authority
to refuse licensing either the House or the Preachers.
404 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Nov. 1787.
Sun. 4.--The congregation at the new chapel was far larger
than usual; and the number of communicants was so great, that
I was obliged to consecrate thrice. Monday, 5. In my way to
Dorking, I read Mr. Duff’s “Essay on Genius.” It is, beyond
all comparison, deeper and more judicious than Dr. G.'s Essay
on that subject. If the Doctor had seen it, (which one can
hardly doubt,) it is a wonder he would publish his Essay. Yet
I cannot approve of his method. Why does he not first define
his term, that we may know what he is talking about? I doubt,
because his own idea of it was not clear; for genius is not
imagination, any more than it is invention. If we mean by it
a quality of the soul, it is, in its widest acceptation, an extraor
dinary capacity, either for some particular art or science, or for
all; for whatever may be undertaken. So Euclid had a genius
for mathematics; Tully, for oratory: Aristotle and Lord
Bacon had an universal genius, applicable to everything.
The congregation was, as usual, large and serious. But
there is no increase in the society. So that we have profited
nothing by having our service in the church-hours, which
some imagined would have done wonders. I do not know
that it has done more good anywhere in England; in Scotland
I believe it has.
Tues. 6.--I preached about noon at Mitcham. We preached
here many years ago for some time; but despairing of doing
any good there, totally left the place. A year or two ago a
spark fell upon it, which is now kindled into a flame. So that
the work of God is more lively here, than in any society near
London. I found more life than I expected, in the evening,
among the poor people at Wandsworth, who have been long
swallowed up in the cares of this world. But as they have a
little more business, so they have more ease for their souls;
and seem determined to recover the ground they had lost.
Fri. 9.--A friend offering to bear my expenses, I set out in
the evening, and on Saturday, 10, dined at Nottingham.
The preaching-house (one of the most elegant in England)
was pretty well filled in the evening. Sunday, 11. At ten
we had a lovely congregation; and a very numerous one in
the afternoon. But, I believe, the House would hardly
contain one half of those that came to it. I preached a charity
sermon for the Infirmary, which was the design of my coming.
This is not a County Infirmary, but is open to all England;
Dec. 1787.J JOURNAL. 405
yea, to all the world; and everything about it is so meat, so
convenient, and so well ordered, that I have seen none like it
in the three kingdoms. Monday, 12. In the afternoon we
took coach again, and on Tuesday returned to London.
Thur. 15.--Even at Poplar I found a remarkable revival
of the work of God. I never saw the preaching-house so
filled before; and the power of the Lord seemed to rest on
many of the hearers.
Sun. 18.-We had, as usual, a large congregation and a
comfortable opportunity at Spitalfields. Monday, 19. I began
the unpleasing work of visiting the classes. I still continue
to do this in London and Bristol, as well as in Cork and
Dublin. With the other societies, their respective Assistants
supply my lack of service.
Sun. 25.-I preached two charity sermons at West-Street,
in behalf of our poor children. Herein I endeavoured to warn
them, and all that bring them up, against that English sin,
ungodliness; that reproach of our nation, wherein we excel all
the inhabitants of the earth.
Thur. 29.-I preached at Mr. Edwards's, in Lambeth. How
wonderfully does God fit people for their work | Here Mrs.
Edwards, a person of no extraordinary natural abilities, teaches
near a hundred children, and keeps them in as good, if not
better, order, than most school-mistresses in the kingdom '
Fri. 30.--I met the Committee, to consider the state of our
temporal circumstances. We are still running backward. Some
way must be found to make our income answer our expenses.
Sat. DECEMBER 1.-I saw an uncommon instance of dis
tress; a gentlewoman who used to keep her coach, shut up
with her four children in a dark dirty room, (her husband being
imprisoned for debt,) without almost any of the necessaries of
life. No wonder if she had chose strangling rather than life.
Sun. 2.-I was pressed in spirit to warn our people, in strong
terms, of the Laodicean spirit which had crept in among them.
They received the reproof; and many began to stir up the gift
of God that is in them, which immediately appeared from the
very great increase of the morning congregations.
Tues. 4.--I retired to Rainham, to prepare another edition
of the New Testament for the press. Wednesday, 5. I preached
at Purfleet, to a deeply serious congregation, many of whom
walk in the light of God’s countenance. Thursday, 6. I
406 REv. J. Wesley’s [Dec. 1787.
preached to a large congregation at Rainham. I trust some
good will be done here also.
Fri. 7.-I returned to London, and again considered what
was to be done in our present temporal circumstances. After
much consultation, they desired me, 1. To appoint a few of
our brethren to divide the town between them, and desire our
brethren that were able to assist in this exigence: 2. That a
collection should be made in all our preaching-houses for the
same purpose. Above three hundred pounds were raised by
these means, whereby the whole difficulty was removed.
Sun. 9.-I went down at half-hour past five, but found no
Preacher in the chapel, though we had three or four in the
house : So I preached myself. Afterwards, inquiring why
none of my family attended the morning preaching, they said,
it was because they sat up too late. I resolved to put a stop
to this; and therefore ordered, that, 1. Every one under my
roof should go to bed at nine; that, 2. Every one might attend
the morning preaching: And so they have done ever since.
Mon. 10.-I was desired to see the celebrated wax-work at
the Museum in Spring-Gardens: It exhibits most of the
crowned heads in Europe, and shows their characters in their
countenance. Sense and majesty appear in the King of
Spain; dulness and sottishness in the King of France;
infernal subtlety in the late King of Prussia; (as well as in the
skeleton Voltaire;) calmness and humanity in the Emperor,
and King of Portugal; exquisite stupidity in the Prince of
Orange; and amazing coarseness, with everything that is
unamiable, in the Czarina.
In the evening I preached at Peckham to a more awakened
congregation than ever I observed there before.
Thur. 13.−I preached in the evening at Miss Teulon's, in
Highgate. I never saw such a congregation there before. Will
there then be good done here at last? Well; nothing is too
hard for God
Sun. 16.--After preaching at Spitalfields, I hastened to
St. John’s, Clerkenwell, and preached a charity sermon for the
Finsbury Dispensary; as I would gladly countenance every
institution of the kind.
Tues. 18.--I retired to Newington, and hid myself for
almost three days. Friday, 21. The Committee proposed to
me, l. That families of men and women should sit together
March, 1788.] JOURNAL. 407
in both chapels: 2. That every one who took a pew should
have it as his own: Thus overthrowing, at one blow, the
discipline which I have been establishing for fifty years
Sat. 22.--I yielded to the importunity of a painter, and sat
an hour and a half, in all, for my picture. I think it was the
best that ever was taken; but what is the picture of a man
above fourscore ?
Mon. 24.--We had another meeting of the Committee; who
after a calm and loving consultation, judged it best, 1. That
the men and women should sit separate still ; and, 2. That
none should claim any pew as his own, either in the new
chapel, or in West-Street.
[N.B. A part of Mr. Wesley's Journal which should come
in here, is lost or mislaid, and cannot be found.]
FEBRUARY 25, 1788.--I took a solemn leave of the congre
gation at West-Street, by applying once more what I had
enforced fifty years before, “By grace are ye saved, through
faith.” At the following meeting the presence of God, in a
marvellous manner, filled the place. The next evening we had
a very numerous congregation at the new chapel, to which I
declared the whole counsel of God. I seemed now to have
finished my work in London. If I see it again, well; if not,
I pray God to raise up others, that will be more faithful and
more successful in his work
Thur. 28.--I set out in the mail-coach, and the next
morning came to Bath. Here I found a pleasing prospect:
The congregations are larger than ever. The society is, at
length, at unity in itself; and, consequently, increases both in
grace and number.
Sat. MARCH 1.-(Being Leap-year.) I considered, What
difference do I find by an increase of years? I find, 1. Less
activity; I walk slower, particularly up-hill: 2. My memory
is not so quick: 3. I cannot read so well by candle-light. But
I bless God, that all my other powers of body and mind
remain just as they were.
Sun. 2.-I preached at eleven, at half an hour past two,
and at half-hour past five. The first congregation was large,
and so was the second; but the third was far the largest,
filling every corner of the House. And the power of God
seemed to increase with the number of the people; insomuch
that in the evening, while I was applying, “To me to live is
408 REv. J. Wesley’s [March, 1788.
Christ, and to die is gain,” the glory of the Lord seemed to
overshadow the congregation in an uncommon manner: And
I trust the impression then made upon rich and poor will not
soon wear off.
Mon. 3.-I went on to Bristol, and having two or three quiet
days, finished my sermon upon Conscience. On Tuesday I
gave notice of my design to preach on Thursday evening,
upon (what is now the general topic) Slavery. In consequence
of this, on Thursday, the House from end to end was filled
with high and low, rich and poor. I preached on that ancient
prophecy, “God shall enlarge Japhet. And he shall dwell in
the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.” About
the middle of the discourse, while there was on every side
attention still as might, a vehement noise arose, none could tell
why, and shot like lightning through the whole congregation.
The terror and confusion were inexpressible. You might
have imagined it was a city taken by storm. The people
rushed upon each other with the utmost violence; the benches
were broke in pieces; and nine-tenths of the congregation
appeared to be struck with the same panic. In about six
minutes the storm ceased, almost as suddenly as it rose; and,
all being calm, I went on without the least interruption.
It was the strangest incident of the kind I ever remember;
and I believe none can account for it, without slopposing some
preternatural influence. Satan fought, lest his kingdom should
be delivered up. We set Friday apart as a day of fasting and
prayer, that God would remember those poor outcasts of men;
and (what seems impossible with men, considering the wealth
and power of their oppressors) make away for them to escape,
and break their chains in sunder.
Fri. 7.--I went over to Kingswood School, and found every
thing there in excellent order. Sunday, 9. I preached at the
Room, morning and afternoon, (Mr. Collins reading Prayers,)
and about two at the School; though the House would very
ill contain the congregation. Monday, 10, and the three
following days, I visited the classes; which contained (after
many added, and many lost or removed) a little more than
aine hundred members. I wonder that, with such Preachers,
there is so little increase. Dublin has outrun Bristol already:
So will Manchester, Sheffield, and even Birmingham soon,
unless they stir themselves up before the Lord.
March, 1788.] JOURNAL. 409
Wed. 12.-I preached in the evening at a new place, in Little
George-Street, the poorest part of the city; and great was our
rejoicing in the Lord among this willing people.
Sat. 15.--In the evening, having no other time, I preached
once more in Temple church. I had no thought of meddling
with the controversy which has lately pestered this city; till I
read those words in the Second Lesson which threw me full
upon it, “Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his
power.” I then thought it my duty to speak clearly and
strongly upon that head.
Sun. 16.--I was invited by the Mayor, Mr. Edger, to
preach in his chapel, and afterwards to dine with him at the
Mansion-House. Most of the Aldermen were at church, and
a multitude of high and low; to whom I explained and
applied that awful passage of Scripture, the history of Dives
and Lazarus.
Mon. 17.-I began my northern journey, in a mild, lovely
morning. In the evening I preached to so crowded an audi
ence at Stroud, as I have not seen there for some years.
Tuesday, 18. I preached in Painswick at ten. Here also we
wanted room for the audience; and all were still as night. At
six in the evening I began at Gloucester. Here it seems the
scandal of the cross (such is the will of God) is ceased. High
and low, rich and poor, flock together, and seem to devour
the word. I preached on building upon a rock, and spoke
with all plainness. Many, I believe, were cut to the heart;
for it was a day of the Lord's power.
Wed. 19.--About noon I preached at Tewkesbury, where
also, notwithstanding the market, the House was over-filled;
and the people were deeply attentive.
The work of God goes on steadily here. More and more
are continually convinced, and converted to God: But the
preaching-house is far too small; so that many who came
could not get in. We went to Worcester in the afternoon,
where also the House is far too small for the congregation.
The Methodists here have by well-doing utterly put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men; so that they are now abundantly
more in danger by honour than by dishonour. Thursday, 20.
I went to Stourport. Twenty years ago there was but one
house here ; now there are two or three streets; and, as the
trade swiftly increases, it will probably grow into a considerable
410 REv. J. Wesley’s [March, 1788.
town. A few years since Mr. Cowell largely contributed to
the building of a preaching-house here, in which both Calvin
ists and Arminians might preach: But when it was finished,
the Arminian Preachers were totally excluded. Rather than
go to law, Mr. Cowell built another House, both larger and
more convenient. I preached there at noon to a large congre
gation, but to a much larger in the evening. Several Clergy
men were present, and were as attentive as any of the people.
Probably there will be a deep work of God at this place.
Sat. 22.--I breakfasted at Mr. Lister’s, in Kidderminster,
with a few very serious and pious friends. In the evening we
had a Sunday congregation at Birmingham.
Here there is a glorious increase of the work of God. The
society is risen to above eight hundred; so that it is at
present inferior to none in England, except those in London
and Bristol.
Sun. 23.--We were greatly straitened for room, many being
obliged to go away. But I believe all that could squeeze in
found it good to be there; for, both in the morning and after
noon, the power of God was present to heal. And so indeed
it was on the two following days; particularly on Tuesday
evening, while I explained, “Seest thou how faith wrought
with his works, and by works was faith made perfect?”
Wed. 26.--I went on to Wednesbury, the mother-society
of Staffordshire. But few of the old standers are left: I think
but three, out of three hundred and fifteen. However, a new
generation is sprung up, though hardly equal to the former.
Thur. 27.--About noon I preached at Dudley, and with
much liberty of spirit; but with far more at Wolverhampton
in the evening; the new House being sufficiently crowded.
What a den of lions was this town for many years But
now, it seems, the last will be first. Friday, 28. We came
to our dear friends at Madeley. Mrs. Fletcher's health is
surprisingly mended; and one might take her nephew for a
believer of seven years’ standing; he seems so well established
in the faith of the Gospel. The congregation was surprisingly
large in the evening; and great was their solemn joy, while
I applied, “When Christ who is our life shall appear, then
shall ye also appear with him in glory.”
Sat. 29.-Having no other time, I went over to Salop, and
spent an afternoon very agreeably. The Room was so crowded
in the evening as I never saw it before; perhaps the more,
April, 1788.] JOURNAL. 411
by reason of two poor wretches who were executed in the
afternoon. It was given me to speak strong words, such as
made the stout-hearted tremble. Surely there is now, if there
never was before, a day of salvation to this town also.
Sun. 30.--I returned to Madeley; but we were distressed
by the large concourse of people. It was too cold to stand
abroad; and the church could in mowise contain the congrega
tion. But we could not help it: So as many as could got
in ; the rest stood without, or went away. The epistle led me
to preach on the “Three that bear record in heaven,” which
proved seasonable for Mrs. Fletcher. In the afternoon, I
preached on, “This is the record, that God hath given unto
us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.”
Mon. 31.--About noon I preached at Stafford, to a large and
serious congregation; and about six in the evening, at Lane
End. Our chapel not being able to contain one-third of the
congregation, they stood at the front of Mr. Myat’s house,
where they could all hear perfectly; and though the wind was
high, and extremely cold, none seemed to regard it.
Mr. Myat was mentioning a little circumstance which I
think worth relating, for its oddness :--He had two cats with
kitten at once ; one of which was the mother of the other,
and kittened three weeks before her. But she would not
suffer one of her kittens to suck at all, till it was almost
starved. The younger cat seeing this, took the kitten and
suckled it till she kittened herself; and afterwards suckled it
with her own kittens. Who can account for this 2
Tues. APRIL 1.--We went on to Burslem, where the work
of God still prospers exceedingly. Sinners--men, women,
and children--are still convinced and converted to God every
day; and there are exceeding few that draw back, as they are
much united in affection, and watch over each other in love.
In the evening, before the time of preaching came, the
preaching-house was more than filled. Finding it could not
contain one half of the people, I ordered a table to be placed
in the yard; where they stood very patiently, though the wind
was very high and very cold. Afterwards I spent a comfortable
hour with the society, who completely filled the House.
Wed. 2.-This morning I finished Mr. Weston’s ingenious
“Dissertations on the Wonders of Antiquity;” particularly
the Darkness at our Lord’s death, and the Pool of Bethesda.
And I quite agree with him, that the chief reason why these
412 REv. J. wesley’s [April, 1788.
and many other miracles were not even mentioned by the
heathen Historians is, their utter contempt of the Chris
tians, and their being so accustomed to the “lying wonders”
which were so common in the heathen world; whence they
naturally supposed all the Christian miracles to be of the same
sort.
In the evening I preached to a crowded congregation at
Newcastle; and God was in the midst of them. Thursday,
3. I crossed over to Leek, where for many years we seemed
to be ploughing upon the sand; but, at length, the fruit
appears. Their new House would very hardly contain the
congregation, although it blew a storm, so that many of the
women could hardly bear up against the wind. In the
evening I preached at Congleton. Part of the congregation
were the Minister and the Mayor, with several Aldermen:
But they seemed astonished while I opened and strongly
applied, “Thou shalt have no other gods before me.”
Fri. 4.--We had another violent storm in going to Maccles
field. But there all is calm ; their little feuds are removed,
and the work of God steadily goes on. Sunday, 6. The new
church was half filled in the morning, but throughly in the
afternoon; and great was our rejoicing in the Lord, both
then and at six in the evening.
I took a solemn leave of them at five in the morning,
Monday, 7, and with a deal of difficulty got to New-Mills; the
roads over the mountains being scarce passable; but the
earnestness of the congregation made amends for the difficulty
of the journey. They are all athirst for God. Wednesday,
9. At noon I preached in the chapel at Bullocksmithy;
one of the most famous villages in the county for all manner
of wickedness. But there is a change for the better already,
and a fair prospect of a much greater. In the evening, as well
as on the next, the House at Stockport was throughly filled
with people ready prepared for the Lord, and adorning the
doctrine of God our Saviour.
Thur. 10.--About noon I preached at Ashton, to a loving
and lively people, and thence went on to Oldham. But what
could be done here? I suppose the children alone would have
filled the preaching-house from end to end. We kept the door
locked till a little before the appointed time. Then I went in,
and to as many as the House would hold, explained “the rest”
that “remaineth for the people of God;” and indeed they had
April, 1788.] JOURNAL. 413
ears to hear. Afterward, leaving one to preach again, after an
hour's respite I went on to Manchester.
Fri. 11.--The House was well filled in the evening. I
explained and enforced the words of St. James, “Seest thou
how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith
made perfect?” I did not hear that any were offended; for
the bulk of these are an understanding people.
Sat. 12.-I took a view of the public library, preferable to
most in England. It is annexed to the Blue-Coat School,
wherein fourscore children are provided with all things; and
all by the munificence of one man, who expressly forbade any
one to add thereto.
Sun. 13.--Mr. Simpson assisting, we dealt very well with a
crowded congregation. I suppose we had about a thousand
communicants; and surely God was among them: And so He
was in the evening, while I applied, “Thou shalt have no
other gods before me.”
Mon. 14,-At noon I preached at Northwich, to such a
congregation as scarce ever was seen there before; and had a
good hope that, after all the storms, good will be done here also.
In the evening I preached to the affectionate congregation at
Chester, who want nothing but more life and fire. Tuesday,
15. I was desired to preach upon the Trinity. The chapel
was sufficiently crowded; and surely God answered for
himself to all candid hearers.-
Wed. 16.--I preached about eleven at Warrington, (a cold,
uncomfortable place,) and in the evening at Liverpool. The
House was extremely crowded, and I found great liberty of
spirit; but still more the next evening, while I was opening and
applying the parable of the Sower. How much seed has been
sown in this town' And, blessed be God, all is not lost. Some
has brought forth thirty, some sixty, and some a hundred fold.
Fri. 18.-Notice having been given at Wigan of my preach
ing a sermon for the Sunday-schools, the people flocked from all
quarters in such a manner as never was seen before. I spoke
with all possible plainness on, “Repent ye, and believe the
Gospel;” and it seemed to sink deep into the hearts of the
hearers. Surely “the kingdom of heaven is at hand.”
Sat. 19.--We went on to Bolton, where I preached in the
evening in one of the most elegant Houses in the kingdom, and
to one of the liveliest congregations. And this I must avow,
there is not such a set of singers in any of the Methodist congre
414 REv. J. Wesley’s [April, 1788.
gations in the three kingdoms. There cannot be; for we have
near a hundred such trebles, boys and girls, selected out of our
Sunday-schools, and accurately taught, as are not found together
in any chapel, cathedral, or music-room within the four seas,
Besides, the spirit with which they all sing, and the beauty
of many of them, so suits the melody, that I defy any to
exceed it; except the singing of angels in our Father's house.
Sun. 20.-At eight, and at one, the House was throughly
filled. About three, I met between nine hundred and a
thousand of the children belonging to our Sunday-schools. I
never saw such a sight before. They were all exactly clean,
as well as plain, in their apparel. All were serious and well
behaved. Many, both boys and girls, had as beautiful faces
as, I believe, England or Europe can afford. When they all
sung together, and none of them out of tune, the melody was
beyond that of any theatre; and, what is best of all, many
of them truly fear God, and some rejoice in his salvation.
These are a pattern to all the town. Their usual diversion is
to visit the poor that are sick, (sometimes six, or eight, or
ten together,) to exhort, comfort, and pray with them.
Frequently ten or more of them get together to sing and pray
by themselves; sometimes thirty or forty; and are so earnestly
engaged, alternately singing, praying, and crying, that they
know not how to part. You children that hear this, why
should not you go and do likewise? Is not God here as well
as at Bolton? Let God arise and maintain his own cause,
even “out of the mouths of babes and sucklings I’”
Mon.21.--I went on, through miserable roads, to Blackburn;
where, notwithstanding the continued rain, the new preaching
house was throughly filled with serious, well-behaved people.
Tuesday, 22. Through equally good roads we got on to
Padiham. I preached at eleven to as quiet a congregation,
though not so lively, as that at Bolton. From hence we went
in the afternoon, through still more wonderful roads, to
Haslingden. They were sufficient to lame any horses, and
shake any carriage in pieces.--N.B. I will never attempt to
travel these roads again, till they are effectually mended !
A gentleman, no way connected with us, has built us a neat
preaching-house here, desiring only three per cent. for what he
has laid out, (about eight hundred pounds,) provided the seats
let for so much, of which there is little doubt. It was well
filled in the evening with serious people, lying in the midst
May, 1788.] JOURNAL, 415
of many societies. Wednesday, 23. We hohbled on to Bury,
through roads equally deplorable; but we met a lively congre
gation, which made us forget our labour. In the evening I
preached to another lively congregation at Rochdale. For
merly we had much trouble here : But it is past; and they
now hold the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
Thur. 24.--About ten we began the Service in the church
at Todmorden, crowded sufficiently. I found uncommon
liberty among these poor mountaineers. We had a pleasant
road from hence to Burnley, where a multitude of people were
waiting; but we had no house that could contain them. Just
then the rain ceased: So we went into the inn-yard, which
contained them well; and it was an acceptable season, as
indeed it was both the times before when I preached at Bury.
Fri. 25.-In the evening I preached at Colne. This is the
fifth rainy day we have had. However, the House was pretty
well filled; and I strongly exhorted them that had left their
first love, to remember from whence they had fallen, to repent,
and to do their first works.
Sun. 27.--I preached at Haworth church in the morning,
crowded sufficiently; as was Bingley church in the afternoon:
But as very many could not get in, Mr. Wrigley preached to
them in the street; so that they did not come in vain. In the
evening we went on to Halifax.
Mon. 28.-The House in the evening was throughly filled
with hearers that devoured the word. Tuesday, 29. I was
desired to preach in the church at Sowerby, four miles from
Halifax. It stands on the brow of a high and steep mountain.
Rich and poor flocked together to it; whom I exhorted to
acquaint themselves with God, and be at peace. I found much
liberty of spirit among them; and still more at Halifax in the
evening, when it seemed as if the windows of heaven were
opened; as also at five in the morning, when I took a solemn
leave of this affectionate people.
Wed. 30.--About eleven the service began at Honley.
After the Curate had read Prayers to a large and serious
congregation, I preached, on, “It is appointed unto men
once to die.” I believe many felt as well as heard the word.
About six I preached at Huddersfield; where our brethren
are now all at peace and unity with each other. In the evening
I went to our quiet and delightful retreat at Longwood-House.
Thur. MAY 1.--The congregation at five was exceeding
416 REv. J. Wesley’s [May, 1788.
large, coming from many miles round; but that at Shelly, a
lone place, six or seven miles from Huddersfield, where I was
constrained to preach in the open air at nine, was six or seven
times larger ; indeed, the largest I have seen since I left
Manchester; and the power of God was eminently present,
both to wound and to heal. I believe the congregation at
Wakefield in the evening was larger even than this ; and the
verdure of the trees, the smoothness of the meadow, the
calmness of the evening, and the stillness of the whole
congregation, made it a delightful sight.
Fri. 2.--I went on to Bradford. I feared the jars which
had been here would have lessened the congregation; but it
was as large as ever I remember it on a week-day; and as
deeply attentive as ever. A large number attended again at
five in the morning. In the afternoon I spent some hours
with the Trustees of Eccleshill House; but I might as well
have talked to so many posts. In the evening we had a
lovely congregation again, to whom I explained the former
part of Rev. xiv. These had ears to hear; and many of them
rejoiced with joy full of glory.
Sun. 4.--It was not without extreme difficulty that we
could get into the church; but it was worth all the labour. I
strongly applied those words in the Epistle for the day, “The
end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore sober, and watch
unto prayer.” It seemed as if the whole congregation was
moved. I believe that hour will not soon be forgotten.
The concourse of people at Birstal, about four, was greater
than ever was seen there before; and the wind being very
high, it was feaped not half of them would be able to hear:
But God was better to them than their fears. Afterwards
we found that all could hear distinctly; so, if they hear no
more, I am clear of their blood. I have declared to them the
whole counsel of God.
e Mon. 5.--About nine I preached to the loving people at
Morley, on 1 Pet. i. 3, and then went forward to Leeds; where
(Mr. Hey having sent me word that it was not convenient for
him to receive me) Mr. Floyd, and every one in his house,
received me with all gladness. We had a full House in the
evening. I explained and applied James ii. 22, which .
suppose was never more needful to be insisted upon than it is
this day.
Tues. 6.--About eleven I accepted the invitation of Mr.
May, 1788.] JOURNAL. 417
Stone, a truly pious and active man, and preached in his church
at Rawdon, ten miles from Leeds, to a very serious congregation,
on Mark i. 15: “Repent ye, and believe the Gospel.”
In the evening I preached at Otley to a lovely congregation,
and at five in the morning. At four in the afternoon I preached
at Pateley-Bridge; and setting out at four on Friday morning,
reached Kendal that evening, (sixty-one miles,) and Whitehaven
at five on Saturday, 10.
The congregation in the evening rejoiced much, as they had
not seen me for four years. But scarce any of the old standers
are left: Two-and-forty years have swept them away. Let us
who are left live to-day. “Now is the day of salvation.”
MAY 11-(Being Whitsunday.) In the morning, while
those words were applied, “And they were all filled with the
Holy Ghost,” his power was eminently present in the congre
gation; but much more in the evening. At noon Joseph
Bradford preached in the market-place to a numerous congre
gation; and I am not without hope, that poor Whitehaven
will lift up its head again.
Mon. 12.--About eight I began preaching in the market
house at Cockermouth. I was surprised to find several of those
that are called the best of the town there; and they were one
and all serious and attentive: So we had a solemn parting.
Hence we went on to Carlisle. I never found this society so
well united before. The preaching-house, begun three or four
years ago, is now completely finished. It is neat, lightsome,
and cheerful; but it was very ill able to contain the congre
gation. Several Ministers were there; and so was the power
of God, in an uncommon degree. All that were under the
roof seemed to be moved more or less; and so they were in
the morning, Tuesday, 13, when I besought them to present
themselves a living sacrifice to God.
To-day we went on through lovely roads to Dumfries.
Indeed all the roads are wonderfully mended since I last travel
led this way. Dumfries is beautifully situated; but as to wood
and water, and gently-rising hills, &c., is, I think, the neatest,
as well as the most civilized, town that I have seen in the
kingdom. Robert Dall soon found me out. He has behaved
exceeding well, and done much good here; but he is a bold
man: He has begun building a preaching-house, larger than
any in Scotland, except those in Glasgow and Edinburgh In
4.18 it ev. J. WESLEY’s [May, 1788.
the evening I preached abroad in a convenient street, on one
side of the town. Rich and poor attended from every quarter,
of whatever denomination; and every one seemed to hear for
life. Surely the Scots are the best hearers in Europel
Wed. 14.--At five I was importuned to preach in the
preaching-house; but such a one I never saw before. It had
no windows at all: So that although the sun shone bright, we
could see nothing without candles. But I believe our Lord shone
on many hearts, while I was applying those words, “I will,
be thou clean.” I breakfasted with poor Mr. Ashton, many
years ago a member of our society in London; but far happier
now in his little cottage, than ever he was in his prosperity.
When I was in Scotland first, even at a Nobleman’s table,
we had only flesh meat of one kind, but no vegetables of any
kind; but now they are as plentiful here as in England. Near
Dumfries there are five very large public gardens, which
furnish the town with greens and fruit in abundance.
The congregation in the evening was nearly double to that
we had the last; and, if it was possible, more attentive. Indeed
one or two gentlemen, so called, laughed at first; but they
quickly disappeared; and all were still while I explained the
worship of God in spirit and in truth. Two of the Clergy
followed me to my lodging, and gave me a pressing invitation
to their houses. Several others intended, it seems, to do the
same; but having a long journey before me, I left Dumfries
earlier in the morning than they expected. We set out on
Thursday, 15, at four; and reached Glasgow, Friday, 16,
before noon. Much of the country, as we came, is now well
improved; and the wilderness become a fruitful field.
Our new preaching-house will, I believe, contain about as
many as the chapel at Bath. But O the difference It has the
pulpit on one side; and has exactly the look of a Presbyterian
meeting-house. It is the very sister of our House at Brentford.
Perhaps an omen of what will be when I am gone. I preached
at seven to a tolerably large congregation, and to many of them
at five in the morning. At six in the evening they were
increased fourfold; but still I could not find the way to their
hearts.
Sun. 18.--I preached at eleven on the parable of the Sower;
at half-past two on Psalm 1.23; and in the evening on, “Now
abideth faith, hope, love; these three.” I subjoined a short
May, 1788.] JOURNAL. 419
account of Methodism, particularly insisting on the circum
stances, There is no other religious society under heaven
which requires nothing of men in order to their admission intoit,
but a desire to save their souls. Look all round you, you can
not be admitted into the Church, or society of the Presbyterians,
Anabaptists, Quakers, or any others, unless you hold the same
opinions with them, and adhere to the same mode of worship.
The Methodists alone do not insist on your holding this or
that opinion; but they think and let think. Neither do they
impose any particular mode of worship; but you may continue
to worship in your former manner, be it what it may. Now, I do
not know any other religious society, either ancient or modern,
wherein such liberty of conscience is now allowed, or has been
allowed, since the age of the Apostles. Here is our glorying;
and a glorying peculiar to us. What society shares it with us?
Mon. 19.--I went to Edinburgh, and preached to a much
larger congregation than I used to see here on a week-day. I
still find a frankness and openness in the people of Edinburgh,
which I find in few other parts of the kingdom. I spent two days
among them with much satisfaction; and I was not at all disap
pointed, in finding no such increase, either in the congregation
or the society, as many expected from their leaving the Kirk.
Thur. 22.--The House at Dalkeith being far too small,
even at eight in the morning, to contain the congregation, I
preached in a garden, on, “Seek ye the Lord while he may
be found:” And from the eager attention of the people, I could
not but hope, that some of them would receive the truth in
love. In the evening I preached in the House at Dunbar,
tolerably well filled, on Job xxii. 2, 3; I believe with
The spirit of convincing speech:
But much more, at five in the morning, Friday, 23. And
will God manifest his power among these dry bones also?
Immediately after preaching we set out. How is the face of
this country changed in a few years It was, twenty years
ago, dreary enough; but is now as a pleasant garden. But
what is most remarkable, is the bridge which connects the two
mountains, the Peas, together; one of the noblest works in
Great Britain; unless you would except the bridge at Edin
burgh, which lies directly across the Cowgate: So that one
street (a thing not heard of before) runs under another.
420 REV. J. W. ESLEY’s [May, 1788.
About noon we came to Berwick-upon-Tweed; but the town
being all in a hurry, on occasion of the fair, so that I could not
conveniently preach in the market-house, I was glad that Mr.
Atcheson, the Presbyterian Minister, offered me the use of his
chapel. It was a large commodious place. Several of his hear
ers attended; to whom I spoke exceeding plain, in the evening,
on 1 Cor. xii. 3; and in the morning, on Isaiah lix. 1-3.
Sat. 24.--About one we reached Alnwick. I was a little sur
prised at the new preaching-house, (in which I preached in the
evening,) exactly resembling the meeting-house we hireat Brent
ford. Had they no eyes? Or had they never seen any English
House? But the scarecrow must now stand without remedy.
Sun. 25.-This was the day on which all the Nonjuring con
gregations in Scotland began, by common agreement, to pray
in all their public worship for King George and his family. I
preached at nine, at two, and at half-past five; the last time on
the Gospel for the day, (the history of Dives and Lazarus,) with
much enlargement of spirit. After preaching at five in the
morning, on Matt. xxvi., and taking a solemn leave of the con
gregation, I went on to Morpeth; but was informed the Town
Hall was totally engaged; the lower part, by a company of
players; the upper, by a dancing-master. However, the latter
did scruple the having his right: So I preached to the largest
congregation I ever saw there. And our Lord seemed to
Dart into all the melting power
Of love, and make the mountains flow.
It was indeed a wonderful season, such as we had scarce had
before since we left Bristol. In the evening I preached at
Newcastle, to such a congregation as was never there before.
unless on a Sunday; and indeed all the congregations, morn
ing and evening, were such as had not been before since the
House was built. Surely this is the accepted time for Newcastle.
Perhaps I may see it no more. .
At noon I preached in the lower House, to a very crowded
congregation; and I believe most of them felt that God was
there; for it was as a season of great refreshment. So it was
at the upper House in the evening. I doubt not but God
will be glorified in both, provided the people in each agree to
provoke one another only to love, and to good works.
Sat. 31.--At five I preached in the lower House to a
numerous congregation: I believe the greater part of whom
June, 1788.] JOURNAL. 4.2.1
had no thought of salvation, till they heard the preaching at
this place. Were it only for the sake of these, I do not regret
all the trouble I have had on occasion of this building.
At nine I preached in South-Shields to a large and serious
congregation, ready prepared for the Gospel; in the evening
at Sunderland, to an experienced people, many of whom are
rooted and grounded in love.
Sun. JUNE 1.--I willingly accepted of Mr. Hampson's invi
tation, and preached in his church morning and afternoon. I
suppose it was hardly ever so filled before. And the power of
God was present to heal. It was doubted whether all could
hear. In order to try, Joseph Bradford stood in the farthest
corner; and he could hear every word. I preached in our chapel
at six; but abundance of people could not get in. I was sorry I
did not preach abroad, while so many were athirst for the word.
Mon. 2.-About noon I preached at Cockermouth. I had
never such a season there before : The glory of the Lord
seemed to fill the House, and the people trembled before him.
We had such another opportunity at Sunderland in the
evening: Surely God will be glorified in this place |
Tues. 3.--I returned to Newcastle, and preached in the
evening on the “rest " that “remaineth for the people
of God:” And a few have believed our report, and are eager
to enter into it.
Thur. 5.-Desiring to pay one more visit to the loving
society in Weardale, I set out early, and drove through
wonderful roads to Wolsingham; a town near the entrance
of the vale. I could not preach abroad, because of the storm;
and the House would not near contain the people. However,
as many crowded in as could : The rest got near the door or
windows; and surely the willing mind was accepted.
In the evening, the wind being still very high, I was obliged
to preach within, in Weardale also; and it was a time of uncom
mon blessing. Friday, 6. Going out of my room, I missed a
step, and fell forward, so that the edge of one of the stairs came
a quarter of an inch above my right eye, exactly upon my
eyelid. I put a little white paper upon it, which immediately
stopped the bleeding, and preached without any inconvenience.
The work of God has much increased here lately. Many
have been convinced of sin, many justified; some perfected in
love, and many added to the society.
Fri. 6.--We returned to Stanhope, formerly the seat of
422 REv. J. WESLEY’s [June, 1788.
several great families, now an inconsiderable village. It is
eminent for nothing in this age, but a very uncommon degree
of wickedness. I preached at five, in what I understood
was once the market-place, to an exceedingly numerous con
gregation. I preached on Isaiah lv. 6, 7; and, if ever, with
the demonstration of the Spirit. The people were all bowed
down together, as the heart of one man. Surely God will
have a people in this place |
Sat. 7.--Our brethren thought the preaching-house would
contain the congregation at five in the morning. It was a large
upper room ; But before I began to speak, it was exceedingly
crowded; and the main beam that supported it giving way, the
floor began to sink. Some crying out, “The room is falling!”
one man leaped out of the window; the rest slowly and quietly
went out, without the least hurry or confusion; so that nothing
was hurt except a poor dog that was under the window. I then
preached in the open air, to twice or thrice as many as the
room would have contained, who were all attention. O how
white are these fields to the harvest!
About twelve, I preached to a lovely congregation at Burn
upfield, on, “Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous.” I have
found nothing like it since I left London; such was
The' o'erwhelming power of grace divine !
I know not that ever I felt such self-abasement before ; and
the whole congregation seemed almost equally moved. And
so they were at Newcastle in the evening, while I explained and
strongly applied, “I am the All-sufficient God: Walk before
me, and be thou perfect.”
Sun. 8.--I preached at the Ballast-Hills, about half an hour
after eight. I think the congregation was nearly double to that
I had here two years ago; and they increased in earnestness as
much as in number. About two I preached at Gateshead-Fell,
to I suppose twice as many as were at the Ballast-Hills, on
the joy that is in heaven “over one sinner that repenteth.”
Though the sun was very hot, and the wind very cold, the
people regarded neither one nor the other. They seemed only
to attend to the voice of God, and the breathing of his Spirit.
In the evening I preached near the Keelmen’s Hospital,
within sight of the place where I preached the first Sunday I
was at Newcastle; and I think to the largest congregation which
I have seen at Newcastle since that time. The Second Lesson
June, 1788.] JOURNAL, 423
for the Evening Service supplied me with a text, 2 Cor. vi. 1 :
“We then, as workers,” &c. The people appeared to devour
the word, and I did not spare them. I was then ready to say,
“Now I am clear from the blood of these men.” No, I dare
not I judge not my own self! He that judgeth me is the
Lord.
Mon. 9.--I preached at Durham about eleven, to more than
the House could contain. Even in this polite and elegant
city, we now want a larger chapel. In the evening I preached
near our preaching-house, to a large multitude; I think, as
numerous as that at Gateshead-Fell. Many of the Durham
Militia, with several of their officers, were there: And all
of them seemed to receive the word, “not as the word of man;
but, as it is indeed, the word of God.”
Tues. 10.--We went through one of the pleasantest coun
tries I ever saw, to Darlington. Before I left Newcastle, I
was desired to read a strange account of a young woman, late
of Darlington. But I told the person who brought it, “I can
form no judgment till I talk with Margaret Barlow herself.”
This morning she came to me, and again in the afternoon;
and I asked her abundance of questions. I was soon convinced,
that she was not only sincere, but deep in grace; and therefore
incapable of deceit. I was convinced, likewise, that she had
frequent intercourse with a spirit that appeared in the form of
an angel. I know not how to judge of the rest. Her account
was -“ For above a year, I have seen this angel, whose face
is exceeding beautiful; her raiment,” so she speaks, “white as
snow, and glistering like silver; her voice unspeakably soft and
musical. She tells me many things before they come to pass.
She foretold, I should be ill at such a time, in such a manner,
and well at such an hour; and it was so exactly. She has said,
such a person shall die at such a time; and he did so. Above
two months ago, she told me, your brother was dead; (I did
not know you had a brother;) and that he was in heaven.
And some time since she told me, you will die in less than a
year. But what she has most earnestly and frequently told me,
is, that God will in a short time be avenged of obstinate sin
ners, and will destroy them with fire from heaven.” Whether
this will be so or no, I cannot tell; but when we were alone,
there was a wonderful power in her words; and, as the Indian
said to David Brainerd, “They did good to my heart.”
It is above a year since this girl was first visited in this man
424 REv. J. WESLEY’s [June, 1788.
ner, being then between fourteen and fifteen years old. But she
was then quite a womanish girl, and of unblamable behaviour.
Suppose that which appeared to her was really an angel; yet
from the face, the voice, and the apparel, she might easily mis
take him for a female; and this mistake is of little consequence.
Much good has already resulted from this odd event; and
is likely to ensue; provided those who believe, and those who
disbelieve, her report, have but patience with each other.
We had a love-feast in the evening, at which several spoke
deep experience in a plain, artless manner; and many were
greatly comforted, and stirred up more intensely to hunger
and thirst after righteousness.
Wed. 11.--About noon I preached at Stockton; but the
House would not contain the congregation; nor indeed at
Yarm, in the evening. Here I heard what was quite new to
me, namely, that it is now the custom, in all good company, to
give obscene healths, even though Clergymen be present;
one of whom, lately refusing to drink such a health, was put
out of the room; and one of the forwardest, in this worthy
company, was a Bishop's steward.-
Thur. 12.--Between one and two we had a larger congrega
tion at Potto than I ever saw there before. At Hutton-Rudby,
in the evening, I spoke strongly to the backsliders; and I think
not in vain.
At eight I preached to a lovely congregation, at Stokesley,
with much liberty of spirit; and at eleven, in Guisborough,
to one far larger, and equally attentive. In the evening I
preached at Whitby, in the new House, throughly filled
above and below; though it contains twice as many as the
old one; and although the unfinished galleries, having as yet
no fronts, were frightful to look upon. It is the most curious
House we have in England. You go up to it by about forty
steps; and have then before you a lofty front, I judge, near
fifty feet high, and fifty-four feet broad. So much gainers
have we been by the loss of the former House. Beside that
it stood at one end of the town, and in the very sink of it,
where people of any fashion were ashamed to be seen.
Sat. 14.--At five in the morning we had a large congre
gation; but it was more than doubled in the evening; and at
both times I could not but observe the uncommon earnestness
of the people. Sunday, 15. The House was well filled at
seven. For the sake of the country people, who flocked
June, 1788.] JOURNAL. 4.25
from all sides, I preached again at half an hour past one, on,
“The end of all things is at hand : Beye therefore sober, and
watch unto prayer.” After preaching at five, on the education
of children, I made a collection for Kingswood School; the
rather, that I might have an opportunity of refuting that
poor, threadbare slander, of my “getting so much money.”
We concluded our service with a comfortable love-feast.
Mon. 16.--From the plain people at Whitby I went on to
the elegant congregation at Scarborough. I was surprised at
their flocking together in such numbers, many more than the
House could contain; and I strongly enforced, “Now is the
accepted time, now is the day of salvation.”
Tues. 17.--Desiring Joseph Bradford to preach at five, I did
not preach till three. I then urged on a very genteel congre
gation, “One thing is needful;” and surely the power of the
Lord was present to heal them, in a manner I have not often
found; and again in the evening, while I enforced, “He is able
to save to the uttermost all them that come unto God by him.”
Wed. 18.--I designed to preach in the street, at Brid
lington; but the wind and dust would not suffer it. So as
many as could pressed into the House; but near as many
were constrained to go away. I preached on Rev. xx. 12;
and, I believe, not in vain.
Thur. 19.--I went about forty miles out of my way, to see
my old friends at Malton; and particularly old Mr. Wilson, at
whose house I first lodged there. Between eleven and twelve I
began preaching on, “It is appointed unto men once to die:”
And God applied his word, one would almost have thought,
to every one under the roof. It was a glorious opportunity.
The people were gathered from many miles round, and I
think few repented of their labour. As soon as the service
was over, I hasted away, and reached Beverley (twenty-eight
miles) in good time. The House here, though greatly
enlarged, was well filled with high and low, rich and poor;
and (it being the day of the Archdeacon’s visitation) many
of the Clergy were there. I rejoiced in this, as it might be a
means of removing prejudice from many sincere minds.
Fri. 20.--I went on to Hull; and in the evening explained
and applied those remarkable words of our Lord, “Whosoever
doeth the will of God, the same is my brother, and sister, and
mother.” The new preaching-house here is nearly as large as
426 REv. J. Wesley’s [June, 1788.
the new chapel in London. It is well built, and elegantly
finished; handsome, but not gaudy. Saturday, 21. We had a
large congregationat five, larger than even that at Birmingham;
which exceeded all the morning congregations I had then seen.
Sunday, 22. Mr. Clark, the Vicar, inviting me to preach in the
High Church, I explained (what occurred in the Service of the
day) what it is to build our house upon the rock; and applied it
as strongly as I could. I dined at the Vicarage with Mr. Clark;
a friendly, sensible man; and, I believe, truly fearing God. And
such, by the peculiar providence of God, are all the three stated
Ministers in Hull. He said he never saw the church so full
before. However, it was still fuller in the afternoon; when, at
the desire of Mr. Clark, I preached on St. James's beautiful
account of the wisdom which is from above. At six in the
evening I preached in our own House, to as many as could
get in, (but abundance of people went away,) on Gal. vi. 14.
Mon. 23.−About eight we reached Mr. Stillingfleet's, at
Hotham; one of the pleasantest places I have seen. At nine
he read prayers, and I preached to a large and serious congre
gation. At eleven I preached, with much enlargement of heart,
in the new chapel, at Market-Weighton; and at half an hour
after one, in Pocklington: But the House was like an oven.
Between six and seven I began at York, on Rom. xiii. 12.
The word was as fire; and all that heard it seemed to feel the
power thereof.
Tues. 24.--Having no other opportunity, I went over to
Thirsk, and preached in the evening on 1 Pet. i. 24. All the
congregation were serious, but two young gentlewomen, who
laughed and talked incessantly, till I turned and spoke
expressly to them. They then seemed to be ashamed.
Wed. 25.-Believing the little flock there wanted encourage
ment, I took Ripon in my way to York, and gave them a strong
discourse on the story of Dives and Lazarus. Many strangers
seemed greatly astonished; and I believe they will not soon
forget what they heard; for God applied it to their hearts: As
he did also the parable of the Sower at York, I will hope, to
most of the congregation.
Thur. 26.-The Vicar of Selby having sent me word that I
was welcome to preach in his church, I went that way. But
before I came he had changed his mind: So I preached in
our own chapel ; and not without a blessing. In the evening I
June, 1788.] JOURNAL. 427
preached at Thorne to a larger congregation than ever I saw
in the House before. Friday, 27. At nine I preached in the
church, at Swinfleet, filled from end to end. About eleven I
preached at Crowle, to a large congregation; and I am now in
hope that there will be a good harvest here also, seeing the
almost perpetual jars are now at an end. Thence I came once
more (perhaps for the last time) to Epworth; where, by the
prudence and diligence of T. Tattershall, the people have now
forgot their feuds, and are at unity with each other.
Sat. 28.--I this day enter on my eighty-fifth year. And what
cause have I to praise God, as for a thousand spiritual blessings,
so for bodily blessings also ! How little have I suffered yet by
“the rush of numerous years l’” It is true, I am not so agile as
I was in times past. I do not run or walk so fast as I did ; my
sight is a little decayed; my left eye is grown dim, and hardly
serves me to read; I have daily some pain in the ball of my
right eye, as also in my right temple, (occasioned by a blow
received some months since,) and in my right shoulder and arm,
which I impute partly to a sprain, and partly to the rheumatism.
I find likewise some decay in my memory, with regard to names
and things lately passed; but not at all with regard to what I
have read or heard, twenty, forty, or sixty years ago; neither
do I find any decay in my hearing, smell, taste, or appetite;
(though I want but a third part of the food I did once;) nor do
I feel any such thing as weariness, either intravelling or preach
ing: And I am not conscious of any decay in writing sermons;
which I do as readily, and I believe as correctly, as ever.
To what cause can I impute this, that I am as I am? First,
doubtless, to the power of God, fitting me for the work to which
I am called, as long as He pleases to continue me therein; and,
next, subordinately to this, to the prayers of his children.
May we not impute it, as inferior means,
1. To my constant exercise and change of air?
2. To my never having lost a night's sleep, sick or well, at
land or at sea, since I was born ?
3. To my having sleep at command; so that whenever I feel
myself almost worn out, I call it, and it comes, day or night?
4. To my having constantly, for above sixty years, risen at
four in the morning?
5. To my constant preaching at five in the morning, for above
fifty years?
428 REv. J. W.ESLEY’s [June, 1788.
6. To my having had so little pain in my life; and so little
sorrow, or anxious care?
Even now, though I find pain daily in my eye, or temple,
or arm; yet it is never violent, and seldom lasts many minutes
at a time.
Whether or not this is sent to give me warning that I am
shortly to quit this tabernacle, I do not know; but be it one
way or the other, I have only to say,
My remnant of days
I spend to his praise
Who died the whole world to redeem :
Be they many or few,
My days are his due,
And they all are devoted to Him I
I preached in the morning on Psalm xc. 12; in the evening
on Acts xiii. 40, 41; and endeavoured to improve the hours
between to the best advantage.
Sun. 29.--At eight I preached at Misterton, as usual; about
one to a numerous congregation at Newby, near Haxey; and
about four at my old stand in Epworth market-place, to the
great congregation. Here there used to be a few mockers; but
there were none now : All appeared serious as death, while I
applied those solemn words, “When the breath of man goeth
forth,” &c. We concluded with a love-feast, at which many
declared, with an excellent spirit, the wonderful works of God.
Mon. 30.-About eight I preached in Scotter; and found it
good to be there. About eleven I preached in Scowby, two
miles from Brigg, to avery numerous and serious congregation.
In the afternoon, going just by that curious building, Mr.
Pelham's Mausoleum, I alighted, and took a view of it within
and without. The like, I suppose, is not to be found in Eng
land. It is exactly round, fifty-two feet in diameter, and will
be sixty-five feet high. The lower part contains, I believe,
near a hundred places for the bodies of the Pelham family.
(O what a comfort to the departed spirits, that their carcases
shall rot above ground !) Over this is to be a chapel. It is
computed the whole building will cost sixty thousand pounds.
About five we came to Grimsby; and, the Vicar reading
Prayers, I preached on the Psalm for the day, “He healeth
them that are broken in heart, and giveth medicine to heal their
sickness.” I think the church is near as large as that at Hull;
July, 1788.] JOURNAL. 429
and it has not been so well filled in the memory of man before.
All were seriously attentive; many received the word with joy;
and some doubtless will bring forth fruit to perfection.
Tues. JULY 1.--The Vicar again read Prayers at eleven;
and I preached on those words in the Second Lesson, “Lord,
are there few that be saved?” I spoke as plain as possibly I
could; but God only can speak to the heart.
The gentleman at whose house I was to lodge coming from
Louth to meet me, his headstrong horse crushed his leg against
a gate, with such force, that both the bones were broke and came
through his boot. The horse stood by him till some countrymen
came, put him into a cart, and brought him home. It is
doubtful whether he will recover; but death is no terror to him.
I preached in Louth at six, in the preaching-house; but
perhaps I had better have been in the market-place. At
five in the morning the Room was filled; and I spoke, as
doubting whether I should see them any more. At eleven I
preached at that lovely spot, Langham-Row.' Although Mr.
Robinson has made the chapel twice as large as it was, yet it
would hardly contain the congregation; and most of these are
in earnest to save their souls; as well as himself, and his wife,
and his sixteen children.
Thur. 3.-I was going to preach at Alford, near the end of
the town; but the Gentry sent and desired me to preach in the
market-place; which I accordingly did, to a large and attentive
congregation, on, “It is appointed unto men once to die.”
Thence we went to Raithby; an earthly paradise ! How
gladly would I rest here a few days: But it is not my place
I am to be a wanderer upon earth. Only let me find rest in
a better world !
At six I preached in the church to such a congregation as I
never saw here before; but I do not wonder if all the country
should flock in hither, to a palace in the midst of a paradise.
Fri. 4.--I set out early from Raithby, and at eight preached
in Horncastle. My design was, to have preached seriously; for
which purpose I chose that text, “The harvest is past, the
summer is ended, and we are not saved;” but I was turned,
I knew not how, quite the other way, and could preach scarce
anything but consolation. I believe this was the very thing
which the people wanted; although I knew it not.
We reached Lincoln about twelve. A very numerous
congregation of rich and poor were quickly assembled. I
430 REv. J. Wesley’s [July, 1788.
preached below hill, in Mrs. Fisher's yard; a large and
commodious place. From the quietness of the people one
might have imagined that we were in London or Bristol.
Indeed the dread of the Lord was on every side; and surely
his power was present to heal.
In the evening I preached in our new House at Gains
borough, which was crowded sufficiently. I spoke strong
words, on, “Now is the accepted time;” which seemed to
sink deep into the hearts of the hearers. Saturday, 5. In
the evening I preached at Owstone, to such a congregation,
both for number and seriousness, as I hardly ever saw here
before. Afterwards I took a view of what was lately the glory
of the town, the great mansion-house built by the late Mr.
Pinder's father, when I was a little child. His grandson has
left it desolate and without inhabitant, has taken away all the
pictures and furniture, blocked up the windows, and cut
down the fine rows of trees which formed the avenue !
So fleets the comedy of life away.
Sun. 6.--At eight we had such another congregation as
that in the evening; to which I expounded that comfortable
scripture, the former part of Rev. xiv. I came to Epworth
before the church Service began; and was glad to observe the
seriousness with which Mr. Gibson read Prayers, and preached
a plain useful sermon; but was sorry to see scarce twenty
communicants, half of whom came on my account. I was
informed likewise, that scarce fifty persons used to attend the
Sunday service. What can be done to remedy this sore evil?
I fain would prevent the members here from leaving the
church; but I cannot do it. As Mr. G. is not a pious man,
but rather an enemy to piety, who frequently preaches against
the truth, and those that hold and love it, I cannot with all my
influence persuade them either to hear him, or to attend the
sacrament administered by him. If I cannot carry this point
even while I live, who then can do it when I die? And the
case of Epworth is the case of every church, where the Minister
neither loves nor preaches the Gospel. The Methodists will
not attend his ministrations. What then is to be done?
At four I preached in the market-place, on Rom. vi. 23;
and vehemently exhorted the listening multitude to choose
the better part.
Mon. 7.--Having taken leave of this affectionate people,
*
*
July, 1788.] JOURNAL. 431
probably for the last time, I went over to Finningley; and
preached at eleven, on that verse in the Second Lesson,
Luke xix. 42. After dinner we walked over Mr. H.’s domain,
the like to which I never saw in so small a compass. It con
tains a rabbit-warren, deer, swans, pheasants in abundance,
besides a fish-pond and an elegant garden. Variety indeed
But is there no danger that such a multitude of things should
divert the mind from the “one thing needful?”
In the evening I preached at Doncaster. I never before
saw this House so filled, much less crowded; and it was, in a
manner I never knew before, filled with the presence of God,
while I earnestly enforced that advice, “Acquaint now thyself
with Him, and be at peace.” One fruit of this was, that the
congregation at five in the morning was larger than it ever
was before in the evening; and God again made bare his arm,
and uttered his voice, yea, and that a mighty voice. Surely
those who now heard will be without excuse, if they do not
know the day of their visitation
We were much distressed at Rotherham for want of room,
the rain driving us into the House. However, we stowed in
it as many as we possibly could; and God bore witness to his
word. Wednesday, 9. After dining with that lovely old man,
Mr. Sparrow, I went on to Sheffield. The House was much
crowded, though one of the largest in England; but all could
hear distinctly. In the morning, Thursday, 10, at five we had
an evening congregation; and the people seemed to devour
the word. Here and at Hull are the two largest morning
congregations which I have seen in the kingdom.
Fri. 11.--We set out early for Derby. About nine, within
about a mile of the Peacock, suddenly the axletree of my chaise
snapped asunder, and the carriage overturned. The horses
stood still till Jenny Smith and I crept out at the fore-windows.
The broken glass cut one of my gloves a little, but did us no
other damage. I soon procured another chaise, and went on to
Derby, where I preached in the evening; and at five in the
morning on Saturday, 12; and then went on to Nottingham.
Sun. 13.--I began the service at ten; but I knew not how I
should get to the end, being almost exhausted when I had
finished my sermon; when Mr. Dodwell came, who, though very
weak through the ague, assisted me in administering the Lord's
supper to a very large number of communicants. After
4.32 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Aug. 1788.
preaching in the evening, I made a collection for Kingswood
School. To-day I had just as much work as I could do.
Mon. 14.--The mail-coach being full, I crossed over to
Newark, and had the satisfaction of seeing in the evening, not
only a numerous, but likewise a serious and deeply attentive
congregation.
Wed. 16.-I consulted with a few friends concerning the
state of things; which was better than I expected. The
society is increased, and the ordinary hearers in all parts of
the town not diminished. Meantime there is reason to hope
the work of God goes on, though by slow degrees. On the
following days I looked over my books and papers, and set
them in order as far as I could. Saturday, 19. I spent an
hour in Chesterfield-Street, with my widowed sister and her
children. They all seemed inclined to make the right use
of the late providential dispensation.
Sun. 20.--Both in the morning and evening I preached at
the new chapel, crowded sufficiently, on Heb. v. 12: “Ye
have need that one teach you again which be the first prin
ciples of the oracles of God.” Monday, 21. I retired to
Highbury-Place, and spent the residue of the week in answering
letters, revising papers, and preparing for the Conference.
Sun. 27.--In the morning I preached at West-Street;
and in the afternoon in Bethnal-Green church, on part of the
Gospel for the day; our Lord’s lamentation over Jerusalem.
I believe the word did not fall to the ground. I preached at
the new chapel every evening during the Conference, which
continued nine days, beginning on Tuesday, JULY 29, and
ending on Wednesday, AUGUST 6: And we found the time
little enough; being obliged to pass over many things very
briefly, which deserved a fuller consideration.
Sun. 3.--I preached at the new chapel, so filled as it scarce
ever was before, both morning and evening. Monday, 4. At
five we had a good evening congregation; and I believe many
felt the power of the word; or, rather, of God, speaking therein.
One of the most important points considered at this Confer
ence, was that of leaving the Church. The sum of a long conver
sation was, 1. That, in a course of fifty years, we had neither
premeditately nor willingly varied from it in one article either
of doctrine or discipline. 2. That we were not yet conscious of
varying from it in any point of doctrine. 3. That we have in a
Aug. 1788.] J() URNAL. 433
course of years, out of necessity, not choice, slowly and warily
varied in some points of discipline, by preaching in the fields,
by extemporary prayer, by employing Lay Preachers, by form
ing and regulating societies, and by holding yearly Confer
ences. But we did none of these things till we were convinced
we could no longer omit them, but at the peril of our souls.
Wed, 6.-Our Conference ended, as it began, in great peace.
We kept this day as a fast, meeting at five, nine, and one, for
prayer; and concluding the day with a solemn watch-night.
The three following days I retired, revised my papers, and
finished all the work I had to do in London. Sunday, 10. I
was engaged in a very unpleasing work, the discharge of an old
servant. She had been my housekeeper at West-Street for
many years, and was one of the best housekeepers I had had
there ; but her husband was so motorious a drunkard, that I
could not keep them in the house any longer. She received her
dismission in an excellent spirit, praying God to bless us all.
I preached in the morning at West-Street to a large congre
gation; but to a far larger at the new chapel in the evening.
It seems the people in general do not expect that I shall
remain among them a great while after my brother; and that,
therefore, they are willing to hear while they can. In the
evening we set out in the mail-coach, and early in the morning
got to Portsmouth.
They have lately built a neat preaching-house in the town,
something larger than that at Deptford. It is well situated
near the midst of the town, and has three well-constructed
galleries. I preached at noon to a large and well-behaved
audience, and to a much larger in the evening. I believe the
word took place in many souls. All went away still as night.
Tues. 12.--Joseph Bradford preached at five in the morning.
I preached in the new House about six in the evening, and
guarded them against that deadly Antinomianism which has so
often choked the good seed here. In the evening I preached
at our House on the common. Afterwards, meeting the society,
I took a solemn leave of them, which I hope they will remember
if they see me no more.
Wed. 13.--We crossed over to Sarum, where I preached in
the evening, with much enlargement of heart. Thursday, 14.
Setting out about three, we came to Gloucester early in the
afternoon. I spoke very plain, both in the evening and the
434 REv. J. wesley’s [Aug. 1788.
morning. Friday, 15. We went on to Monmouth; but Mr.
G. has done with us; so I lodged with my old friend, Mr.
Johnson; and instead of that lovely young woman, S
B , who is removed to Cowbridge, met with her younger
sister, who more than supplies her place. She is a jewel
indeed; full of faith and love, and zealous of good works.
I preached both in the evening and the next morning with
the demonstration of the Spirit; and all the congregation, rich
and poor, appeared to be sensible of it. Saturday, 16. We had
an easy journey to Brecon, where I preached in the evening.
Sunday, 17. I preached in the Room at eight, on the fruit of
the Spirit. In the evening I preached in the spacious Town
Hall, so filled as it had never been before. I think there is a
little company here that are truly alive to God. Monday, 18.
I went on to Carmarthen, and preached at six, on 2 Cor. v. 19;
and again at five in the morning, Tuesday, 19, when the Room
was well filled. A servant of Mr. Bowen's came early in the
morning to show us the way to Llyngwair : And it was well he
did; for I do not know that we could otherwise have found our
way thither. We met (as I expected) with a hearty welcome.
At five I preached in Newport church, to a large congregation,
and with agreater prospect of doing good than ever I had before.
We passed an agreeable evening at Llyngwair. Wednesday, 20.
I went to Tracoon, one of the most venerable seats in Great
Britain. The good old house is buried in woods and mountains,
having no resemblance to any place I have seen. It is just
suited to the good old Admiral, with his four maiden sisters;
the youngest of whom, I suppose, has lived more than seventy
years. I preached at twelve, and in the afternoon went on to
Haverfordwest. The Room was filled sufficiently, and I could
not but believe God will build up the waste places.
Thur. 21.--The Room was well filled at five. Finding there
had been no discipline herefor some time, I determined to begin
at the foundation, and settle everything. So I first visited and
regulated the classes, then restored the bands, which had been
totally neglected, and then gave directions for meeting the
Leaders both of bands and classes. After preaching in the
evening, I met the society, and gave them a warm exhortation,
--to set out anew. I trust they will ; and all the present
Preachers, I am persuaded, will neglect nothing.
Fri. 22.-I went to Pembroke. Here, likewise, not one
- Aug. 1788.] JOURNAL. 435
thing, but everything, had been neglected. No Stewards, no
bands, half of the preaching-places dropped; all the people
cold, heartless, dead I spoke earnestly in the evening; and
the word was as fire. Surely, some fruit will follow !
Sun. 24.--We had a lovely congregation at St. Daniel’s, and
a remarkable blessing. In the afternoon I returned to Haver
fordwest, and preached in a large open space near the great
church, to such a congregation as I have not seen in Wales for
many years. I explained and applied the parable of the Sower,
and God clothed his word with power. I know not whether I
have had such an opportunity before, since I left London.
Mon. 25.--I spent another night at Carmarthen very agree
ably. Tuesday, 26. I preached in Kidwelly at mine; between
twelve and one at Llanelly, to all the Gentry in the town; and
in the evening to a multitude of people at Swansea. Wednes
day, 27. Far more than the Room would contain attended at
five in the morning. About eight I preached in our new
preaching-house at Neath; and in the afternoon reached
Fontegary, and found Mrs. Jones, with several of her children
about her, on the margin of the grave; worn out with that
dreadful disease, a cancer. She uttered no complaint, but
was all patience and resignation, showing the dignity of a
Christian, in weakness, and pain, and death. I preached on,
“It is appointed unto men once to die;” and I believe all
present felt the awful truth.
I had intended to go on to Cowbridgethe mext day; but, being
much importuned to give one day more to a dying friend, I
yielded, and desired another Preacher to go and supply my
place. In the evening I preached on Psalm colvi. 3, 4. The
scene before us greatly confirmed the word. Friday, 29. That
they might not be offended, I went to Cowbridge. In half an
hour's notice, we had a large congregation in the Town-Hall,
to whom I showed the nature and pleasantness of religion, from
Prov. iii. 17. I returned to Fontegary, took my last leave of
the dying saint, and then went on to Cardiff. In the evening U
preached (probably for the last time) to a very genteel congre
gation in the Town-Hall. Saturday, 30. I returned to Bristol.
Sun. 31.-Mr. Collins came very opportunely, to assist me at
the morning service. Otherwise, Ishould have been distressed;
for such a number of communicants I never saw here before.
I would fain have preached abroad; but the ground was too
436 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Sept. 1788.
wet. So I preached within, on, “Ye cannot serve God and
mammon.”
Wed. SEPTEMBER 3.--I made a little beginning of some
account of my brother's life. Perhaps I may not live to finish
it. Then let it fall into some better hands !
Thur. 4.--I had the satisfaction of spending an hour with
that excellent woman, Lady : Not quite so honourable,
but full as much devoted to God, and as useful, as even Lady
Betty Hastings. What is too hard for God? We see even
this is possible with God, to raise a Lady and a saint in one
person |-
Fri. 5.-We had a solemn watch-night at Kingswood. The
school is now in just such a state as I wish. Mr. M'Geary
has three pious and able Assistants, out of those that were
brought up in it; and I doubt not it will supply a sufficiency
of Masters for the time to come.
Sat. 6.--I walked over to Mr. Henderson’s, at Hannam,
and thence to Bristol. But my friends, more kind than wise,
would scarce suffer it. It seemed so sad a thing to walk five
or six miles ! I am ashamed, that a Methodist Preacher, in
tolerable health, should make any difficulty of this.
Sun. 7.-Having none to assist me, I found it hard work to
read Prayers, preach, and administer the sacrament to such a
number of people. The moment I had done, I hastened to
Kingswood; having but just time to take a little dinner before I
began preaching to a large congregation, before the preaching
house. Returning to Bristol, I preached at five in Carolina
Court, to an immense number of people, on Rom. viii. 33, 34.
Tues. 9.--I saw the large church at Midsummer-Norton
throughly filled with serious hearers. The Room at Shepton
Mallet, though greatly enlarged, could in nowise contain the
congregation. At five in the morning, Wednesday, 10, it was
throughly filled. At Coleford, in the evening, I was obliged
to preach. Thursday, 11. We had a lovely congregation at
Frome, both in the evening and at five in the morning. At
length this wilderness, too, as it has long appeared to be,
begins to blossom and bud as the rose.
About two o'clock, Friday, 12, I preached in the preaching
house yard, at Trowbridge, where, notwithstanding the harvest,
we had an unusually large congregation, who listened with deep
attention; in the evening at Bradford, to as many as the
Sept. 1788.] JOURNAL. 437
House would contain. But I did not find good Mrs. Ballard
there. After long struggling with a deep nervous disorder,
which for a time depressed the mind as well as the body, the
cloud removed; her load fell off, and her spirit joyfully
returned to God.
Sat. 13.--I found the society at Bath in a more flourishing
state than it had been for many years; and the congregation
in the evening was unusually large, and, as usual, seriously
attentive.
Sun. 14.--We had twice as many communicants as I ever
remember here. Just before service Mr. Shepherd came, and
offered me his service. It could not have been more season
able. I had much liberty of spirit the first time I preached
to-day; but greater at half-hour past two, and the greatest of
all in the evening; when I vehemently enforced those awful
words, “Why will ye die, O house of Israel?”
Mon. 15.-I returned to Bristol, and on the four following
days was sufficiently employed in meeting the classes. At
each end of the town, the society increases greatly. It does
not decrease in any part. Glory be to God!
Fri. 19.--Being pressed to preach to the poor people in
George-Street, and knowing the House would not contain half
the congregation in the evening, I began at five; by which
means we had room for all that could attend at so early an
hour. O what an advantage have the poor over the rich !
These are not wise in their own eyes, but all receive with
meekness the ingrafted word which is able to save their souls.
Sat. 20.--I met the Trustees for the new Room ; who were
all willing to add a codicil to the Deed of Trust, in order to
ascertain to the Conference (after me) the sole right of
appointing the Preachers in it.
Sun. 21.--I preached morning and afternoon at the Room;
and at three in Temple church; so filled as I never saw it
before. In the evening I spent an hour in fixing the places
of the several classes, at the society; a thing necessary to be
done, although it is certain some will be not a little displeased.
Tues. 23.--An end was put to the long contest between
Dr. Coke and Mr. Durbin, by the Doctor's acknowledging
that the words he had wrote were too keen; and that he was
sorry he had given Mr. D. so much uneasiness.
Wed. 24.--I took a walk in Miss Goldney’s garden at Clifton.
4.38 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Oct. 1788.
Nothing can be more pleasant. But what is most remarkable is,
the long terrace-walk, commanding a most beautiful prospect,
and the grotto, the largest and most beautiful in its kind that I
ever saw. It is admirably well laid out, and decorated with a
surprising variety of shells and glittering fossils; the procuring
and placing of which (we were informed) took the late Mr.
Goldney above twenty years. And he has left it all !
Fri. 26.--We had a fast-day, which was concluded with a
solemn watch-night. At the close of this we sung,
Ye virgin souls, arise !
accompanied by the Gloucestershire band of music. Such a
concert was never heard in that House before, and perhaps
never will be again.
Sat. 27.-Two or three friends took me to Blaise-Castle,
about five miles from Bristol. Mr. F , a person of exqui
site taste, built it some years ago on the top of a hill, which
commands such a prospect all four ways as nothing in
England excels. Thence we went to Lord Clifford's seat,
at King's Weston. His house, one of the most beautiful I
ever saw, stands on a little eminence in his park, and fronts
all four ways. The prospect is fine every way, commanding
both the land and the water; and the rooms are very elegantly
furnished, particularly with excellent pictures. And must
the owner leave all these beautiful things? Will Death have
no more respect for a Lord than for a beggar?
Sun. 28.--I set out in the mail-coach. Tuesday, 30. Having
for the present settled my business at London, in the evening I
took coach for Lynn; and came thither about noon on Wednes
day, October 1. I spent all the time with much satisfaction,
as I never found them so much alive before. On Friday, 3, I
set out for Norwich, in the coach oddly called the Expedition.
Going through Dereham about noon, I was desired to preach,
which I willingly did on Isaiah xxxvii. 3; and in the evening,
to a huge congregation at Norwich, on the parable of the Sower.
Sunday, 5, was a comfortable day, especially at seven in the
morning, when I administered the Lord's Supper; and at two
in the afternoon and six in the evening, when I preached to
very serious congregations. Monday, 6. I preached at Loddon,
North-Cove, and Lowestoft. When I came into the town, it
blew a storm; and many cried out, “So it always does when
Oct. 1788.] JOURNAL. 439
he comes.” But it fell as suddenly as it rose; for God heard
the prayer. **
Wed. 8.-I preached at Caston about noon, and at Yarmouth
in the evening. Thursday, 9. I returned to Norwich; and,
after preaching in the afternoon, took coach for London.
Fri. 10.--I appointed a Committee for auditing myaccounts,
and superintending the business of the Book-room; which, I
doubt not, will be managed in a very different manner from
what it has been hitherto.
Sun. 12.--I preached in the morning at the new chapel; in
the afternoon, at West-Street. Monday, 13. I went to Walling
ford, and preached to a serious and, it seemed, much-affected
audience. Tuesday, 14. I preached at Witney, which I
generally find a very comfortable place. I think much of the
impression which was made on the people here, at the time of
the great storm, remains still. Wednesday, 15. I preached at
Oxford, on Gen. i. 27. We wanted only a larger Room. Many
young gentlemen were there, and behaved well. I hope some
of them did not come in vain. Thursday, 16. We went on to
High-Wycomb. Mr. Murlin’s settling here has been of great
use. Here is now a steady and understanding people; to
whom I preached, as usual, evening and morning, with a good
deal of satisfaction. Friday, 17. We returned to London.
Sun. 19.-We had, as usual, a comfortable time at Spital
fields. Monday, 20. I set out for Northamptonshire. In the
evening I preached to the lovely congregation at Whittle
bury, standing fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made
them free. Wednesday, 22. I made one more trial of poor
Towcester, if haply God might yet breathe on the dry bones,
by opening and strongly applying these words, “I will heal
their backsliding; I will love them freely.” In the evening,
and on Thursday morning, I preached at Northampton, in the
new Presbyterian meeting-house, a large and elegant building,
I think not without effect; and then returned to London.
Tues. 28.-I took the stage-coach for Rye ; which promised
to be there by six in the evening: But the coachman lingered
so, that in the afternoon I found they did not intend to be there
till near eight: So at Hawkhurst Itook apost-chaise, which, with
much ado, reached it soon after six. Being informed the service
was begun, I did not stay to eat or drink, but went directly to
the preaching-house, which was sufficiently crowded; and, as
440 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Nov. 1788.
soon as I could get through the people, I began with solemn
prayer; and then explained and applied that glorious truth,
“God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself.”
We had another happy opportunity at five in the morning.
Knowing there was no depending on the coach, I took chaise;
and by that means came early to Sevenoaks; where, in the
evening, I found uncommon liberty of spirit in exhorting the
audience to worship God in spirit and in truth.
Sat. NoveMBER 1.--(Being All-Saints' Day.) I preached
at Snowsfields, on Rev. xiv. 1; a comfortable subject; and I
always find this a comfortable day. Monday, 3. I began
visiting the classes; a work which usually takes up about a
fortnight. Sunday, 9. I preached at West-Street, and found
uncommon liberty in enforcing that caution, “Quench not the
Spirit.” On Wednesday, 12, and the following days, I
visited the country societies; some of which, that of Mitcham
in particular, are swiftly increasing in the grace of God.
Mon. 17.--I set out for Hertfordshire. In the evening I
preached at Hinxworth, to a deeply serious congregation; the
next evening, in the church at Wrestlingworth, to the largest
congregation I have seen there these twenty years. Wednes
day, 19. I crossed over to Bedford; but where to lodge I did
not know : But one met me in the street, and said Mr.
desired I would go straight to his house. I did so, and found
myself in a palace; the best house by far in the town; where
I was entertained not only with the utmost courtesy, but, I
believe, with sincere affection. Our Room was much crowded
in the evening, and pretty well filled in the morning; and
as all disputes are at an end, there is great reason to hope
that the work of God will increase here also.
Thur. 20.--We had a lovely congregation at St. Neot's, who
seemed ripe for the promises; so I preached on our Lord’s
words to the leper: “I will; be thou clean.” Friday, 21.
About moon I preached at Huntingdon, and in the evening at
Godmanchester. Still it is the day of small things here; but
a few are still fighting the good fight of faith.
Mon. 24.--I went to Canterbury. As all the Preachers are
in earnest, God has blessed them through the whole Circuit.
This evening we had a large and deeply serious congregation,
and not a few of them in the morning. Tuesday, 25. Though
it blew a storm, and was piercing cold, we were sufficiently
o
Dec. 1788.] JOURNAL. 441
crowded at Dover; where the work of God is very lively,
and continually increasing. Wednesday, 26. Our Room at
Sandwich being small, both the Dissenting Ministers sent to
offer me the use of their chapels. I willingly accepted one of
them, which was far larger than ours, and very commodious.
I believe God spoke to many hearts. In the evening we
had another storm, with much snow and sleet: However, our
House at Margate was well filled; and I was much comforted
by the earnestness of the congregation.
Fri. 28.--A little preaching-house being just built at St.
Peter's, (two miles from Margate,) notice had been given, with
out my knowledge, of my preaching there in the morning. It
was utterly inconvenient, on many accounts; the wind was
piercing cold, and the ground covered with snow. However,
I would not disappoint the congregation; so I preached at
nine, and hastened to Canterbury, where the House was, as
usual, well filled; and God gave us his blessing.
Tues. DECEMBER. 2.-I went to Chatham, and preached in
the evening, on, “We walk by faith, not by sight.” Wednes
day, 3. I went to Sheerness, where the society is considerably
increased since I was here before. Thursday, 4. At noon, I
preached at Faversham, where, after a long winter, the seed
seems to be springing up. The congregation was very large,
and deeply attentive. In the evening I preached in the new
House at Brompton. I had not preached there between
thirty and forty years; and there is now a fair prospect here
also. Friday, 5. I returned to London.
Mon. 8.-I had the pleasure of meeting an old friend, who
gave me a pleasing account of the glorious death of his mother,
which had made so deep an impression upon him that he was
almost persuaded to be a Christian. Wednesday, 10, and the
following days, I corrected my brother's posthumous poems;
being short Psalms, (some few excepted,) [hymns] on the four
Gospels, and the Acts of the Apostles. They make five
volumes in quarto, containing eighteen or nineteen hundred
pages. They were finished April 25, 1765.
The revisal finished, April 24, 1774.
A second revisal finished, January 26, 1777.
A third revisal finished, February 20, 1780.
A fourth revisal finished.
A fifth revisal finished.
442 REv. J. wesley’s [Dec. 1788.
A sixth revisal finished.
A seventh revisal finished.
The last revisal finished, May, 1787.
Many of these are little, if any, inferior to his former poems,
having the same justness and strength of thought, with the
same beauty of expression; yea, the same keenness of wit on
proper occasions, as bright and piercing as ever.
Mon. 15.--In the evening I preached at Miss Teulon's
school in Highgate. I think it was the coldest night I ever
remember. The house we were in stood on the edge of the hill,
and the east wind set full in the window. I counted eleven,
twelve, one, and was then obliged to dress, the cramp growing
more and more violent. But in the morning, not only the cramp
was gone, but likewise the lameness which used to follow it.
About this time I was reflecting on the gentle steps whereby
age steals upon us. Take only one instance. Four years ago
my sight was as good as it was at five-and-twenty. I then began
to observe that I did not see things quite so clear with my left
eye as with my right; all objects appeared a little browner to
that eye. I began next to find some difficulty in reading a
small print by candle-light. A year after, I found it in reading
such a print by day-light. In winter, 1786, I could not well
read our four-shilling hymn-book, unless with a large candle;
the next year I could not read letters, if wrote with a small or
bad hand. Last winter a pearl appeared on my left eye, the
sight of which grew exceeding dim. The right eye seems
unaltered; only I am a great deal nearer sighted than ever
I was. Thus are “those that look out at the windows
darkened;” one of the marks of old age. But I bless God,
“the grasshopper is” not “a burden.” I am still capable of
travelling; and my memory is much the same as ever it was;
and so, I think, is my understanding.
This week I dedicated to the reading over my brother's
works. They are short poems on the Psalms, the four Gospels,
and the Acts of the Apostles. Some are bad; some mean;
some most excellently good: They give the true sense of Scrip
ture, always in good English, generally in good verse; many
of them are equal to most, if not to any, he ever wrote; but
some still savour of that poisonous mysticism, with which we
were both not a little tainted before we went to America.
This gave a gloomy cast, first to his mind, and then to many
Jan. 1789.] JOURNAL. 443
of his verses: This made him frequently describe religion as a
melancholy thing: This so often sounded in his ears, “To the
desert;” and strongly persuaded in favour of solitude.
Thur. 25.--(Being Christmas-Day.) We began the service,
as usual, at four in the new chapel. Notwithstanding the
severe frost which had now lasted a month, the congregation
was uncommonly large. I preached here again in the
evening; about eleven, in the chapel at West-Street. This
was a comfortable day, as were also the two following.
Sun. 28.--I preached at Allhallows church, on those words
in the Service, “His commandments are not grievous.” The
congregation was exceeding large, and seemed to taste the
good word.
Tues. 30.-The frost continued severe; yet the congregation
was uncommonly large in the evening, and God warmed many
hearts.
Wed. 31.--A numerous company concluded the old year
with a very solemn watch-night. Hitherto God hath helped
us, and we neither see nor feel any of those terrible judgments
which it was said God would pour out upon the nation about
the conclusion of the year.
For near seventy years I have observed, that before any war
or public calamity, England abounds with prophets, who confi
dently foretell many terrible things. They generally believe
themselves, but are carried away by a vain imagination. And
they are seldom undeceived, even by the failure of their predic
tions; but still believe they will be fulfilled some time or other.
Thur. JANUARY 1, 1789.-If this is to be the last year of
my life, according to some of those prophecies, I hope it will
be the best. I am not careful about it, but heartily receive
the advice of the angel in Milton,
How well is thine: How long permit to Heaven.
Sun. 4.--Although the extreme severity of the weather kept
many tender people away; yet we had a large congregation in
the evening to renew their covenant with God; and we always
find, when we avouch Him to be our God, he avouches us to
be his people.
Mon. 5.-At the earnest desire of Mrs. T , I once more
sat for my picture. Mr. Romney is a painter indeed. He
struck off an exact likeness at once; and did more in one hour
than Sir Joshua did in ten. Tuesday, 6. I retired to Highbury
444 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Jan. 1789.
Place, and on Thursday, 8, to Peckham. Here, in the
evening, I preached to a very serious congregation, although
many of them were of the better rank. But rich and poor
seemed equally determined to work out their own salvation.
Fri. 9.-I left no money to any one in my Will, because I
had none. But now considering, that, whenever I am
removed, money will soon arise by sale of books, I added a
few legacies by a codicil, to be paid as soon as may be. But
I would fain do a little good while I live; for who can tell
what will come after him 2
Sun. 11.-I again warned the congregation, as strongly as
I could, against conformity to the world. But who will [take
the warning] 2 If hardly one in ten, yet is my record with
the Most High.
Tues. 13.--I spent a day or two with my good old friends
at Newington. Thursday, 15. I retired to Camberwell, and
carried on my Journal, probably as far as I shall live to write
it. On Thursday I preached once more at Peckham; and
did not withhold from them that had ears to hear, the whole
counsel of God.
Fri. 16.--I looked over the finest picture of atheistical
religion that ever I saw, in the account that Captain Wilson
gives of Thule, King of Pelew. But how utterly needless is
either the knowledge [or the grace] of God, (consequently,
how idle a book is the Bible,) if a man be all-accomplished,
that has no more knowledge of God than a horse, and no
more of his grace than a sparrow !
Tues. 20.--I retired in order to finish my year's accounts. If
possible, I must be a better economist; for instead of having
anything before hand, I am now considerably in debt; but this
I do not like. I would fain settle even my accounts before I die.
Sun. 25.--Much of the power of God was in the congrega
tion, both morning and afternoon; as also on Monday evening;
which gave me a good hope that God will carry on his own
work. At the earnestimportunity of our friends, on Wednesday,
28, I went to open the new preaching-house at Rye. It is a
noble building, much loftier than most of our Houses, and
finely situated at the head of the town. It was throughly filled.
Such a congregation I never saw at Rye before; and their beha
viour was as remarkable as their number; which, added to the
peaceable, loving spirit they are now in, gives reason to hope
there will be such a work here as has not been heretofore.
Feb. 1789.] JOURNAL. 445
Thur. 29.-I went over to Winchelsea; once a large,
flourishing city; but ever since it was burnt by the Danes, a
little, inconsiderable town, though finely situated on the top
of a range of hills. The new preaching-house was well filled
with decent, serious hearers, who seemed to receive the truth
in the love of it. I returned to Rye in the afternoon; and
in the evening preached to another large and serious congre
gation. Friday, 30. We made our way through miserable
roads to Sevenoaks, where the congregation, both evening
and morning, was uncommonly large. So (whether I see
them again or not) I cheerfully commended them to God, and
the next morning returned to London.
Sun. FEBRUARY 1.--We had an exceeding solemn season,
both morning and evening. It seemed indeed as if the skies
poured down righteousness on all that lifted up their hearts
to God.
Monday, 2, and the following days, I spent in meeting the
classes. Friday, 6, being the Quarterly Day for meeting the
Local Preachers, between twenty and thirty of them met at
West-Street, and opened their hearts to each other. Taking
the opportunity of having them all together, at the watch
night, I strongly insisted on St. Paul’s advice to Timothy,
“Keep that which is committed to thy trust;” particularly the
doctrine of Christian Perfection, which God has peculiarly
entrusted to the Methodists.
Wed. 11.-I went to Brentford, and found the society still
alive, and increasing both in strength and number. Thurs
day, 12. I preached once more at Chelsea, where there is at
length a fair and promising prospect. Friday, 13. I took a
view of that noble building, Chelsea College, and all the parts
of it. It is designed to lodge five hundred old soldiers, who
are furnished with all things needful for life and godliness.
Sunday, 15. We had the usual blessing at Spitalfields.
Monday, 16. I went to Dorking. I scarce find any society
in England like this. Year after year, it seems at one stay,
neither increasing nor decreasing; only if one or two die,
one or two are quickly added to fill up the number.
Tues. 17.--I examined the society at Deptford, and preached
there in the evening. Wednesday, 18. I retired into the country
to finish my writings. Sunday, 22. God was eminently present
with us at West-Street chapel, both in the morning and even
ing. Tuesday, 24. Mr. W called upon me, and we had
j
446 REv. J. wesley’s [March, 1789.
an agreeable and useful conversation. What a blessing is it
to Mr. P. to have such a friend as this 1 In the evening I
expounded part of the Second Lesson, Eph. iii.
Wednesday, 25, was the day which I had ordered all our
brethren in Great Britain and Ireland to observe with fasting
and prayer, for the recovery of His Majesty's health : But we
had the satisfaction to hear, that before we asked (unless
in private) He answered; insomuch that the time intended
for humiliation, turned into a time of thanksgiving; and both
at five, at nine, at one, and in the evening, we were most
employed in praises.
Sunday, MARCH 1, was a solemn day indeed. The new
chapel was sufficiently crowded both morning and afternoon;
and few that expected a parting blessing, were disappointed of
their hope. At seven in the evening I took the mail-coach;
and having three of our brethren, we spent a comfortable
night, partly in sound sleep, and partly in singing praise to
God. It will now quickly be seen whether they who prophe
sied some time since, that I should not outlive this month,
be sent of God or not. One way or the other, it is my care
to be always ready.
Mon. 2.-At Bath the evening congregation was such as we
used to have on Sunday evening; and I have seldom seen a
larger here. In the morning, a young gentleman, who had
heard me the evening before, desired to speak to me. He
seemed greatly affected, and was almost persuaded to be a
Christian. In the afternoon he sent his carriage, and would
needs have me see his lady, though she had lain in but two
or three days. Whether they turn back or no, they both
seem now not far from the kingdom of God.
Wed. 4.--I went on to Bristol, where we had a crowded con
gregation both this evening and the next. Sunday, 8. In the
evening I preached in Temple church to a large congregation.
It was an acceptable time, especially to the mourners in Zion.
Mr. Baddiley read Prayers for me, but could not stay to assist
me at the Lord's Supper. However, my strength was as my
day. Monday, 9, and the following days, I visited the classes,
which do not decrease either in grace or number. Tuesday, 10.
I had the pleasure of an hour's conversation with Mr.2
whom I had hardly seen for several years. On all these
evenings God was eminently present in the congregation. On
Thursday, 12, the grand day of rejoicing for His Majesty's
March, 1789.] JOURNAL. 447
recovery, I preached on part of King Hezekiah’s thanks
giving for his recovery; and indeed it was a season of solemn
joy; particularly when I applied those words, “The living,
the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day.”
Fri. 13.--I spent some time with poor Richard Henderson,
deeply affected with the loss of his only son; who, with as great
talents as most men in England, had lived two-and-thirty
years, and done just nothing. Saturday, 14. In the evening I
preached in Temple church; perhaps for the last time, as good
Mr. Easterbrook was suddenly taken ill the next day. Well,
whatever is, is best. Sunday, 15. Having Mr. Baddiley to
assist me in the morning, I preached at Kingswood in the after
noon; and in the evening, at the Room. We concluded the
day with a solemn and comfortable love-feast.
Mon. 16.-We set out early, and dined at Stroud, where I
had proof that either people or Preachers, or both, had left
their first love. I strongly exhorted them to remember from
whence they were fallen, and do the first works. God applied
his word, and I suppose two hundred were present at five in the
morning. Tuesday, 17. Many were present at Gloucester in
the evening; but they seemed to be little affected. Wednesday,
18. I preached in Tewkesbury at noon. The Room was
crowded, and all seemed to feel what they heard. I was informed
that one who, two or three years ago, had carried all his family
to America, in quest of golden mountains, had crept back again,
being utterly beggared, and forced to leave his family behind
him. In the evening the House at Worcester was throughly
filled with a deeply-affected congregation; but we were in great
want of more room. In due time God will give us this also.
Fri. 20.--We went on to Birmingham, still increasing on
every side. Hearing the cry of want of business, even in this
as well as most other trading towns in England, I considered
what the meaning of it should be ; and the case seems plainly
this: Two or three years ago, business poured into Birming
ham, and consequently more hands were wanting; but when
business returned into its usual channel, they were wanted no
longer. These men therefore certainly wanted business, and
spread the cry over the town. The same must be the case
at Manchester, Liverpool, and all other towns where there is
an extraordinary trade for a time: It must subside again;
and then arises the cry of want of business.
448 REv. J. wesley’s [March, 1789. .
Sat. 21.--I had a day of rest, only preaching morning and
evening. Sunday, 22, was appointed for my opening the
House at the east end of the town. It would have been
crowded above measure, but that the friendly rain interposed;
so that we had only a moderate congregation. It was otherwise
in the evening, when heaps upon heaps were obliged to go away.
How white are these fields unto the harvest ! Monday, 23.
The congregation at Dudley pretty well filled the new House,
where I preached as I did at London fifty years ago. Thence
we hastened to Madeley, where I found Mrs. Fletcher better
than she had been for many years; and young Mr. Fletcher
much alive to God, and swiftly growing up into the spirit of his
uncle. I preached in the evening, after Mr. Horne had read
Prayers, to a deeply serious congregation; and again at nine
in the morning, Tuesday, 24, in the preaching-house she has
lately fitted up. Going on to Shrewsbury, at six I preached
in the preaching-house, on 1 Cor. xiii. 1-3. Several of the
Gentry and several Clergymen were there; and, I believe, not
in vain. I had purposed to set out early in the morning, but
was persuaded to stay another day, there being now a fairer
prospect in Salop than had been before. I preached morning
and evening. I have cast my bread upon the waters, and
hope it will be found again, at least after many days.
Thur. 26.-We set out early, and, taking post-horses at
Clowrust, reached Conway between eight and nine o'clock;
having travelled seventy-eight miles that day; twenty-eight
more than from Chester to Conway.
Fri. 27.--We went on to Holyhead; and at eight in the
evening went on board the Claremont packet. The wind stood
fair three or four hours: It then turned against us, and blew
hard. I do not remember I was ever so sick at sea before; but
this was little to the cramp which held most of the night with
little intermission. All Saturday we were beating to and fro,
and gaining little ground; and I was so ill, throughout the day,
as to be fit for nothing; but I slept well in the night, and about
eight in the morning, Sunday, 29, came safe to Dublin quay.
I went straight up to the new Room. We had a numerous
congregation, and as serious as if we had been at West-Street.
I preached on the sickness and recovery of King Hezekiah and
King George; and great was our rejoicing. I really took
knowledge of the change which God has wrought in this congre
April, 1789.] JOURN A I. 449
gation within a few years. A great part of them were light and
airy; now almost all appear as serious as death. Monday, 30.
I began preaching at five in the morning; and the congrega
tion, both then and the following mornings, was far larger in
proportion than those at London. Meantime, I had letter upon
letter concerning the Sunday service; but I could not give any
answer till I had made a full inquiry both into the occasion
and the effects of it. The occasion was this :--About two years
ago, it was complaimed, that few of our society attended the
church on Sunday; most of them either sitting at home, or
going on Sunday morning to some Dissenting meeting. Here
by many of them were hurt, and inclined to separate from the
Church. To prevent this, it was proposed to have service at
the Room; which I consented to, on condition that they would
attend St. Patrick’s every first Sunday in the month. The
effect was, 1. That they went no more to the meetings. 2.
That three times more went to St. Patrick's (perhaps six
times) in six or twelve months, than had done for ten or
twenty years before. Observel This is done not to prepare
for, but to prevent, a separation from the Church.
On the mornings of this and the following week I ex
pounded the thirteenth chapter of the First Epistle to the
Corinthians: Such a compendium of true religion as none
but the Author of it can give. The evening congregations
were exceeding large, as well as deeply attentive. Friday,
APRIL 3. I preached at Bethesda; and with much liberty of
spirit. Saturday, 4. I preached in Gravel-Walk House, so
filled as I never saw it before; and they all seemed to hear as
for life. It was a comfortable night.
Sun. 5.--I preached in the new Room at seven. At eleven
I went to the cathedral. I desired those of our society who
did not go to their parish churches, would go with me to St.
Patrick's. Many of them did so. It was said, the number of
communicants was about five hundred; more than went there
in the whole year before the Methodists were known in Ireland.
Mon. 6.--To-day, and for some days following, I was so
overborne with letters, that I had hardly time to do anything
but to read and answer them. Wednesday, 8. I visited and
administered the sacrament to our poor widows; four-and
twenty of whom are tolerably provided for in our Widows’
House. The frowardness and stubbornness of some of these
450 REv. J. WESLEY’s [April, 1789.
was, for a time, a grievous trial to the rest; but this is past:
They are all now of a better spirit, and adorn the doctrine of
God our Saviour.
Thur. 9.--In the evening I met, for the second time, the
bands. I admired them much : They are more open than
those either in London or Bristol; and I think here is a
greater number of those that are now clearly perfected in
love, than I now find even in London itself.
APRIL 10.--(Being Good Friday.) I accepted of the press
ing invitation of Mr. Smyth, and preached at Bethesda both
morning and evening; in the morning on the New Covenant,
as it is now given to the Israel of God; and in the evening on
Heb. ix. 13, 14, “If the blood of bulls,” &c. At both times
we had a brilliant congregation, among whom were Honour
able and Right Honourable persons: But I felt they were all
given into my hands; for God was in the midst. What a
mercy it is, what a marvellous condescension in God, to
provide such places as Bethesda, and Lady Huntingdon’s
chapels, for these delicate hearers, who could not bear sound
doctrine if it were not set off with these pretty trifles |
APRIL 12.--(Being Easter-Day.) We had a solemn assembly
indeed; many hundred communicants in the morning; and in
the afternoon far more hearers than our Room would contain;
though it is now considerably enlarged. Afterwards I met
the society, and explained to them at large the original design
of the Methodists, viz., not to be a distinct party, but to stir
up all parties, Christians or Heathens, to worship God in spirit
and in truth; but the Church of England in particular; to
which they belonged from the beginning. With this view, I
have uniformly gone on for fifty years, never varying from
the doctrine of the Church at all; nor from her discipline, of
choice, but of necessity : So, in a course of years, necessity
was laid upon me, (as I have proved elsewhere,) 1. To preach
in the open air. 2. To pray extempore. 3. To form societies.
4. To accept of the assistance of Lay Preachers: And, in a
few other instances, to use such means as occurred, to prevent
or remove evils that we either felt or feared.
We set out early on Monday, 13, and about twelve reached
Clonard; five-and-twenty Irish miles from Dublin. Three
or four times as many as the house could contain met together
at five o'clock. The power of God was remarkably present;
April, 1789.] JOURNAL. 451
when divers were cut to the heart; and perhaps mone more
so than the master of the house. We had another good
opportunity at seven in the morning, Tuesday, 14, which we
closed with a serious, pointed conversation, and then went on
to Tyrrel’s Pass.
Though the wind was piercing cold, the multitude of people
obliged me to preach abroad in the evening; after which I
gave them all a plain account of the design of Methodism;
namely, not to separate from the Church, but to unite
together all the children of God that were scattered abroad.
Wed. 15.--About ten I preached to a small congregation in
the Court-House, in Molingar. We had a far different con
gregation, both as to number and spirit, in Longford Court
House in the evening. It was a beautiful sight. Great part
of them came again at seven in the morning, and seemed to
relish those words, “He that doeth the will of God, the same
is my brother, and sister, and mother.”
Thur. 16.--Heavy rain came on in the evening; yet the
preaching-house at Kenagh would not contain the people.
Friday, 17. I came to my old friends at Athlone; but, to my
surprise, I found them heaps upon heaps. I hastened to hear
the contending parties face to face; and was amazed to find
how much matter a little fire kindles. Some of the Leaders
had causelessly taken offence at the Assistant. He called on
Mr. R., and warned him against imbibing the same prejudice;
telling him if he did he must beware of the consequence;
meaning thereby the mischief it would do among the people.
Misunderstanding this word, he grew very angry. Others
took part with him, and the society was in an uproar. I talked
with him till I was tired; but in vain: One might as well
have talked to the north wind. So I gave him up to God,
and only endeavoured to quench the flame among the people.
Saturday, 18, was a day of peace. Sunday, 19. The Com
manding Officer sending to offer me the use of any part of
the barracks, I preached at five in the riding-house, a very
spacious building, to a multitude of people, on, “Believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.” I think the
word did not fall to the ground. Monday, 20. I preached
about eleven at B ; and at six in the church at Aghrim.
It was much fuller than when I preached here before; and
many Papists were there; who, as the Minister informed me,
452 REv. J. Wesley’s [April, 1789.
had attended the church ever since I was there before.
Tuesday, 21. About ten I preached in Eyre-Court church,
so filled as, I suppose, it never was before; and many of the
hearers seemed to feel the word. Thence we went on to Birr.
How is the scene changed here ! One of the dullest places
in Ireland is become one of the liveliest ! But I could not
preach abroad in the evening, by reason of the rain; so we
made all the room we could in the Room and in the yard;
and a most solemn opportunity we had.
Wed. 22.--About moon I preached in the beautiful new
Court-House, at Tullamore. Deep attention sat on the rich
as well as the poor; as it did likewise at Coolylough in the
evening. Thursday, 23, being the Thanksgiving Day for the
recovery of His Majesty’s health, I preached in the Court
House, at Portarlington, as soon as the Church Service ended.
The congregation was exceeding well dressed, but exceeding
careless and ill-behaved. At six I preached in the church at
Mount-Mellick, exceedingly crowded with hearers of quite
another kind: They were all attention; and in the morning
filled the preaching-house. Friday, 24. The church at Mary
borough was far larger, and one of the most elegant that I
have seen in the kingdom. It was throughly filled in the
evening, although many of the hearers looked as if they had
not been in a church before. But in half an hour they were
serious as death; and in the morning, Saturday, 25, the lower
part of the church was well filled. Surely many will remember
that day. In the evening I preached in our preaching-house
at Carlow; where, that I might not overshoot the congre
gation, I preached on, “So teach us to number our days, that
we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.”
Sun. 26.--I preached in the morning, and at five in the
evening. The people were very civil, and many of them atten
tive; but I think the time of Carlow is not yet come. Mon
day, 27. I reached Enniscorthy about noon; and presently
after, as it had continued to rain, I preached in the place
prepared for me, which was a large, though not very elegant,
cow-house. However, God was there ; as likewise in the
assembly-room, at Wexford, where I preached to a large
congregation in the evening.
Tues. 28.-About noon we reached the ferry, on the west
side of which Mrs. Deaves was waiting. She pressed me much
May, 1789.] JOURNAL, 453
to go with her in the chaise, and, at least, to dine at her
house; saying Mr. Deaves was willing to settle the House in
any way that I desired ! The same thing he said to me himself;
so I hoped all things would end well. In the evening I preached
to a numerous congregation, on Mark iii. 35. The God of
peace and love was in the midst of us, and seemed to affect
the whole assembly.
Wed. 29.--We had a large congregation in the morning.
At breakfast and at tea, on these two days, I met all the society;
(eight or ten excepted;) and we greatly confirmed our love to
each other. In the evening I preached to a larger congregation
than before, on, “I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.”
Afterwards I strongly exhorted them all to rehearse no past
grievances ; and only to provoke one another to love and
good works.
Fri. MAY 1.--We went to Capoquin. The rain preventing
my preaching abroad, I accepted of a very large room which
was offered me in the barracks. As we went up the street, we
had a very numerous retinue, hallooing and shouting with all
their might: But the sentinel keeping out the mob, we had a
quiet congregation within. A Popish gentleman inviting me to
lodge at his house, I spent a comfortable evening.
Sun. 3.-The House was sufficiently filled with people, as
well as with the power of God. Monday, 4. So it was again at
five, when I endeavoured to quench the fire which some had
laboured to kindle among the poor, quiet people, about sepa
rating from the Church. In the evening I preached on Luke
viii. 24; and the word was as fire; it pierced to the dividing of
soul and spirit, joints and marrow. Tuesday, 5. Being not very
well in the morning, I desired Joseph Bradford to preach. In
the evening I preached on, “Remember from whence thou art
fallen, and repent, and do the first works.” Many, I believe, are
earnestly purposed so to do. May God give them the power!
Wednesday, 6. I preached on that remarkable prophecy, Gen.
ix. 27, which is so eminently fulfilled at this day, wherein God
does “seize the servile progeny of Ham.” Thursday, 7. I
went to Bandon, and finished the Life of Baron Trenck; the
strangest I ever read. Was there ever such a fiend incarnate
as the late King of Prussia? To inflict such unheard-of tor
ments for so many years, for no fault | Good had it been for
him, if he had never been born. Yet, what a wretch was
Trenck himself! He made not the least scruple of adultery and
454 REv. J. Wesley’s [May, 1789.
murder; and does not appear to have had a jot more religion
than an inhabitant of Otaheitel I think, therefore, this is a
most dangerous book; I wish none that cares for his soul
would read a page of it.
In the evening I preached in the new preaching-house,
twice or thrice as large as the old. It was well filled both
this evening and the next; but I did not find the same life
in this people as in those at Cork. But God is able to cause
all grace to abound here also. Saturday, 9. I returned to
Cork, and earnestly enforced, “Thou shalt have no other
gods before me.”
Sun. 10.--After preaching, I administered the Lord's Supper
to about four hundred and fifty communicants. I was enabled
to speak with power in the evening to more than the House
could contain, and afterwards to the society. May God write
it on all their hearts | I am now clear of their blood.
Mon. 11.--At half an hour after two we reached Kilkenny;
and at six I preached on, “One thing is needful.” A few
seemed to understand what I meant; as also at five in the
morning, when I expounded, “There is neither work, nor
device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou
goest.” Tuesday, 12. I felt myself a good deal out of order.
However, I pushed on to Limerick, where the Rev. Mr. Ingram
(one of the Chaplains of the cathedral) gladly received me: So
did Mrs. Ingram, and all the lovely family; where I wanted
nothing which the kingdom could afford. At six the House
would not contain the congregation. I preached on, “There
is one God;” and it seemed as if all under the roof were
sensible of his presence.
Wed. 13.--I was not well able to preach in the morning; so
Joseph Bradford took my place. But about eleven I preached
myself at Pallas, about twelve miles from Limerick. All the
remains of the Palatine families came hither from Balligarane,
Court-Mattris, and Ratheal; in all which places an uncommon
flame has lately broke out, such as was never seen before.
Many in every place have been deeply convinced, many con
verted to God, and some perfected in love. Some societies are
doubled in number, some increased six or even ten fold. All
the neighbouring Gentry were likewise gathered together; so
that no House could contain them, but I was obliged to stand
abroad. The people, as it were, swallowed every word: and
great was our rejoicing in the Lord.
May, 1789.] JOURNAL. 455
Thur. 14.--I preached in the morning on Rev. ii. 4, 5; in
the evening on Luke iv. 18. All the congregation were, for
the present, much affected: With many, I trust, the impres
sion will continue.
Fri. 15.--We set out at five; and between three and four
reached Castlebay. In the evening I preached at Killchrist, to
so large a congregation that I was obliged to preach abroad,
though it rained all the time. As I had not been well for some
days, this did me no good; but I held up till Saturday, 16,
when we came to Ballinrobe, and then gave up, and let another
preach. After a very uneasy night, on Sunday, 17, I went on
to Castlebar, and, finding myself much better, preached in the
evening to a lovely congregation. But I was obliged to let
Joseph Bradford preach in the morning, on Monday, 18. Being
stronger in the evening, I preached again, and met the earnest
society, increasing both in number and grace. Tuesday, 19.
Retiring to a friend’s house about a mile from the town, I took
a full account of the late wonderful affair of Mr. F d.
Mr. George Robert F d, at his first settling near Castle
bar, about the year 1776, made himself very popular; but, mean
time his pride was excessive; affirming that, being the head of
the Desmond family, he was the premier Nobleman of Ireland.
Therefore he expected that all the country should submit to him:
Hencehefell into disputes with his father; and by turns with his
brother; and kept his neighbours in perpetual alarm. In 1779,
when volunteering began, he raised a Company, which was
wholly subject to him. Soon after he engaged Patrick Randal
M“Donald, a relation, as a Captain in his Company; but not
long after, a dispute arose between them, relative to the driving
of some cattle. Mr. M'D., being informed that Mr. F. intended
violence to him, placed some men near his own house; and
ordered them, if he approached the house, to fire. Mr. F.
approaching, one of them did fire; which killed his horse, and
wounded him in the knee and leg. On this he prosecuted Mr.
M“D. at the following Assizes; but, after a full hearing, he
was acquitted.
Another matter of contention soon ensued: Mr. M'D., being
an Attorney, was employed against Mr. F., and carried the suit.
This inflamed Mr. F. beyond measure, of which Mr. M'D. was
frequently informed. This continued, however, to the close of
the year 1785; when Mr. M'D., being at Castlebar one night,
o
456 REv. J. wesley’s [May, 1789.
a blunderbuss, charged with eight or nine bullets and slugs, was
discharged through the window of the room where he used to sit.
Immediately after Christmas, the witness, Mr. R. G., was sitting
in Mr. M.'s cellar, bottling some wine, when he heard a very
uncommon sound of a musket, and a loud shriek following it.
Going out, the first thing he saw was Mr. M'D., wounded in
the leg. On his cry, three men ran out of the little house of
Mr. F., whence the gun had been fired from a hole through
the wall, which had been made on purpose.
He then took a lodging in Castlebar; but on the 20th of
February, 1786, accompanied by Mr. G., Mr. H., and M., went
to his house in the country. They had been but a while
there, when they found it surrounded by many armed men; on
which Mr. M'D.’s friends made their escape to a neighbouring
village. Meantime they broke into his house; and, not finding
him, broke into several houses. At length they came to the
housewhere he was, and fired several balls through the doors and
windows: Then they broke in, and made M*Donald, Gallagher,
and Hipson, prisoners; and one Fulton said he had a warrant
against them. They desired he would bring them before Sir
Neal O'Donnel, a Magistrate, then within five miles; but, in
stead of this, they were tied, and dragged to F.'s house, in
Turlogh, where they continued all night.
Tuesday, February 21. About six they were marched out
with a large company, under pretence of carrying them before a
Magistrate. Gallagher and Hipson were tied together, M'Do
nald being suffered to ride, because of his wound; aruffian hold
ing his bridle. When they got about half a mile from Turlogh,
a shot was fired from the rear, which wounded one of the ruffians;
F d contriving it so, that they might cry a rescue; on
hearing of which they were ordered instantly to despatch the
prisoners. Immediately severalshots were fired at the prisoners.
Hipson was shot dead, and Gallagher wounded: M*Donald
had both his arms broke; but his horse took fright, and
broke from the ruffian: Gallagher had crept a little way,
but they soon found him. Some were for despatching him
instantly; but others moved to carry him to Mr. F d’s.
At his house he was kept prisoner all the night.
Wednesday, 22. The news coming to Castlebar, Mr. Ellison,
the Magistrate, went up with a large party of the army to Tur
logh. They rushed in, but, after searching all the house, could
May, 1789.] JOURNAL. 457
not find F.; till two young men went into a room where was
a large trunk, on touching the hasp of which, he jumped up
like a harlequin, fell upon his knees, and begged they would
not kill him. He was then carried out, and committed to
Castlebar gaol, where he remained till the June following.
He was found guilty on June 6th, and executed the 12th.
After drinking a bottle of port, he went out of prison with
the air of one going to a ball. He gave a spring off the
ladder, which snapped the rope in two. He fell down, but
instantly leaped up. All his courage was gone, and none
could die more penitent.
Sun. 17.--Having been a good deal out of order for some
days, I had thoughts of returning straight to London: But I
judged it best to try a little longer; so I set out for Castle
bar. In a moment I felt an entire change; only I felt a
little feverish. But this did not hinder my preaching in the
evening, nor God from giving us an uncommon blessing.
The same attended us on the following evening; but more
eminently on Tuesday, both morning and evening; as well
as in the administration of the Lord's Supper, in which two
Clergymen desired to partake with us.-
Wed. 20.--We set out between three and four, and in just
twelve hours reached Sligo. There I met S. Pennington
once more, with her lovely daughter and son-in-law. I never
before saw such a congregation in Sligo, so numerous, and so
serious. Does there yet another day of visitation appear
even for this desolate place 2
Thur. 21.--I was constrained, by the earnestness of the
people, to preach at five, though with much difficulty; my
tongue literally cleaving to the roof of my mouth, through
extreme dryness. Between nine and ten I was agreeably sur
prised at Manorhamilton, where I expected little good. But
the power of God fell upon the congregation in a very uncom
mon degree; so that scarce any one was unaffected. We then
hobbled on, through wonderful roads, to Annadale; where we
soon forgot all the labours of the day, for which the amiable
family, and the earnest congregation, made us large amends.
Fri. 22.--We went on to Ballyconnel, where I was nothing
glad that the rain drove us into our melancholy House.
However, we had a comfortable meeting; and I believe many
found their desires increased of worshipping God in spirit and
458 REv. J. WESLEY’s [May, 1789.
in truth. Saturday, 23. Between ten and eleven I preached
at Killeshandra, in a pleasant meadow, to a large and atten
tive congregation, though we had a few light showers of rain.
Hence we went through a most beautiful country, equal to any
in England, to Killmore. After dining at Mr. Creighton's, we
took a walk to see the remains of the venerable Castle where
Bishop Bedell was confined. It stands in a fine lake, being
built exactly round, with walls nine feet thick. It is remark
ably high, but has been for many years without inhabitant; one
side of it being beaten down by Oliver Cromwell. A very large
congregation, from all parts, assembled in the evening; to whom
I proclaimed, “Jesus Christ, made of God unto us wisdom,
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.”
Sun. 24.--At seven I preached in the Town-Hall at Cavan,
to a very large and well-behaved congregation. As I went
through Ballyhays, the poor people flocked round me on
every side, and would not be contented, till I came out of the
chaise, and spent some time with them in prayer. I expected,
being a fair morning, to see a huge congregation at Clones;
but while we were at church, the rain came on : So all I
could do in the evening was, to let Joseph Bradford preach
to as many as the House would contain, and to administer
the Lord’s Supper to our own society.
Mon. 25.--I preached to a multitude of people in the Old
Camp, on, “All things are ready; come ye to the marriage.”
The congregation seemed ready to receive every word. I
hardly saw, since I left Cork, such congregations, either for
number or seriousness, as is this at Clones.
Tues. 26.-The rain prevented my preaching abroad at
Brooksborough, although the congregation was exceeding
large. Part of them were sheltered by a spacious turf-house,
and the rest little regarded the rain; for the Lord watered us,
in an uncommon degree, with the dew of his blessing: And a
more affectionate family than Mr. M'Carty’s, I have not found
in the kingdom. This appeared more particularly in the
morning, Wednesday, 27. When we were talking together,
one and another fell upon their knees all round me, and most
of them burst out into tears and earnest cries, the like of which
I have seldom heard; so that we scarce knew how to part. At
noon I preached to an unwieldy multitude, in the market-house
at Enniskillen; and, I am persuaded, not in vain: God was
June, 1789.] JOURNAL. 459
there of a truth. I concluded the day by preaching at
Sidare, to the old, steady congregation.
Thur. 28.--I went on to Kirlish-Lodge, through storms of
wind and rain; yet we had a large congregation of serious
people; though divers came from far. In the morning,
Friday, 29, we spent an hour at Lord Abercorn's seat, three
miles from Newtownstewart. The house is elegant in the
highest degree, both within and without. It stands on a
little eminence over a fine river, in a most beautiful park:
But the owner has not so much as the beholding it with his
eyes; spending all his time in England.
Between Newtown and Moyle we had such rain as I never
saw in Europe before. In two minutes the horsemen were
drenched from head to foot. We dined at the Rector's, Dr.
Wilson, a man of very uncommon learning, particularly in
the Oriental tongues. At six he took me in his coach to the
Castle-yard, where a numerous congregation soon assembled.
Almost as soon as I began to preach, the rain began. Observ
ing the people begin to scatter, I prayed aloud, that God
would “stay the bottles of heaven.” He did so: The people
returned ; and we had a comfortable, refreshing shower of
heart-reviving love.
Sat. 30.--I took a view of the improvements round the house,
which are wonderfully pleasant. I have seen few comparable to
them in the kingdom, except Dr. Lesley's at Tanderagee.
MAY 31.-(Being Whitsunday.) I preached at London
derry at ten, (two hours before the Church Service began,)
on, “They were all filled with the Holy Ghost.”
I found an agreeable prospect here: A meat, convenient
preaching-house just finished; a society increasing and well
united together; and the whole city prejudiced in favour of it.
On Monday and Tuesday, the congregations were uncom
monly large, though we had rain every day, particularly on
Tuesday evening, when the hearts of the people seemed to
be as melting wax; and likewise at five on Wednesday morn
ing. I preached on, “Blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord:” A good farewell to Londonderry.
Wed. JUNE 3.--A quarter of an hour after I set out, the
axletree of my chaise snapped in two. In about half an hour
I procured another chaise, and in three hours reached New
town Limavaddy. Finding a congregation was waiting for
460 REv. J. wesley’s [June, 1789,
me in the preaching-house, I went to them without delay.
The House was throughly filled with deeply-attentive hearers;
and the power of God was among them.
We went hence, through miserable roads, to Coleraine; but
the company there made amends for them. We met with a
right English society, in spirit, in carriage, and even in dress;
but I was concerned to find John Stephens, a lovely young
Preacher, in a deep consumption; from which, I judge,
nothing can recover him, unless perhaps a total butter-milk
diet. In the evening the large meeting-house which was
offered me was well filled, though the rain was heavy.
Thur. 4.--I was fully employed in answering a heap of
letters. In the evening, the rain continuing, (as it has done
almost every day since we set out from Dublin,) I was glad to
accept of the meeting again, which was fuller than the evening
before. Friday, 5. We went a few miles out of our way, to
call at a small village, where abundance of people flocked to
the church, and appeared to be quite ripe for the Gospel: So
I preached on, “Now is the accepted time; now is the day of
salvation.” Thence we hastened on to Ballymena, where the
rain did us no harm by driving us into the meeting-house;
where a large congregation cheerfully heard the word that is
able to save their souls.*
Sat. 6.--The largest meeting-house I have been in was that
which I preached in at Antrim; and the people behaved exceed
ing well; the children as well as the rest. In the evening I
was at the new chapel at Lisburn, the largest and best-finished
in the north of Ireland. Sunday, 7. It was well filled at nine.
We went to church a little before twelve, where the singing was
admirably good; the Clerk who teaches them to sing, having
been formerly a Leader in our society. The day continuing
stormy, I could not preach in the street, but we were glad to
retreat into the Linen-Hall. Here was such a congregation as
I have not seen since I came into the kingdom; but somethings,
called gentlemen, were walking to and fro, and talking during
the greatest part of the sermon. If these had been poor men,
probably they would have had common sense. The meeting of
the society which followed, at which we permitted many others
to be present, was exceeding solemn. The power of God fell
upon many. I observed one gentlewoman in particular, that
wept and trembled exceedingly. I did not wonder, therefore,
June, 1789.] JOURNAL. 46]
that the Room was filled at five ; and that we had a parting
blessing.
Mon. 8.-We went on to Belfast. I had at first thought
of preaching in the Linen-Hall; but the weather being very
uncertain, I went to the heads of the large meeting-house, to
desire the use of it, which they granted in the most obliging
manner. It is the completest place of public worship I have
ever seen. It is of an oval form ; as I judge by my eye, a
hundred feet long, and seventy or eighty broad. It is very
lofty, and has two rows of large windows; so that it is as
light as our new chapel in London: And the rows of pillars,
with every other part, are so finely proportioned, that it is
beautiful in the highest degree.
The House was so crowded both within and without, (and
indeed with some of the most respectable persons in the town,)
that it was with the utmost difficulty I got in ; but I then
found I went not up without the Lord. Great was my liberty
of speech among them ; great was our glorying in the Lord:
So that I gave notice, contrary to my first design, of my in
tending to preach there again in the morning; but soon after,
the sexton sent me word, it must not be ; for the crowds had
damaged the House, and some of them had broke off and
carried away the silver which was on the Bible in the pulpit:
So I desired one of our Preachers to preach in our little
House, and left Belfast early in the morning.
Tues. 9.--About eight I came once more to Newtown,
where I had not been for eleven years, and preached at nine
to a multitude of people, in the Presbyterian meeting-house.
All of them seemed to be not a little affected. God grant the
impression may continue ! From hence we had a pleasant ride
to Portaferry, a pretty large sea-port town, and one of the
quietest I ever saw, either in England, Scotland, or Ireland.
Here likewise I preached in a large meeting-house, to a
serious and well-behaved congregation, on, “Stand ye in the
old paths;” and many seemed determined to “walk therein.”
Wed. 10.--We had twice or thrice as many people in the
morning as our House would have contained. We had then a
lovely passage to Strangford; but the question was, where to
preach. I was inclined to preach in the open air, as I did
eleven years ago, till the Vicar called upon me, and, after a little
friendly conversation, asked me if I would not preach in the
462 REv. J. Wesley’s June, 1789.
chapel. As we walked together through the street, the people
gathered from every quarter: So that the church was over filled;
many being constrained to stand without the door; and greatly
was the mighty power of God displayed in the midst of them.
We came to Downpatrick before one. In the afternoon we
viewed the venerable ruins of the Abbey. Great men have
talked of rebuilding it for many years; but none moves a hand
towards it. At six I preached to a numerous congregation in
the Grove, on, “How long halt ye between two opinions?”
Afterwards I met the society, now well established, and still
increasing both in number and strength. Thursday, 11. I
preached in Rathfriland about noon; and before two, set out for
Tanderagee: But in about half an hour, the iron part of my
fore-axletree broke ; so I walked forward with two of our breth
ren, which was easier than riding either of their horses. But be
fore we came to Loch-Brickland, my strength was so exhausted,
I was glad to stop at a little inn, and send to Bannbridge, about
two miles off, for a post-chaise. It came soon after six o'clock,
and I set out immediately. I had gone about a mile, when Mrs.
Lesley met me with her chaise, (who set out as soon as ever she
heard that my chaise was broke down,) and took me with her to
Tanderagee. A multitude of people were waiting; (twice as
many as were in the Green at Downpatrick;) when, finding no
want of strength, I earnestly proclaimed, “God was in Christ,
reconciling the world unto himself.” Such a congregation I
have not seen since I came into the kingdom; neither such a
pleasing place, shaded with tall, spreading trees, near which ran
a clear river: And all the people listened with quiet and deep
attention, [when invited] to “drink of the water of life freely.”
Fri. 12.--I had a day of rest in the same delightful grove;
and preached on, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul.” Saturday, 13. I had
another quiet day to answer my letters and revise my papers.
I think the evening congregation was the largest we have
seen in the kingdom ; and they all seemed to feel the appli
cation of these words, which God applied with uncommon
power, “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.”
Sun. 14.--I preached to near as large a congregation at nine,
on, “Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous.” After preaching in the
evening, I lodged at Killiman, and preached at seven in the
morning at Mr. Caulfield's door. In the evening I preached in
June, 1789.] JOURNAL. 463
the Castle-yard at Dungannon, on, “There is one God,” with
the demonstration of the Spirit. It is a lovely place, and
contained a huge congregation. Tuesday, 16. I preached in
the street at Blackwater-Town, on 1 Cor. x. 13. The word
sunk deep into many hearts; for the power of God was in
the midst of the congregation. In the evening I preached
once more to a multitude of people, in Mr. M'Gough's
avenue; to whom I paid probably the last visit, as he is just
tottering over the grave.
Wed. 17.--I went on to Newry, and preached once more in
the Presbyterian meeting-house, well filled with rich and
poor. It was a blessed season; as it was nearly at five in the
morning. Thursday, 18. About ten I began in the market
place at Dundalk: The congregation was large, and exceeding
quiet. They were tolerably quiet at Drogheda in the evening,
and deeply attentive at six in the morning. Friday, 19.
About eleven I preached in the street at Swords; and in the
afternoon reached Dublin.
Sun. 21.--I preached and administered the Lord's Supper;
in the conclusion of which
The' o'erwhelming power of grace divine
overshadowed the congregation. On Monday, Tuesday, and
Wednesday, I visited the classes; now containing a little
above a thousand members, after I had excluded about a
hundred. Thursday, 25. I went on to Mrs. Tighe's, at
Rosanna, near Wicklow, an exceeding pleasant seat, deeply
embosomed in woods on every side. In the evening I
preached in the great hall, to about a hundred very genteel
persons. I believe most of them felt as well as heard; some
perhaps may bring forth fruit.
Fri. 26.--After spending a quiet day, I went in the after
noon to Wicklow, and preached in the Court-House to a large
congregation, civil, though unawakened enough : Yet a few
appeared to be deeply attentive ; and I hope will “seek the
Lord while he may be found.”
Sat. 27.--We returned to Dublin by the Glen of the Downs,
much resembling that which lies north above Keswick-Water.
All this country is remarkably fruitful and pleasant, having,
in many parts, a fine sea, as well as land, prospect.
Sun. 28.--In the conclusion of the morning service we had
a remarkable blessing; and the same in the evening, moving
the whole congregation as the heart of one man.
464 REv. J. Wesley’s [July, 1789.
This day I enter on my eighty-sixth year. I now find I grow
old: 1. My sight is decayed; so that I cannot read a small
print, unless in a strong light: 2. My strength is decayed; so
that I walk much slower than I did some years since: 3. My
memory of names, whether of persons or places, is decayed;
till I stop a little to recollect them. What I should be afraid
of, is, if I took thought for the morrow, that my body should
weigh down my mind; and create either stubbornness, by the
decrease of my understanding; or peevishness, by the increase
of bodily infirmities: But Thou shalt answer for me, O Lord
my God.
Fri. JULY 3.--Our little Conference began in Dublin, and
ended Tuesday, 7. On this I observe, 1. I never had between
forty and fifty such Preachers together in Ireland before; all
of them, we had reason to hope, alive to God, and earnestly
devoted to his service : 2. I never saw such a number of
Preachers before, so unanimous in all points, particularly as
to leaving the Church; which none of thern had the least
thought of. It is no wonder, that there has been this year so
large an increase of the society.
Sun. 5.--I desired as many as chose it of our society, to go
to St. Patrick's, being the first Sunday in the month. The
Dean preached a serious, useful sermon; and we had such a
company of communicants as, I suppose, had scarce been seen
there together for above a hundred years. Our House would
not contain them that came in the evening; many of whom
being little awakened, I preached on, “It is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God.” On Monday and
Tuesday we settled the rest of our business; and on Wed
nesday morning we parted in the same love that we met.
I had much satisfaction in this Conference; in which, convers
ing with between forty and fifty Travelling Preachers, I found
such a body of men as I hardly believed could have been found
together in Ireland; men of so sound experience, so deep piety,
and so strong understanding. I am convinced, they are no way
inferior to the English Conference, except it be in number.
Friday, 10, we observed as a day of fasting and prayer,
chiefly for the increase of the work of God. This was con
cluded with a very solemn watch-night, wherein the hearts of
many were greatly comforted.
Sun. 12.-At seven I preached in Marlborough-Street, where
(though it rained all the morning) we had a full congregation of
July, 1789.] JOURNAL. 465
serious people. We met at the new Room at half-hour past nine;
and truly God was with us. We had never so many communi
cants before; but as my day, so was my strength. About two
we left Dublin, and hastened down to the ship; the Princess
Royal, of Parkgate; the neatest and most elegant packet I ever
saw. But the wind failing, we did not get out of the bay till
about twelve. We had exceeding agreeable company; and I
slept as well as if I had been in my own bed. Monday, 13.
The sea being smooth, I shut myself up in my chaise, and read
over the life of the famous Mr. George F , one of the most
extraordinary men (if we may call him a man) that has lived
for many centuries. I never heard before of so cool, delibe
rate, relentless a murderer And yet from the breaking of
the rope at his execution, which gave him two hours of vehe
ment prayer, there is room to hope he found mercy at last.
In the evening we sang a hymn upon deck, which soon drew
all the company about us. I then, without any delay, began
preaching on, “It is appointed unto men once to die.” I believe
all were a little affected for the present. We were then con
strained to slacken sail, and to lie by for some hours, not having
water to pass the bar: However, we landed between four and
five in the morning, Tuesday, 14; and, after resting an hour, I
went to Chester. I lodged at T. Briscoe's; a lovely family indeed;
just such another as Miss B.'s, at Keynsham. The children,
indeed, are not quite so genteel, but full as much awakened;
and, I think, the most loving I ever saw. The House was
throughly filled in the evening, (it being the fair-time,) as well
as the following. Thursday, 16. When I took my leave of the
family, they came all in tears. It is long since I saw the like.
About noon I preached to a large and much-affected congre
gation at Northwich. A flame is lately broke out here, such as
never was seen here before. In the evening I preached at Man
chester. Saturday, 18. I consulted Dr. Easton, finding my
thirst and fever much increased. His medicine inmediately
took place; and I was so much better in the morning, Sunday,
19, that I preached, and, with Dr. Coke's assistance, adminis
tered the sacrament to eleven or twelve hundred communicants.
I preached again in the evening; but it was too much for me,
and brought back my fever. Monday, 20. I went on to Halifax,
where, in the evening, I preached to a noble congregation; and
afterwards spent near another hour in exhorting the society.
466 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Aug. 1789.
Tuesday, 21. I hid myself at Otley, and prepared for the Con
ference. Friday, 24. I preached to a lovely congregation, on
Ephes. iv. 14. Saturday, 25. I preached in Dewsbury, in the
evening, on Rev. xiv. 1-4. It rained all the time. I and
several more people were wet to the skin. I lodged in Joseph
Taylor's house, at Gomersal, who labours for peace, and
would fain reconcile Christ and Belial.
In this journey I employed some part of my leisure time in
reading Mr. Forster’s “Voyage round the World.” In many
parts of this, one would think he was almost persuaded to be a
Christian. But how is it, then, that he says, (vol. i., p. 136)
“We listened to our boat’s crew, who recited a number of dull
stories, intermixed with hearty curses, oaths, and indecent ex
pressions, &c., (obscenity,) but seldom without real humour?”
Now, what need of mentioning these “hearty curses and
oaths,” with such profound indifference, if it were not to
screen himself from the imputation of believing the Bible?
Sun. 26.--I preached at noon in Birstal House, to as
lively a congregation as ever was seen there; and at five
preached on the education of children.
Mon. 27.--Being not well able to preach in the morning,
through the heat and dryness of my mouth, in the evening I
preached on 1 Tim. vi. 20. Tuesday, 28. The Conference
began : About a hundred Preachers were present, and never
was our Master more eminently present with us. The case of
separation from the Church was largely considered, and we
were all unanimous against it. Saturday, AUGUST 1. We
considered the case of Dewsbury House, which the self
elected Trustees have robbed us of. The point they con
tended for was this, that they should have a right of reject
ing any Preachers they disapproved of. But this, we saw,
would destroy itinerancy. So they chose J. A. for a Preacher,
who adopted W. E. for his Curate. Nothing remained but
to build another preaching-house, toward which we subscribed
two hundred and six pounds on the spot.
Sun. 2.-Knowing the church would not contain half of our
congregation added to its own, we began at our Room, at half
an hour past nine. After preaching, with the assistance of
three other Clergymen, I administered the sacrament to fifteen
or sixteen hundred persons; I hope, all desirous to be inward
Christians. Tuesday, 4. Having before preached to the people
Aug. 1789.] JOURNAL. 467
at large, I now spoke directly to the Preachers, on, “If any
man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God;” and, I am
persuaded, God applied his word to many of their hearts.
Wed. 5.-About noon we left Leeds; and that evening
went to Newark, about seventy miles. Thursday, 6. We set
out early, and between four and five reached Hinxworth. I
was now pretty well inclined to rest; but a congregation soon
getting together, I would not disappoint them, but preached
on, “We love him because he first loved us ;” and after
preaching, and travelling fourscore miles, I was no more tired
than when I set out in the morning.
Fri. 7.-We reached London between one and two; and
found great reason to praise the Gracious Power, which had
preserved us by sea and by land, in all known and unknown
dangers, unto the present hour.
Sat. 8.--I settled all my temporal business, and, in particu
lar, chose a new person to prepare the Arminian Magazine;
being obliged, however unwillingly, to drop Mr. O , for
only these two reasons: 1. The errata are unsufferable; I
have borne them for these twelve years, but can bear them
no longer. 2. Several pieces are inserted without my know
ledge, both in prose and verse. I must try whether these
things cannot be amended for the short residue of my life.
Sun. 9.--The new chapel was sufficiently crowded, both in
the morning and at four in the afternoon. At seven we set
out, and about noon, on Monday, 10, reached Bristol. Finding
all things here in a flourishing state, I set out for the west early
on Tuesday morning, and had an exceeding pleasant journey to
Taunton; where we had a full and serious congregation in the
evening. Wednesday, 12. I had no thought of preaching at
Collumpton, though we were to pass through it; but I yielded
to importunity, and preached at one to a numerous audience.
Thence we went on to Exeter, where the people were in high
expectation of seeing the King, who appointed to be there the
next day: However, a pretty large congregation assembled;
to which I preached at six o'clock. We set out at three, on
Thursday, 13, and reached Plymouth between one and two in
the afternoon. I preached to a large audience in the evening;
and although the day was extremely hot, yet I found myself
better yesterday and to-day, than I have been for some months.
Fri. 14.--In the afternoon I went on to the Dock, having
468 REv. J. Wesley’s [Aug. 1789.
previously determined not to say or hear anything of their
late senseless quarrel; wherein I could not but blame both
sides, and knew not which to blame most. So I spent this
and the next day in peace, and answered all my letters. Sun
day, 16. In the morning, I believe, we had not less than six
hundred communicants; but they were all admirably well
behaved, as if they indeed discerned the Lord’s body. But
when I preached in the afternoon, the House would not hold
half the congregation. I chose the space adjoining the south
side of the House, capable of containing some thousands of
people. Besides, some hundreds sat on the ridge of the rock
which ran along at my left hand. I preached on part of the
Gospel for the day, “He beheld the city, and wept over it;”
and it seemed as if every one felt,
His heart is made of tenderness ;
His bowels melt with love.
Mon. 17.--Setting out at three, we easily reached our friends
at St. Austle by dinner-time. But I knew not where to preach,
the street being so dirty, and the preaching-house so small. At
length we determined to squeeze as many as we could into the
preaching-house; and truly God was there. Tuesday, 18. We
went on to Truro, where I had appointed to preach at twelve
o'clock; but here an unforeseen hinderance occurred. I could
not get through the main street to our preaching-house. It was
quite blocked up with soldiers to the east, and numberless tin
ners to the west; a hugemultitude of whom, being nearly starved,
were come to beg or demand an increase of their wages; without
which they could not live. So we were obliged to retire to the
other end of the town, where I preached under the Coinage
Hall, to twice as many people, rich and poor, as the preaching
house would have contained; and many of them would not have
come thither at all. How wise are all the ways of God!
In the afternoon, as we could not pass by the common road,
we procured leave to drive round by some fields, and got to Fal
mouth in good time. The last time I was here, above forty
years ago, I was taken prisoner by an immense mob, gaping and
roaring like lions: But how is the tide turned High and low
now lined the street, from one end of the town to the other, out
of stark love and kindness, gaping and staring as if the King
were going by. In the evening I preached on the smooth top
of the hill, at a small distance from the sea, to the largest con
Aug. 1789.] JOURNAL, 469
gregation I have ever seen in Cornwall, except in or near Red
ruth. And such a time I have not known before, since I
returned from Ireland. God moved wonderfully on the hearts
of the people, who all seem to know the day of their visitation.
Wed. 19.-I preached at noon in the High-Street in Hel
stone, to the largest and most serious congregation which I
ever remember to have seen there. Thursday, 20. I went on
to St Just, and preached in the evening to a lovely congrega
tion, many of whom have not left their first love. Friday, 21.
About eleven I preached at Newlyn, and in the evening at
Penzance; at both places I was obliged to preach abroad.
Saturday, 22. I crossed over to Redruth, and at six preached
to a huge multitude, as usual, from the steps of the market
house. The word seemed to sink deep into every heart. I
know not that ever I spent such a week in Cornwall before.
Sun. 23.--I preached there again in the morning, and in the
evening at the amphitheatre; I suppose, for the last time; for
my voice cannot now command the still increasing multitude.
It was supposed they were now more than five-and-twenty
thousand. I think it scarce possible that all should hear.
Mon. 24.--Calling at Marazion, in my way to Penzance,
where I had promised to preach once more, the House was
filled in a few minutes, so that I could not refrain from
preaching a short sermon; and God was there of a truth.
We had a rainy afternoon; so I was obliged to preach in the
new preaching-house, considerably the largest, and, in many
respects, far the best, in Cornwall.
Tues. 25.--I went to St. Ives, and preached, as usual, on
one side of the market-place. Well nigh all the town attended,
and with all possible seriousness. Surely forty years’ labour
has not been in vain here.
Wed. 26.-I returned to Redruth, and applied to the great
congregation, “God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself.” I then met the society, and explained at large the
rise and nature of Methodism ; and still aver, I have never
read or heard of, either in ancient or modern history, any
other church which builds on so broad a foundation as the
Methodists do; which requires of its members no conformity
either in opinions or modes of worship, but barely this one
thing, to fear God, and work righteousness.
Thur. 27.--We set out early, and reached Truro soon after
470 REv. J. Wesley’s [Sept. 1789.
five. I preached at six, to a House full of serious people, on,
“Awake, thou that sleepest.” The congregation seemed to be
awake. Thence we hasted forward to Port-Isaac. I preached in
the evening, in an open part of the town, to almost all the inhabit
ants of it. How changed [since the time] when he that invited me
durst not take mein, for fear his house should be pulled down
Fri. 28.--I preached at nine in our new House at Camel
ford, throughly filled, though at a short warning; and at six
in the evening, in the new House at Launceston; still too
small for the congregation, who seemed exceeding lively. So
there is a fair prospect in Cornwall, from Launceston to the
Land's End. Saturday, 29. Going through Tavistock, a poor
man asked me to preach. I began in about a quarter of an
hour, the preaching-house being filled directly; but with so
poor a congregation as I have not seen before, for twice seven
years. In the evening I preached at Plymouth-Dock, to a
very different congregation, but equally serious.
Sun. 30.--Our service began at ten. The rain prevented the
chapel being too much crowded. In the evening I preached
at Plymouth, on the words in the First Lesson, “How long
halt ye between two opinions?” It was an awful season. After
wards I spent a comfortable evening with a few of our serious
brethren. The jars both here and at the Dock seem now to be
over, and the contending parties are willing to live in peace.
Mon. 31.--We set out at three, in a lovely morning, and
reached Exeter between twelve and one. Here the scene was
much changed: Many of the people were scattered, and the
rest faint and dead enough. The preaching-house was swiftly
running to ruin, the rain running through the roof into it
amain ; and five or six tenants living in the house were noisy
enough, having none to control them. We called earnestly
upon God to arise, and maintain his own cause: He did so in
the evening congregation, (which was much larger than usual,)
while I strongly enforced the parable of the Sower; and the
dread of God seemed to rest on the whole congregation.
Tues. SEPTEMBER 1.--We went through a delightful coun
try to Tiverton. In the evening, the Independent Minister
offering the use of his meeting-house, far larger than ours, I
willingly accepted his offer. The congregation was far the
largest I have seen in Tiverton for many years. I preached
on Mark iii. 25; and it seemed all had ears to hear.
Sept. 1789.] JOURNAL. 471
Wed. 2.--I preached at Halberton. I spoke here before in
the open air; but the rain prevented it now. So as many as
could, conveniently, got into the House. When we set out,
one of my horses was quite lame; so that it was with great
difficulty I could get to Taunton. In the evening, we had
such a congregation, as, I suppose, was never in that House
before. Surely the ancient work will some time revive, and
the prayers of that blessed man, Joseph Alleine, be answered.
Thur. 3.--Being obliged to take post-horses at Taunton, we
went on to Castle-Carey. Here we found a little company of
lively Christians. We found such another, Friday, 4, at Dit
cheat; but the rain drove us into the House, where as many as
could squeeze in seemed to be much affected. In the evening
I preached at Shepton, where the flame, kindled some time
since, is not yet extinguished. The next day we went on to
T}ristol.
Sun. 6.--I read prayers and preached, and administered the
sacrament to many hundred communicants. I preached in
the evening as usual; and spent a little more time with the
society than I commonly do: But it was more than I could
well do: Yet in four-and-twenty hours I was as well as usual.
The fair brought abundance of strangers to the preaching on
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday. Thursday, 10. I went
over to Thornbury, where we preached near fifty years, and
hardly saw any fruit; but whom can we despair of? Now
at length it seems that God’s time is come. A few men of
substance in the town have built a meat and commodious
preaching-house. It was filled within and without with
serious hearers; and they did not hear in vain.
Fri. 11.--I went over to Kingswood: Sweet recess where
everything is now just as I wish. But
Man was not born in shades to lie
Let us work now; we shall rest by and by. Saturday, 12. I
spent some time with the children; all of whom behaved
well; several are much awakened, and a few rejoicing in the
favour of God.
Sun. 13.--As Mr. Baddiley assisted me in the morning, I
took the opportunity of preaching at Kingswood in the after
noon, and abroad in the evening; and was abundantly better in
the evening than in the morning. Monday, 14. I spent an
agreeable hour with Mr. Ireland and Mr. Romaine, at Brisling
472 REv. J. wesley’s [Sept. 1789.
ton. I could willingly spend some time here; but I have none
to spare. Tuesday, 15. In the evening I preached at Pensford,
to an uncommon congregation, and with an uncommon blessing.
Wednesday, 16. I went on to Midsummer-Norton. I never saw
the church so full before. I preached on that verse in one of
the Psalms for the day, “Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill
it.” Many, I believe, found the promise true. In the evening
I preached to our honest, earnest colliers, at Coleford; most of
whom attended again at five in the morning. Thursday, 17. I
preached at Frome, to a much larger audience, and with much
of the presence of God. Friday, 18. At noon I preached at
Trowbridge, in an open place, to a multitude of people; and in
the evening, to our old, steady congregation at Bradford; but
many of them are gone into a better world. Scarce any of the
rich and honourable are left; but it is enough that the Gospel
is preached to the poor. Saturday, 19. At Bath the scene is
changed again. Here we have the rich and honourable in
abundance; and yet abundance of them came even in a
stormy night, and seemed as attentive as colliers.
Sun. 20.--I know not that ever I had so large a number of
communicants before; after I had applied strongly, “Neither
circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature.” In the afternoon I applied full as strongly, “God
forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ;” and in the evening returned to Bristol.
On Monday, 21, and the three following days, I visited the
classes at Bristol. Friday, 25. I spent an hour at Clare-Hill
with Mr. Henderson; I believe the best Physician for lunatics
in England: But he could not save the life of his only son,
who was probably taken to bring his father to God.
Sun. 27.--I preached at the new Room morning and even
ing, and in the afternoon at Temple church; but it was full as
much as I could do. I doubt I must not hereafter attempt to
preach more than twice a day. Monday, 28. I strongly enforced
the caution of St. Paul, “Be not conformed to this world; ” but
who can enforce it enough? For what destruction does this con
formity bring upon the children of God! Tuesday, 29. Being
much importuned, I went to Churchill, about twelve miles west
of Bristol. The rain was heavy; yet many of the poor people
made their way through it; so that the church (they said) has
scarce ever been so filled before. After the Service many stayed
in the church, because of the rain: So I spent some time with
Oct. 1789.] JOURNAL, 473
them in singing and prayer; and our hearts were much com
forted together.
Thur. October 1.-I went over to Bath, and preached
once more to a very large congregation, on 1 Pet. i. 14. Fri
day, 2. We had a solemn watch-night at Kingswood, and
most of the people stayed to the end. Sunday, 4. I pur
posed preaching abroad once more in the afternoon; but just
before five the rain began; so I could only enforce in the
Room those solemn words, in the first Lesson for the day,
“Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways,” &c.
Mon. 5.--We set out at four, and, hiring post-horses,
reached Mr. Whitchurch's, at Sarum, before dinner. In the
evening the House was crowded extremely, and the voice of
God was heard among them ; especially in the meeting of the
society, to whom I delivered my own soul once for all. Tues
day, 6. About nine I spoke full as plain at Winchester, I
think, to the largest congregation I have seen there ; and it
seemed the most serious; on that awful subject, Mark ix. 44.
The audience at Portsmouth-Common, in the evening, were
of another kind; to whom, therefore, I spake in quite another
manner, from Eph. iii. 14, &c. Wednesday, 7. About one I
preached to another very serious congregation in the town;
whom, therefore, I exhorted to leave the first principles, and
go on to perfection. Thursday,8. I set out early, and in the
afternoon we were brought to London.
I am now as well, by the good providence of God, as I am
likely to be while I live. My sight is so decayed that I can
not well read by candle-light; but I can write as well as ever:
And my strength is much lessened, so that I cannot easily
preach above twice a day. But, I bless God, my memory is
not much decayed; and my understanding is as clear as it has
been these fifty years.
Sun. 11.--I preached at West-Street morning and afternoon,
and then buried the remains of Dorothy Hundlebee, who, after
an exemplary life, went to God in the full triumph of faith.
Tuesday, 13. I preached partly upon the subject at the new
chapel; and strongly exhorted the congregation to be followers
of her as she was of Christ. In the evening I went in the mail
coach to Barton-Mills, and thence in a chaise to Ilynn.
Wed. 14.--The heavy rain prevented tender people from
attending in the evening. Sunday, 25. In the morning I
474 REv. J. W.ESLEY’s [Nov. 1789.
preached at West-Street, on Matt. xxii. 11: “He saw there a
man which had not on a wedding garment;” and showed that
this has no manner of respect, either to the Lord's Supper, or
the righteousness of Christ; but that it means neither more
nor less than holiness. At three I preached to a crowded
audience at Allhallows church, on Matt. vi. 8. At both places
I believe God strongly applied his word to many hearts.
Mon. 26.--I set out early, dined at Wallingford, just fifty
miles from the new chapel, and preached in the evening to
far more people than the preaching-house could contain. It
was a day of God’s power, and I believe most of the stout
hearted trembled at his word.
Tues. 27.--I went on to Witney. Here I found a lively
people, many of whom were hungering and thirsting after
righteousness. Of what use to a whole community may one
person be, even a woman, that is full of faith and love! The
Lord strengthen thy heart, and fully prepare thee for every
good word and work!
Thur. 29.--I returned to Oxford; and as notice had been
given, though without my knowledge, of my preaching at
noon, I did so, on, “There is one God,” to a very serious
congregation; but in the evening such a multitude of people
pressed in, that they hindered one another from hearing. I
know not when we have had so noisy a congregation; so that
by their eagerness to hear, they defeated their own purpose.
Fri. 30.--In my way to Wycomb, I spent an hour at Mr.
Smith's, in Cudsdem. He has ten children, from eighteen to a
year or two old; but all under government: So that I met the
very picture of my father's family. What a wretched steward
was he, who influenced Lord H to put away such a tenant
In the evening the House at High-Wycomb, though full, was
still as night. Saturday, 31. We came safe and well to London.
Sun. November 1.--Being All-Saints' Day, a day that I
peculiarly love, I preached on Rev. vii. 1; and we rejoiced with
solemn joy. Monday, 2. Miss H. met me at Hatfield, and took
me on to Hinxworth. I never saw that preaching-house so full
as it was this evening; and the people now begin not only to
understand, but to relish, what they hear. Tuesday, 3. We
went over to Wrestlingworth, where likewise the church was
fuller than ever before. I spoke exceeding closely the next even
ing at Hinxworth, which the people are now able to bear; and at
Dec. 1789.] JOURNAL, 475
length that excellent woman that has so tenderly cared for
them sees some fruit of her labour.
Mon.9.--I returned to London; and the four following days
I employed in visiting the classes. Sunday, 15. We had, as
usual, a large congregation, and a solemn opportunity, at Spital
fields; and another at Shoreditch church; where I preached a
charity sermon, after the Prayers had been read in such a man
ner as I never heard before. At five I preached at the new
chapel, and met the society; but it was too much for me.
Mon. 16.-After an intermission of many weeks, through the
dryness of my mouth, I resolved to try if I could not preach at
five in the morning; and did so with not much difficulty; and I
now hope to hold on a little longer. Wednesday, 18. I found
much life in the society at Brentford: So little cause have we
to despair of any people, though for the present ever so dead
Thursday, 19. I preached to a large congregation at Lambeth.
On Friday and Saturday, I answered my letters.
Sun. 22.--We had large congregations and a comfortable
opportunity, both morning and evening, at West-Street
chapel. Monday, 23. I set out for Northamptonshire; and
in the evening preached at Whittlebury; but the House
would ill contain the congregation, which were all serious as
death. So they were the next evening. Wednesday, 25.
The Dissenting Minister at Towcester offering me the use of
his meeting-house, it was well filled; and I believe our Lord
was in the midst. Thence we went on to Northampton,
where I spent two evenings with very great satisfaction;
although the great man who was so affected at Bath last year
was, as I expected he would, ashamed to see me. Friday, 27.
We had a pleasant journey to London.
Sun. 29.--I preached at the new chapel in the morning, on,
“Love is the fulfilling of the law;” and in the evening, on,
“Owe no man anything, but to love one another:” And each
time God was eminently present. Monday, 30. I went to Dept
ford, and found the society in peace; but nearly at one stay.
I endeavoured to stir up both them and the congregation, in
the evening, to go on to perfection. Tuesday, DECEMBER 1.
I called on Mr. Dornford, and found he kept his bed, being
ill of a stubborn ague; but it came no more. At noon I
preached in the new preaching-house at Mitcham; and
examined the little earnest society, almost all rejoicing in the
love of God. I then retired to the lovely family at Balham.
476 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Dec. 1789.
Here I had leisure on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thurs
day, to consider throughly the account of the Pelew Islands.
It is ingenious; but I esteem it a dangerous book, which I
cannot believe, if I believe the Bible; for the direct tendency
of it is to show, that the Bible is quite needless; since if men
may be as virtuous without revelation as with it, then it is
quite superfluous; then the fable of Jesus Christ, and that
of Mahomet, are equally valuable. I do not say that Mr.
Keate, much less Captain Wilson, designed to inculcate this
consequence; but it necessarily follows, if you believe the
premises. I cannot believe there is such a Heathen on earth
as Abba Thulle ; much less such a heathen nation as are
here painted.
But what do you think of Prince Lee Boo? I think he
was a good-natured, sensible young man, who came to Eng
land with Captain Wilson, and had learned his lesson well;
but was just as much a Prince, as Tomo Chachi was a King.
Mon. DECEMBER 7.-I went to Chatham, and preached, as
usual, to far more than the House could contain : And it is no
wonder, considering that the spirit and behaviour of the people
confirm the doctrine they hear. Tuesday, 8. We took a walk
in the dock-yard. In the evening I preached in the elegant
House at Brompton; but it is already far too small. The
people flock in on every side, to hear peacefully the Gospel.
Thur. 10.--I returned to London, and preached at the
new chapel.
Sun. 13.−Feeling much concern for poor backsliders, I
endeavoured to explain and apply the concluding words of the
parable of the Prodigal Son: “This thy brother was dead, and
is alive again: He was lost, and is found;” and in the evening
those of Hosea viii. 11.
Mon. 14.--I went to Canterbury, and preached in the even
ing, on, “There is one God.” The House would in nowise
contain the congregation, in which were several Clergymen. It
pleased God to give me uncommon liberty of spirit; as also at
Dover the next evening, where the new House, large as it is,
was far too small, so that many could not get in. Wednesday,
16. Being quite hoarse, I could neither sing nor speak: However,
I determined to show myself, at least, where I had appointed to
preach. Coming to Sandwich about noon, and finding the con
gregation was waiting, I trusted in God, and began to speak:
The more I spoke, the more my voice was strengthened; so that
Dec. 1789.] JOURNAL. 477
in a few minutes I think all could hear; and many, I believe,
took knowledge that what they heard was not the word of
man but of God.
I preached again at Margate in the evening, till my voice
was near as clear as before I begun. The Spirit of God was
with us of a truth.
Thur. 17.--I returned to Canterbury, and spent half an
mour with my old friend Mr. Perronet, the last of the six
sons, and nearly worn out, and just tottering over the grave.
In the evening we had another numerous congregation, and
all deeply serious. Friday, 18. We returned to London.
Mon. 21,-I went to Sevenoaks, where the work of God
has been at a stand for many years. It was a rainy night;
notwithstanding which, the chapel was crowded from end to
end : God seemed to rest in an uncommon degree upon the
whole congregation. I was still more surprised to see the
House filled in a very dark, rainy morning; a sight which has
not been for many years. Surely God is about to give this
poor, dead people yet another gracious visitation.
Fri. 25.--(Being Christmas-Day.) We began the service in
the new chapel at four o'clock, as usual; where I preached
again in the evening, after having officiated in West-Street at
the common hour. Saturday, 26. We had a very uncommon
congregation in the evening, with a very uncommon blessing.
Sunday, 27. I preached in St. Luke's, our parish church, in
the afternoon, to a very numerous congregation, on, “The
Spirit and the Bride say, Come.” So are the tables turned,
that I have now more invitations to preach in churches than
I can accept of.
Mon. 28.--I retired to Peckham ; and at leisure hours
read part of a very pretty trifle, the Life of Mrs. Bellamy.
Surely never did any, since John Dryden, study more
To make vice pleasing, and damnation shine,
than this lively and elegant writer. She has a fine imagina
tion; a strong understanding; an easy style, improved by
much reading; a fine, benevolent temper; and every qualifi
cation that could consist with a total ignorance of God. But
God was not in all her thoughts. Abundance of anecdotes she
inserts, which may be true or false. One of them, concerning
Mr. Garrick, is curious. She says, “When he was taking
478 REv. J. wesley’s [Jan. 1790.
ship for England, a lady presented him with a parcel, which
she desired him not to open till he was at sea. When he did
he found Wesley’s Hymns, which he immediately threw over
board.” I cannot believe it. I think Mr. G. had more sense.
He knew my brother well; and he knew him to be not only
far superior in learning, but in poetry, to Mr. Thomson, and
all his theatrical writers put together: None of them can equal
him, either in strong, nervous sense, or purity and elegance of
language. The musical compositions of his sons are not more
excellent than the poetical ones of their father.
In the evening I preached to a crowded congregation, some
of whom seemed a good deal affected. Thursday, 31. I
preached at the new chapel; but, to avoid the cramp, went to
bed at ten o’clock. I was well served. I know not that I ever
before felt so much of it in one night.
Fri. JANUARY 1, 1790.--I am now an old man, decayed
from head to foot. My eyes are dim; my right hand shakes
much; my mouth is hot and dry every morning; I have a
lingering fever almost every day; my motion is weak and
slow. However, blessed be God, I do not slack my labour:
I can preach and write still.
Sat. 2.-I preached at Snowsfields, to the largest congrega
tion I have seen there this year, on, “I am not ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ.” Sunday, 3. I suppose near two
thousand met at the new chapel to renew their covenant with
God; a scriptural means of grace which is now almost every
where forgotten except among the Methodists.
Tues. 5.-I paid a visit to my old friend Mark Davis; and
in the evening I preached to a small audience at Leytonstone.
Wednesday, 6. I preached to a larger and more awakened con
gregation at Stratford. Tuesday, 12. I retired to Highbury
Place to answer my letters. Sunday, 17. I buried Mrs. Dorn
ford, (a good woman,) and preached her funeral sermon. In
the afternoon, I preached in Great St. Helen's, to a large
congregation. It is, I believe, fifty years since I preached
there before. What has God wrought since that time !
Thur. 21.--I paid a visit to an eminent sister, of whom
every one despaired. She resolved to set out once more.
May God uphold her with his right hand! Sunday, 24. We
had a love-feast for all the society, at which many spoke their
experience with much simplicity. Monday, 25. I went to
Feb. 1790.] JOURNAL. 479
Dorking; and laboured to awaken a harmless, homest, drowsy
people, who for many years have seemed to stand stock-still,
neither increasing nor decreasing.
Fri. 29.--We had our general Quarterly Meeting, whereby
it appeared, that the society received and expended about
three thousand pounds a year; but our expense still exceeded
our income. Saturday, 30. I began meeting the classes,
which took up this day and all the next week.
Sun. FEBRUARY 7.--I preached the funeral sermon of that
saint of God, Robert Windsor, many years a burning and a
shining light. He was born a few months after me; was a
prudent, serious, diligent man, full of mercy and good fruits;
without partiality, and without hypocrisy. He seemed on the
brink of death some months ago; but was suddenly raised up
again; praised God without ceasing a few days; and then
laid down, and died.
Wed. 10.--We found much of the presence of God in the
chapel at Brentford, where the congregation was exceeding
large. So it was the next evening at Lambeth, though perhaps
not so much alive. Saturday, 13. The meeting of the peni
tents in the evening was exceeding solemn; as indeed it gene
rally is. Sunday, 14. I preached a sermon to the children at
West-Street chapel. They flocked together from every quar
ter; and truly God was in the midst of them, applying those
words, “Come, ye little children, hearken unto me; and I
will teach you the fear of the Lord.”
Tues. 16.-I retired to Balham for a few days, in order to
finish my sermons, and put all my little things in order.
Thur. 18.--I preached once more at poor Wandsworth.
The House was more crowded than it has been for several years;
and I could not but hope that God will once more build up
the waste places. Friday, 19. I preached to a large audience at
Chelsea; and examined the little society, who do not decrease;
but rather grow in grace, and strengthen each other's hands.
Sun. 21.--I preached to the children at the new chapel;
and I believe not in vain. Monday, 22. We had a comfort
able opportunity at West-Street; and another on Tuesday
evening at the new chapel, where we had also a solemn meet
ing of the Leaders. I submitted to importunity, and once
more sat for my picture. I could scarce believe myself;-
the picture of one in his eighty-seventh year !
480 REv. J. wesley’s [March, 1790.
Wed. 24.--I preached once more at Wapping, to a crowded
audience; and the next evening at the new chapel, throughly
filled. Friday, 26. I preached at Rotherhithe, where also
there is lately a remarkable revival of the work of God.
Saturday, 27. I dined at Mr. Baker's, one of the Sheriffs of
London; a plain man, who still lives in an inn-yard | In the
evening I had such a congregation at Snowsfields, as has not
been seen there before for many years. Afterwards I met
the penitents for the last time. They quite filled the Room;
and God was in the midst of them.
Sun. 28.--We have not had such a congregation at the new
chapel since the renewal of the covenant; nor such a bless
ing: The hearts of the people were like melting wax. Most
of them were in tears; and I trust they will not soon forget
the exhortation which was then given them.
In the afternoon I preached at West-Street chapel, on Eph.
v. 1, 2. The chapel would not near contain the congregation.
All that could squeeze in seemed much affected; and it was
with difficulty I broke through and took chaise for Brentford;
where I came before six o'clock. The congregation here also
was by far the largest I ever saw here; so that, it seems, our
labour even here will not be in vain.
Mon. MARch 1.--I left Brentford early in the morning,
and in the evening preached at Newbury. The congregation
was large, and most of them attentive; but a few were wild
as colts untamed. We had none such at Bath the following
evening, but all were serious as death. Indeed, the work of
God seems to flourish here, deepening as well as widening.
Wednesday, 3. I took a view of the new buildings. There are
at present none like them in England. They have not only
added a second Crescent, with two beautiful rows of houses,
near Ludstown, but a whole town on the other side of the city,
which is swiftly increasing every day. And must all these
fine buildings be burned up? Yea, L
Earth and heaven destroy'd,
Nor left even one in the mighty void
Thur. 4.--I went on to Bristol, where I found a people ready
prepared for the Lord. The Preachers are in earnest, the fruit of
which plainly appears in the congregations. Friday, 5. Hearing
Mr. W , of Bolton, was dying, I went over, and spent an
March, 1790.] JOURNAL. 481
hour with him. His spirit was much comforted, and in a few
days he was nearly as well as ever. Saturday, 6. I preached
in the evening at Temple church. Mr. Easterbrook has lately
been very ill; but God has again lifted up his head to be a
father to the poor a little longer. Sunday, 7. I preached at
the Room morning and evening; and about two in the after
noon at Kingswood. Just as I concluded my sermon in the
Room, a lady came in her carriage in all haste; and, finding
the sermon was over, earnestly desired to stay at the society.
Afterwards she importuned me much to call on her at the
Hot Wells, where her husband, Governor Johnstone, died
two years ago. On Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and
Thursday, she came to the preaching, and seemed to be
much affected. On Friday evening I was at Kingswood, and
preached to such a congregation, as I have not seen there
on a week-day for forty years, unless it was at a watch-night.
Saturday, 13. I spent two hours with her at Granby. House,
and answered all her questions. She appeared quite willing
to know the truth, and to be altogether a Christian; and
vehemently desired, if our lives were prolonged, that I would
visit her in London. But if we should live, would she then
be willing to see me? If she is, it would be a miracle indeed.
This week I visited the classes in Bristol. I wonder we do
not increase in number, although many are convinced, many
justified, and a few perfected in love. I can impute the want
of increase to nothing but want of self-denial. Without this,
indeed, whatever other helps they have, no believers can go
forward.
Sunday, 14, was a comfortable day. In the morning I met
the Strangers’ Society, instituted wholly for the relief, not of our
society, but for poor, sick, friendless strangers. I do not know
that I ever heard or read of such an institution till within a few
years ago. So this also is one of the fruits of Methodism.
Mon. 15.--I set out early, and dined at Stroud; but in the
evening we knew not what to do. The preaching-house was far
too small to contain the congregation; so that several hundreds
(it was supposed) were obliged to go away. But the power of
God remained with us; and great was our rejoicing in him.
Tues. 16.-At noon I preached at Painswick, to as many as
the House would contain: In the evening, at Gloucester, we
had a large multitude; but many of them would neither hear
482 Rev. J. Wesley’s [March, 1790.
nor let others hear. Indeed, they that sat in the galleries could
hear well; but very few of them that were below.
Wed. 17.--In the way to Tewkesbury, at the earnest desire
of Samuel Vernon, I called on him and his five daughters, (all
grown up,) who are lately joined to that society; all of whom are
now in great earnest, and bid fair to adorn the Gospel of God
our Saviour. I preached at Tewkesbury about twelve; but here
also the House would not contain the congregation. We went
on to Worcester in the afternoon, and found much comfort
among a well-established people. They have no jars now, but
all hold the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Thurs
day, 18. We went on to Stourport, which is now full twice as
large as it was two years ago. The first chapel was built about
three years ago, by the joint contributions of Arminians and
Calvinists, agreeing that they should preach by turns. But in
a short time the poor Arminians were locked out. On this one
or two gentlemen built another, far larger and more commo
dious. But it was not large enough to contain them in the
evening, to whom I explained that solemn passage in the Reve
lation, “I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God.”
They seemed to be all serious and attentive as long as I was
speaking; but the moment Iceased, fourscore or one hundred
began talking all at once. I do not remember ever to have
been present at such a scene before. This must be amended;
otherwise (if I should live) I will see Stourport no more.
Fri. 19.--About eleven, coming to Quinton, I found a
congregation waiting for me. So, that I might not disappoint
them, I preached immediately, on, “We love him, because he
first loved us;” and then went on to Birmingham, which I
think is thrice as large as when I saw it fifty years ago.
The congregation in the evening were well squeezed together,
and most of them got in. The behaviour of the rich and poor
is such, as does honour to their profession; so decent, so serious,
so devout, from the beginning to the end It was the same the
next evening. Sunday, 21. The Prayers began at the new
House about half an hour after ten. It is a little larger than
the new House at Brompton, and admirably well constructed.
But several hundreds, I suppose, could not get in. I think all
who did, found that God was there. The great House likewise in
the evening was utterly insufficient to contain the congregation.
But God is able to supply this want also; and his time is best.
March, 1790.] JOURNAL. 483
Mon. 22.--I went on to our old friends at Wednesbury,
where the work of God greatly revives. Business has exceed
ingly decreased, and most of them have left the town. So
much the more have the poor grown in grace, and laid up
treasure in heaven. But we were at a great loss in the evening.
I could not preach abroad after sunset, and the House
would not near contain the people. However, as many as
possibly could squeezed in ; and their labour was not in vain.
Tues. 23.--About one I preached in the new House at
Dudley; one of the neatest in England. It was a profitable
season, where two persons, they informed me, found peace
with God. We had a pleasant ride to Wolverhampton.
This evening the rain began, and continued about twenty
hours, after more than four-and-twenty weeks of fair weather;
such a winter as I never saw before.
A melancholy event fell out the day before --The mistress
of the house adjoining boiling some varnish, it boiled over,
and took fire, which seized on her, and burnt her so that her
life is despaired of.
The rain a little lessened our congregation, so that the
House contained us tolerably well; and many, even of the
genteel hearers, seemed almost persuaded not to halt between
two opinions.
Wed. 24.--We rode to Madeley through a pleasant rain,
which did not hinder the church from being throughly filled;
and, I believe, all who had spiritual discernment perceived
that it was filled with the presence of God. Thursday, 25.
At nine I preached to a select congregation, on the deep
things of God; and in the evening, on, “He is able to save
unto the uttermost all them that come unto God through him.”
Friday, 26. I finished my sermon on the Wedding Garment;
perhaps the last that I shall write. My eyes are now waxed
dim; my natural force is abated. However, while I can, I
would fain do a little for God before I drop into the dust.
In the evening I preached to a crowded audience at Salop,
on, “Acquaint now thyself with him, and be at peace.” But
I was much ashamed for them. The moment I had done
speaking, I suppose fifty of them were talking all at once;
and no wonder they had neither sense nor good manners,
for they were gentlefolks!
Sat. 27.--L preached in the evening to a sensible and well
484 REv. J. Wesley’s [April, 1790.
behaved congregationat Newcastle-under-Lyne. (Observe, that
is the name of the river which runs above the town.) Sunday,
28. I preached soon after one in Mr. Myat’s yard, at Lane-End:
The House would not have contained a quarter of the people.
At Burslem also I was obliged to preach abroad, such were the
multitudes of the people. Surely the people of this place were
highly favoured. Mercy embraced them on every side.
Mon. 29.--At nine I preached in the new chapel, at Tunstal;
the most elegant I have seen since I left Bath. My text was,
“Let us go on unto perfection;” and the people seemed to
devour the word.
In the evening I preached at Congleton. The Minister,
the Mayor, and all the heads of the town, were present; so,
that I might not overshoot them, I preached on Psalm xc.
12: And, I believe, God applied it to their hearts.
Tues. 30.-I went on to Macclesfield, and preached to a
crowded audience, both this and the following night. On
Thursday morning one of my horses died. I judged it
best to leave the other till I could procure another, and took
post-chaises to Stockport. A large congregation was ready
at six in the evening. In the morning, on Good-Friday,
we went on to Oldham. The new House would in nowise
contain the congregation; but I preached to as many as it
would contain, on 1 Cor. vi. 19.; and at Manchester in the
evening, Saturday, APRIL 3, on Heb. iv. 14.
APRIL 4.--(Being Easter-day.) I think we had about one
thousandsix hundred communicants. Ipreached, both morning
and evening, without weariness; and in the evening lay down
in peace.
Mon. 5.--Calling at Altringham, I was desired to speak a
few words to the people in the new chapel; but almost as soon
as I got thither, the House was filled; and soon after, more than
filled. So I preached on 1 Pet. i. 3; and many praised God
with joyful lips. About twelve I preached in the chapel at
Northwich, to a large and very lively congregation, and, in the
evening, met once more with our old affectionate friends at
Chester. I have never seen this chapel more crowded than
to-night; but still it could not near contain the congregation.
Both this and the following evening, I was greatly assisted to
declarethe power of Christ's resurrection; and to exhort all that
were risen with him to set their affections on the things above.
May, 1790.] JOURNAL. 485
Here I met with one of the most extraordinary phenomena
that I ever saw, or heard of:--Mr. Sellers has in his yard a
large Newfoundland dog, and an old raven. These have fallen
deeply in love with each other, and never desire to be apart.
The bird has learned the bark of the dog, so that few can
distinguish them. She is inconsolable when he goes out; and,
if he stays out a day or two, she will get up all the bones and
scraps she can, and hoard them up for him till he comes back.
Wed. 7.--About eleven I preached at Warrington. The
chapel was well filled with serious hearers; but the great con
gregation was at Liverpool. If those without were added to
those within, I believe it would have exceeded even that at
Manchester; and surely the power of God was present with
them also.
Thur. 8.--Such another congregation we had on Thursday,
among whom were many that had never been there before.
They seemed utterly amazed when I explained, “Now faith is
the evidence of things unseen.” I believe many were then
convinced; but, alas, how soon will that conviction die away !
Fri. 9.-We went to Wigan, for many years proverbially
called, wicked Wigan: But it is not now what it was: The
inhabitants in general have taken a softer mould. The
House in the evening was more than filled; and all that could
get in seemed to be greatly affected, while I strongly applied
our Lord's words, “I will; be thou clean.” Saturday, 10.
I crossed over to Northwich, and again found the wisdom
of judging nothing before the time. The removal, which I
used to ascribe to cap ice, I find was the effect of necessity.
A wretched man, who had persuaded his father-in-law to give
the staff out of his own hands, now abridges him of half his
five hundred a year; and has the conscience to take fifty
pounds a year out of the remainder, for the board of his son,
apprenticed to him. In the evening I preached in the lovely
House at Bolton, to one of the loveliest congregations in
England; who, by patient continuance in well-doing, have
turned scorn and hatred into general esteem and good-will.
[Part of the manuscript having been lost, causes a chasm
here.]-
Mon. MAY 24.--We set out at four, and reached Forglen
about moon. The face of the country is much changed for
the better since I was here before. Agriculture increases on
every side; sc do manufactories, industry, and cleanliness.
486 REv. J. WESLEY’s [June, 1790.
But I found poor Lady B. (one of the most amiable women
in the kingdom) exceeding ill; and I doubt whether she will be
much better till she removes to her own country. I spent a
very agreeable afternoon with the lovely family, and preached
to a serious congregation in the evening. Tuesday, 25. We
returned to Aberdeen; and I took a solemn farewell of a
crowded audience. If I should be permitted to see them
again, well; if not, I have delivered my own soul.
Wed. 26.--Taking the midland road, we spent an hour at
Lawrence-Kirk; which, from an inconsiderable village, is, by
the care and power of Lord Gordon, soon sprung up into a
pleasant, neat, and flourishing town. His Lordship has also
erected a little library here, adjoining to a handsome and
well-furnished inn. The country from hence to Brechin is
as pleasant as a garden: Happy would Scotland be, if it had
many such gentlemen and noblemen. In the evening I began
preaching at Brechin, in the Freeman’s Lodge; but I was so
faint and ill, that I was obliged to shorten my discourse.
Thursday, 27. We went on through Forfar (now a handsome
and almost a new town) and Cupar to Auchterarder. Here we
expected poor accommodations, but were agreeably disappointed.
Food, beds, and everything else, were as meat and clean as at
Aberdeen or Edinburgh. Friday, 28. We travelled through
a delightful country, by Stirling and Kilsythe, to Glasgow.
The congregation was miserably small; verifying what I had
often heard before, that the Scots dearly love the word of the
Lord--on the Lord’s day. If I live to come again, I will take
care to spend only the Lord's day at Glasgow.
Mon. 31.--We set out at two, and came to Moffat soon
after three in the afternoon. Taking fresh horses, we
reached Dumfries between six and seven, and found the
congregation waiting: So, after a few minutes, I preached on
Mark iii. 35: “Whosoever shall do the will of God, the same
is my brother, and sister, and mother.”
Tues. JUNE 1.-Mr. Mather had a good congregation at
five. In the day I conversed with many of the people; a
candid, humane, well-behaved people; unlike most that I
have found in Scotland. In the evening the House was
filled; and truly God preached to their hearts. Surely God
will have a considerable people here.
Wed. 2.--We set out early, and reached Carlisle about noon.
The work a little increases here: A small handful of people
June, 1790.] JOURNAL. 487
stand firm; and those that opposed are broken to pieces. Our
House would not near contain the congregation; and the word
of God was with power. Thursday, 3. We rode to Hexham,
through one of the pleasantest countries that I have lately seen.
The road lay (from Haisle) on the side of a fruitful mountain,
shaded with trees, and sloping down to a clear river; which ran
between ours and another fruitful mountain, well wooded and
improved. At Hexham they have lately built a convenient
preaching-house; but it is too small already. Here is a loving
people, much alive to God, and consequently increasing daily.
Friday, 4. We reached Newcastle. In this and Kingswood
house, were I to do my own will, I should choose to spend the
short remainder of my days. But it cannot be; this is not
my rest. This and the next evening we had a numerous
congregation; and the people seemed much alive.
Sun. 6.--I was invited to preach in Lemsley church, on the
side of Gateshead-Fell; but some hours after, the Minister
changed his mind. So I preached in our own preaching-house,
which contained the greater part of the congregation tolerably
well; among whom were Sir Henry Lyddal and his Lady, with
a great number of his servants. The chapel was hot as a stove;
but neither high nor low seemed to regard it: For God was
there ! The Orphan-House was equally crowded in the
evening; but the rain would not suffer me to preach abroad.
Mon. 7.--I transcribed the Stations of the Preachers.
Tuesday, 8. I wrote a form for settling the preaching
houses, without any superfluous words, which shall be used
for the time to come, verbatim, for all the Houses to which I
contribute anything. I will no more encourage that villanous
tautology of lawyers, which is the scandal of our nation. In
the evening I preached to the children of our Sunday-school;
six or seven hundred of whom were present. N. B. None
of our masters or mistresses teach for pay: They seek a
reward that man cannot give.
Wed. 9.-Having dispatched all the business I had to do
here, in the evening I took a solemn leave of this lovely
people; perhaps never to see them more in this life; and set
out early in the morning, Thursday, 10. About noon I
preached at Wolsingham, in a House throughly filled, on
Isaiah xxxv. 8; and in the evening in Weardale, which
hardly contained the congregation. The same spirit was still
in the congregation, that has been for many years; and
488 REv. J. Wesley’s [June, 1790.
many felt, the Lord’s hand is not shortened that it cannot
save, nor his ear heavy that it cannot hear.
Fri. 11.--About seven I preached at Stanhope; but no
House would contain the congregation. So I stood in a broad
place near the church; and enforced, “If any man thirst,
let him come unto me and drink.” In going through
Wolsingham, we called at Mr. W.’s, who was in low
circumstances till a few years ago, when many thousands
were heaped upon him unawares; and yet he seems to walk
unhurt in fire | What is too hard for God?
Hence we went on to Durham. Here likewise I was obliged
to preach in the open air, to a multitude of people, all of whom
were serious and attentive. Saturday, 12. We went through
a lovely country to Sunderland, where I preached in the
evening to a numerous congregation. Sunday, 13. In the
morning I preached a charity sermon in Monkwearmouth
church, for the Sunday-school; which has already cleared the
streets of all the children that used to play there on a Sunday
from morning to evening. I preached at five near the Pens,
to several thousands of people. Here, it is plain, our labour
has not been in vain.
Mon. 14.--In the evening I preached to as many as the
Town-Hall would contain at Hartlepool. Tuesday, 15. I
received a farther account of Mrs. B., from two that had lived
with her a year and a quarter; and was throughly convinced, that
she is a woman of strong sense, and a lively imagination; but
that she is given up to a strong delusion, (whether natural or
diabolical I know not,) to believe a lie. One proof may suffice:
Some time since, she told the community, as from God, that the
day of judgment would begin that evening. But how could she
come off when the event did not answer? Easily enough.
“Moses,” said she, “could not see the face of God, till he had
fasted forty days and forty nights. We must all do the same.”
So for three weeks they took no sustenance, but three gills of
water per day; and three weeks more, they took each three
gills of water-gruel per day. What a mercy that half of them
did not die in making the experiment
About noon I preached abroad to a large congregation, and
in the afternoon went on to Stockton. The congregation was
at least double to that at Hartlepool, all of whom seemed to feel
that God was there. Wednesday, 16. I preached in the main
street at Yarm, to a dull, attentive people. Thursday, 17.
June, 1790.] JOURNAL, 489
About noon I preached at Potto, to a deeply serious congrega
tion; and to another such in the evening at Hutton-Rudby.
Twenty years this society was a pattern to all the country for
seriousness and deep devotion. I think seventeen of them were
perfected in love; but only three of them remain, and most
of the rest are either removed, or grown cold and dead.
Fri. 18.--I preached at Stokesley in the morning; and
then went on to Whitby. It was very providential, that part
of the adjoining mountain fell down, and demolished our
old preaching-house, with many houses besides; by which
means we have one of the most beautiful chapels in Great
Britain, finely situated on the steep side of the mountain.
At six it was pretty well filled with such a congregation of
plain, earnest people, as is not often seen. I conversed with
many of them the next day, who were much alive to God.
Sunday, 20. The House contained us at seven tolerably well.
The church likewise was well filled. But in the evening we
were much straitened for room; but as many as could hear,
stood on the pavement without. In all England I have not
seen a more affectionate people than those at Whitby.
Mon. 21.--Being importuned by our friends at Malton to
call there, (it being but about thirty miles out of the way,) I
set out early, to prevent the heat of the day. Calling at
Pickering, some of the society soon found me out, with
whom I went to the preaching-house; which was full enough
in a few minutes’ time. So was the House at Malton, in the
evening; where I found the society more loving and united
together than they had been for many years.
Tues. 22.--I crossed over to Scarborough. The congrega
tion in the evening was unusually small, being not yet recovered
from the blessed fruits of the election. This was the hottest
day we have had this year: And about one in the afternoon,
the thunder, which had long lain at a distance, came near,
with thick flashes of lightning, and impetuous rain: The
thunder continued in one roll for an hour and a quarter. I
never heard the like before, since my return from America.
Thursday, 24. The Dissenting Minister offering me the use
of his chapel in Bridlington, twice as large as our own, (the wind
being too high for me to stand abroad,) I willingly accepted
his offer. Friday, 25. About noon I preached at Beverley, to
a serious, well-behaved congregation; and in the evening to
one equally serious, and far more numerous, at Hull.
490 REv. J. wesley’s [July, 1790.
Saturday, 26, was a day of satisfaction. I preached at seven
in the morning, and at six in the evening, to as many as our
House could contain ; the ground being too wet for the congre
gation to stand abroad. Monday, 28. This day I enter into
my eighty-eighth year. For above eighty-six years, I found
none of the infirmities of old age ; my eyes did not wax dim,
neither was my natural strength abated: But last August I
found almost a sudden change. My eyes were so dim, that no
glasses would help me. My strength likewise now quite forsook
me; and probably will not return in this world. But I feel no
pain from head to foot; only it seems nature is exhausted;
and, humanly speaking, will sink more and more, till
The weary springs of life stand still at last.
Tues. 29.--I crossed over through Epworth to Owstone,
and passed a comfortable day with many of the Preachers.
This, which was one of the last societies in the Circuit, is now
become first in grace, as well as number. The new preaching
house not being able to contain one-half of the congregation, I
preached abroad in the calm, mild evening; and I believe
God applied his word to many hearts.
Thur. JULY 1.--I went to Lincoln. After dinner we took a
walk in and round the Minster; which I really think is more
elegant than that at York, in various parts of the structure,
as well as in its admirable situation. The new House was
throughly filled in the evening, and with hearers uncommonly
serious. There seems to be a remarkable difference between
the people of Lincoln and those of York. They have not so
much fire and vigour of spirit ; but far more mildness and
gentleness; by means of which, if they had the same outward
helps, they would probably excel their neighbours.
Some miles short of Lincoln, our post-boy stopped at an
inn on the road, to give his horses a little water. As soon
as we went in, the innkeeper burst into tears, as did his wife;
wringing her hands, and weeping bitterly. “What!” he
said, “are you come into my house ! My father is John
Lester, of Epworth.” I found both he and his wife had
been of our society, till they left them. We spent some
time in prayer together; and I trust not in vain.
Fri. 2.--About eleven I preached at Newton; but the
preaching-house would not contain half the congregation. No
rain fell during the time of preaching; but it rained both
a
Aug. 1790.] JOURNAL. 491
before and after. I was struck with the preaching-house at
Gainsborough, (one of the handsomest towns in Lincolnshire,)
so neat, so elegant just taking up one side of a small, neat
Square. I found uncommon liberty of speech, and received it
as a token for good. Surely this poor society, which has been
so miserably depressed, will again lift up its head | Saturday,
3. I reached Epworth; and, after preaching in the evening,
met the society; and reminded them of what they were some
years ago, and what they are now ; scarce retaining the shadow
of their former zeal and activity in all the ways of God.
Sun. 4.--I went over to Misterton, where likewise the work
of God was exceedingly decayed. The House being far too
small to contain the multitude of people, I stood under a
spreading tree; and strongly exhorted them to “strengthen
the things that remained,” which were “ready to die.”
Thence I hastened back to Epworth; but I could not reach
it till the Church Service was begun. It was observed Mr.
Gibson read the Prayers with unusual solemnity; and I
believe he was not displeased to see five times as many at
church, and ten times as many at the Lord's table, as usual.
As soon as the Afternoon Service ended, I began in the market
place to press that awful question, “How shall we escape,
if we neglect so great salvation?” on such a congregation as
was never seen at Epworth before.
Fri. AUGUST 27.--I returned to Bristol. In the evening,
and at the watch-night, the House was sufficiently filled.
Finding the account of Mrs. Scudamore's life and death (an
excellent woman, though mistaken in this point) has revived in
some the imagination of the expiatory nature of sufferings,
and hence their absolute necessity to salvation, I discussed
the subject at large; and showed that both these notions had
their rise in Popery; and that neither the one nor the other
of them had any foundation in Scripture.
Sun. 29.--Mr. Baddiley being gone to the north, and Mr.
Collins being engaged elsewhere, I had none to assist in the
service, and could not read the Prayers myself; so I was
obliged to shorten the service, which brought the Prayers,
sermon, and Lord’s supper, within the compass of three hours.
I preached in the afternoon near King's Square; and the
hearts of the people bowed down before the Lord.
Mon. 30.-About noon I preached at Castle-Carey. Since
I was here God has taken to himself that amiable woman,
492 Rio v. J. WESLEY’s [Sept. 1790.
Mrs. Clark; who, to a fine person and a good understanding,
joined a very uncommon degree of deep religion. This
inclined me to apply earnestly Eccles. ix. 10; and all the
people seemed to feel it. Afterwards, I called on her deeply
afflicted husband, who spent some hours with us the next day.
I hope he will no longer sorrow as one without hope, but will
trust to meet her in a better place. In the evening I preached
in the new IHouse at Ditcheat. It would not hold the
congregation; but many could hear at the windows, which they
seemed right willing to do. A flame appears to be kindled
here already. God grant it may continue and increase !
Tuesday, 31. William Kingston, the man born without arms,
came to see me of his own accord. Some time since he
received a clear sense of the favour of God; but after some
months he was persuaded by some of his old companions to
join in a favourite diversion, whereby he lost sight of God, and
gave up all he had gained: But God now touched his heart
again, and he is once more in earnest to save his soul. He is
of a middling height and size, has a pleasing look and voice,
and an easy, agreeable behaviour. At breakfast he shook off
his shoes, which are made on purpose, took the tea-cup between
his toes, and the toast with his other foot. He likewise writes
a fair hand, and does most things with his feet which we do
with our hands. About noon I preached to a lovely congre
gation at Shepton-Mallet; and in the evening at Pensford.
The House was crowded with earnest hearers, and I trust the
word did not fall to the ground.
Wed. SEPTEMBER 1.--I returned to Bristol; and, it being
the first day of the fair, I spoke strongly from the words
of Solomon, “Buy the truth, and sell it not.” In the two
following days, I corrected and abridged the account of that
excellent woman, Mrs. Scudamore; a burning and shining
light, till the Mystics persuaded her to put her light under
a bushel : So that for above two years she renounced all
conversation with even her pious friends ! How does this
agree with Scripture? “All my delight is in the saints that
are on the earth, and with them that excel in virtue!”
How far was the experience of Jane Cooper, or Elizabeth
Harper, preferable to that of such a solitary !
Sat. 4.--I went on to Bath, and preached in the evening
to a serious, but small congregation, for want of notice.
Sunday, 5. At ten we had a numerous congregation, and
Sept. 1790.] JOURNAL. 493
more communicants than ever I saw here before. This day
I cut off that vile custom, I know not when or how it began,
of preaching three times a day by the same Preacher, to the
same congregation; enough to weary out both the bodies
and minds of the speaker, as well as his hearers. Surely God
is returning to this society | They are now in earnest to
make their calling and election sure.
Mon. 6.--This evening the congregation was almost as large
as it was the night before; and the power of God was mightily
present: And so it was on Tuesday and Wednesday evening
at Bristol. Thursday, 9. I read over the experience of
Joseph Humphrys; the first Lay Preacher that assisted me
in England, in the year 1738. From his own mouth I learn,
that he was perfected in love, and so continued for at least
a twelvemonth. Afterwards he turned Calvinist, and joined
Mr. Whitefield, and published an invective against my brother
and me in the newspaper. In a while he renounced Mr.
Whitefield, and was ordained a Presbyterian Minister. At
last he received Episcopal ordination. He then scoffed at
inward religion; and when reminded of his own experience,
replied, “That was one of the foolish things which I wrote in
the time of my madness l’”
Fri. 10.--I preached to a large congregation at Chew-Stoke,
nine miles from Bristol on those words in the Second Lesson,
“Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden;” and
in the evening at Mrs. Griffith's house.
Sun. 12.-I intended to preach abroad ; but the weather
would not permit. Monday, 13, and the three following days,
I met the classes of the society, which contains nine hundred
and forty-four members. Still I complain of false musters.
It was told in London that this society contained above a
thousand members; and yet it falls so far short of a thousand.
There is altogether a fault in this matter.
Thur. 16.--I was desired to see a monster properly
speaking. He was as large as the largest lion in the tower;
but covered with rough hair, of a brown colour; has the head
of a swine, and feet like a mole. It is plain to me, it was
begotten between a bear and a wild boar. He lives on fruit
and bread, chiefly the latter. The keeper handles him as he
pleases, putting his hand in his mouth, and taking hold
of his tongue; but he has a horrible roar, between that of a
lion and of a bull.
494 REv. J. wesley’s [Sept. 1790.
At the same time I saw a pelican. Is it not strange that we
have no true account or picture of this bird? It is one of the
most beautiful in nature; being indeed a large swan, almost
twice as big as a tame one; snow-white and elegantly shaped.
Only its neck is three quarters of a yard long, and capable
of being so distended as to contain two gallons of liquid or
solid. She builds her nest in some wood, not far from a river;
from which she daily brings a quantity of fish to her young:
This she carries in her neck, (the only pouch which she has,)
and then divides it among her young; and hence is fabricated
the idle tale of her feeding them with her blood.
Fri. 17.--I went over to Thornbury, and preached at noon
to a very large and deeply serious congregation. In the
evening we had a solemn watch-night at Kingswood. Satur
day, 18. I called upon Mr. Easterbrook, ill of a disorder which
no Physician understands, and which it seems God alone can
cure. He is a pattern to all Bristol, and indeed to all England;
having beside his other incessant labours, which never were
intermitted, preached in every house in his parish It was
while he was preaching in his own church, that he was suddenly
struck with a violent pain in his breast. This confounds all
the Physicians, and none of their medicines alter it.
Sun. 19.--Mr. Collins assisted me in the morning, so I had
an easy day’s work. Monday, 20, and the next day, I read
over the King of Sweden’s tract, upon the Balance of Power
in Europe. If it be really his, he is certainly one of the most
sensible, as well as one of the bravest, Princes in Europe;
and if his account be true, what a woman is the Czarina' But
still God is over all !
Wed. 22.--I preached once more in Temple church, on,
“All things are possible to him that believeth.”
Sat. 25.-Mr. Hay, the Presbyterian Minister of Lewens
mead meeting, came to desire me to let him have the use of
our preaching-house on Sundays, at those hours when we
did not use it ourselves, (near ten in the morning and two in
the afternoon,) while his House was re-building. To this
I willingly consented, and he preached an excellent sermon
there the next day at two. I preached at five in the morning
to more than the House would well contain.
Mon. 27.--I left Bristol; about eleven I preached in the
Devizes; and in the evening at Sarum. I do not know that
ever I saw the House so crowded before, with high and low,
- =
of.
o
-
§:
Oct. 1790.] JOURNAL. 495
rich and poor: So that I hope we shall again see fruit here
also.
Wed. 29.--About noon I preached at Winton. The congre
gation was larger than usual, and, what was stranger still,
seemed not a little affected How long have we cast our bread
upon the waters here ! And shall we find it again after many
days? In the evening I preached to a crowded and deeply
attentive congregation at Portsmouth-Common. Thursday,
30. It being a lovely morning, we went in a wherry, through
Cowes harbour, to Newport; one of the pleasantest, neatest,
and most elegant towns in the King's dominions. Both the
nights I preached here, the preaching-house would by no
means contain the congregation. I was likewise well pleased
with the poor, plain, artless society. Here, at least, we have not
lost our labour. Friday, October 1. We purposed to return
to Portsmouth, (about twenty miles,) it being a calm sun
shiny morning, in the wherry; but a friend offering us a
kind of hoy, we willingly accepted his offer. It was well he
did ; for as soon as we were out of the harbour, the wind rose,
and the sea raged horribly. The wherry would soon have
been swallowed up. The waves washed over us on both
sides. Having no decks, we were well soaked from head
to foot; but, before noon, we got safe to Portsmouth.
Sat. 2.-Setting out, as usual, at two, we came to Cobham
between ten and eleven ; and found a party of our friends
from London ready to receive us. We walked an hour in the
gardens; but the innkeeper informed us, strangers were not
admitted, unless on Tuesday and Friday. However, hearing
Mr. Hopkins was at home, I sent in my name, and desired
that favour; which was immediately granted. We spent an
hour very agreeably in those lovely walks; but still the eye
was not satisfied with seeing. An immortal spirit can be
satisfied with nothing but seeing God. In the afternoon we
went on to London.
Sunday, 3, was indeed a comfortable day. I preached at
the new chapel, morning and evening, with great enlargement
of spirit. At the love-feast which followed, great was our
rejoicing; many declared what God had done for their souls;
and many were filled with consolation.
Having answered my letters, and finished my other little
business for the present, on Tuesday, 5, I went to Rye.
Though the warning was short, the congregation was exceeding
496 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Oct. 1790.
large, and behaved with remarkable seriousness. While our
people mixed with the Calvinists here, we were always
perplexed, and gained no ground; but since they kept to
themselves, they have continually increased in grace as well
as in number. I was now informed how signally God had
overtaken that wretch who murdered Mr. Haddock some
years since. Being lately overtaken by Captain Bray in one
of the King's cutters, he made a desperate resistance; and
even when boarded, fought still, and drew a pistol at Captain
Bray; who then hewed him in pieces with his cutlass.
Thur. 7.--I went over to that poor skeleton of ancient
Winchelsea. It is beautifully situated on the top of a steep
hill, and was regularly built in broad streets, crossing each
other, and encompassing a very large Square; in the midst of
which was a large church, now in ruins. I stood under a
large tree, on the side of it, and called to most of the
inhabitants of the town, “The kingdom of heaven is at hand;
repent, and believe the Gospel.” It seemed as if all that heard
were, for the present, almost persuaded to be Christians.
Here an eminently pious woman, Mrs. Jones, at whose house
I stopped, gave me a very strange account:--Many years since
she was much hurt in lying-in. She had various Physicians,
but still grew worse and worse; till, perceiving herself to be no
better, she left them off. She had a continual pain in her groin,
with such a prolapsis uteri, as soon confined her to her bed:
There she lay two months, helpless and hopeless; till a thought
came one day into her mind, “Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst
make me whole ! Be it according to thy will !” Immediately
the pain and the disorder ceased. Feeling herself well, sherose,
and dressed herself. Her husband coming in, and seeing her
in tears, asked, “Are those tears of sorrow or joyo” She said,
“Of joy!” on which they wept together. From that hour she
felt no pain, but enjoyed perfect health. I think our Lord
never wrought a plainer miracle, even in the days of his flesh.
In the evening I preached once more at Rye; and the word
did not fall to the ground. In the morning we left this loving,
well-united people, and dined at Sevenoaks. After dinner, we
spent an hour in the Duke of Dorset's house. I could not but
observe some change for the worse here. The silk covers are
removed from several of the pictures, particularly that of Count
|Ugolino and his sons; and it is placed in a worse light; so that
Icould hardly discern the little boy that, when he saw his father
l Oct. 1790.] JOURNAL. 497
o
o
gnawing his own arm for anguish, cried out, “Papa, if you
are hungry, do not eat your own arm, but mine.” The
preaching-house was filled in the evening with people, and
with the presence of God.
Sat. 9.--We returned to London. Monday, 11. I went
on to Colchester, and still found matter of humiliation. The
society was lessened, and cold enough; preaching again was
discontinued, and the spirit of Methodism quite gone, both
from the Preachers and the people. Yet we had a wonderful
congregation in the evening, rich and poor, Clergy and laity.
So we had likewise on Tuesday evening. So that I trust
God will at length build up the waste places.
Wed. 13.--We set out early, but found no horses at Cob
dock; so that we were obliged to go round by Ipswich, and
wait there half an hour. Nevertheless, we got to Norwich
between two and three. In the way we read Captain Carrel's
Travels, admirably well wrote, and giving, I believe, a just
account of .he interior parts of North-America. Here is no
gay account of the Islands of Pelew, or Lapita, but a plain
relation of matter of fact. Surely eastern and western
savages are much alike; and some good might be found in
the east as well as the west. But to see nature in perfection,
either at Pelew, or elsewhere, we need only look on the
savages at Fort-William Henry, butchering, in cold blood
so many hundreds of helpless, unresisting men, in the very
spirit of the old murderer.
In the evening I preached at Norwich; but the House
would in no wise contain the congregation. How wonderfully
is the tide turned 1 I am become an honourable man at
Norwich. God has at length made our enemies to be at
peace with us; and scarce any but Antinomians open their
mouth against us.
Thur. 14.--I went to Yarmouth; and, at length, found a
society in peace, and much united together. In the evening
the congregation was too large to get into the preaching-house;
yet they were far less noisy than usual. After supper a little
company went to prayer, and the power of God fell upon us;
especially when a young woman broke out into prayer, to
the surprise and comfort of us all. Friday, 15. I went to
Lowestoft, to a steady, loving, well-united society. The more
strange it is, that they neither increase nor decrease in number.
498 REv. J. WESLEY’s [Oct. 1790.
Saturday, 16. I preached at Loddon about one; and at six
in Norwich. Sunday, 17. At seven I administered the
Lord's Supper to about one hundred and fifty persons, near
twice as many as we had last year. I take knowledge that
he last year's Preachers were in earnest. Afterwards we went
2 our own parish church; although there was no sermon
Tere, nor at any of the thirty-six churches in the town, save
he cathedral and St. Peter's. I preached at two. When I
had done, Mr. Horne called upon me, who preached at the
cathedral in the morning; an agreeable man, both in temper
and person; and, I believe, much alive to God. At half an
hour after five I preached again, to as many as the House
would contain; and even those that could not get in stayed
more quiet and silent than ever I saw them before. Indeed
they all seemed to know that God was there; and I have no
doubt but he will revive his work here also.
Mon. 18.--No coach going out for Lynn to-day, I was
obliged to take a post-chaise. But at Dereham no horses
were to be had ; so we were obliged to take the same horses to
Swaffham. A congregation was ready here, that filled the
House, and seemed quite ready to receive instruction. But
here neither could we procure any post-horses; so that we
were obliged to take a single-horse chaise. The wind, with
mizzling rain, came full in our faces; and we had nothing
to screen us from it; so that I was throughly chilled from
head to foot before I came to Lynn. But I soon forgot
this little inconvenience; for which the earnestness of the
congregation made me large amends.
Tues. 19.--In the evening all the Clergymen in the town,
except one who was lame, were present at the preaching.
They are all prejudiced in favour of the Methodists; as indeed
are most of the townsmen; who give a fair proof by contri
buting so much to our Sunday-schools; so that there is near
twenty pounds in hand. Wednesday, 20. I had appointed
to preach at Diss; a town near Scoleton; but the difficulty
was, where I could preach. The Minister was willing I
should preach in the church, but feared offending the Bishop,
who, going up to London, was within a few miles of the town.
But a gentleman asking the Bishop whether he had any
objection to it, was answered, “None at all.” I think this
church is one of the largest in this county. I suppose it has
Oct. 1790.] JOURNAL, 499
not been so filled these hundred years. This evening and the
next I preached at Bury, to a deeply attentive congregation,
many of whom know in whom they have believed. So that
here we have not lost all our labour. Friday, 22. We
returned to London.
Sun. 24.--I explained, to a numerous congregation in
Spitalfields church, “the whole armour of God.” St. Paul’s,
Shadwell, was still more crowded in the afternoon, while I
enforced that important truth, “One thing is needful;” and
I hope many, even then, resolved to choose the better part.
END OF MR. wesley's Journal.
§n the name of 650b, 3mem.
I, JOHN WESLEY, Clerk, some time Fellow of Lincoln
College, Oxford, revoking all others, appoint this to be my last
Will and Testament.
I give all my books, now on sale, and the copies of them,
(only subject to a rent-charge of eighty-five pounds a year,
to the widow and children of my brother,) to my faithful
friends, John Horton, Merchant; George Wolff, Merchant;
and William Marriott, Stock-Broker, all of London, in trust,
for the general Fund of the Methodist Conference, in carrying
on the work of God, by Itinerant Preachers; on condition
that they permit the following Committee, Thomas Coke,
James Creighton, Peard Dickenson, Thomas Rankin, George
Whitfield, and the London Assistant, for the time being, still
to superintend the printing-press, and to employ Hannah
Paramore and George Paramore, as heretofore ; unless four
of the Committee judge a change to be needful.
I give the books, furniture, and whatever else belongs to
me in the three houses at Kingswood, in trust, to Thomas
Coke, Alexander Mather, and Henry Moore, to be still
employed in teaching and maintaining the children of poor
Travelling Preachers.
I give to Thomas Coke, Doctor John Whitehead, and
Henry Moore, all the books which are in my study and bed
chamber at London, and in my studies elsewhere, in trust,
for the use of the Preachers who shall labour there from time
to time.
I give the coins, and whatever else is found in the drawer
of my bureau at London, to my dear grand-daughters, Mary
and Jane Smith.
I give all my manuscripts to Thomas Coke, Doctor White
head, and Henry Moore, to be burned or published as they
see good.
o:
&
o
MR. WESLEY'S LAN'l WILL AND TESTAMENT. 501
I give whatever money remains in my bureau and pockets,
at my decease, to be equally divided between Thomas Briscoe,
William Collins, John Easton, and Isaac Brown.
I desire my gowns, cassocks, sashes, and bands, may
remain in the chapel for the use of the Clergymen attending
there.
I desire the London Assistant, for the time being, to divide
the rest of my wearing apparel between those four of the
Travelling Preachers that want it most; only my pelisse I
give to the Rev. Mr. Creighton; my watch to my friend
Joseph Bradford; my gold seal to Elizabeth Ritchie.
I give my chaise and horses to James Ward and Charles
Wheeler, in trust, to be sold, and the money to be divided,
one half to Hannah Abbott, and the other to the members of
the select society.
Out of the first money which arises from the sale of books,
I bequeath to my dear sister, Martha Hall, (if alive,) forty
pounds; to Mr. Creighton aforesaid, forty pounds; and to the
Rev. Mr. Heath, sixty pounds.
And whereas I am empowered, by a late Deed, to name
the persons who are to preach in the new chapel, at London,
(the Clergymen for a continuance,) and by another Deed, to
name a Committee for appointing Preachers, in the new
chapel, at Bath, I do hereby appoint John Richardson,
Thomas Coke, James Creighton, Peard Dickenson, Clerks;
Alexander Mather, William Thompson, Henry Moore,
Andrew Blair, John Walton, Joseph Bradford, James Rogers,
and William Myles, to preach in the new chapel at London,
and to be the Committee for appointing Preachers in the new
chapel at Bath.
I likewise appoint Henry Brooke, Painter; Arthur Keene,
Gent. ; and William Whitestone, Stationer, all of Dublin, to
receive the annuity of five pounds, (English,) left to
Kingswood School, by the late Roger Shiel, Esq.-
I give six pounds to be divided among the six poor men,
named by the Assistant, who shall carry my body to the grave;
for I particularly desire there may be no hearse, no coach, no
escutcheon, no pomp, except the tears of them that loved me,
and are following me to Abraham’s bosom. I solemnly adjure
my Executors, in the name of God, punctually to observe this.
Lastly, I give to each of those Travelling Preachers who
502 THIRD codicil of MR. wesley's will.
shall remain in the Connexion six months after my decease,
as a little token of my love, the eight volumes of sermons.
I appoint John Horton, George Wolff, and William
Marriott, aforesaid, to be Executors of this my last Will and
Testament; for which trouble they will receive no recompence
till the resurrection of the just.
Witness my hand and seal, the 20th day of February, 1789.4
JOHN WESLEY. (Seal.)
Signed, sealed, and delivered, by the said Testator, as and
for his last Will and Testament, in the presence of us,
Should there be any part of my personal estate undisposed
of by this my last Will, I give the same unto my two nieces,
E. Ellison, and S. Collet, equally.
Feb. 25, 1789.
I give my types, printing-presses, and everything pertaining
thereto, to Mr. Thomas Rankin, and Mr. George Whitfield,
in trust, for the use of the Conference.
* “Above a year and a half after making this Will, Mr. Wesley executed a Deed,
in which he appointed seven gentlemen, viz., Dr. Thomas Coke, Messrs. Alexander
Mather, Peard Dickenson, John Walton, James Rogers, Joseph Taylor, and Adam
Clarke, Trustees for all his books, pamphlets, and copyrights, for carrying on the
work of God by Itinerant Preachers, according to the Deed of Declaration enrolled
in the High Court of Chancery: But Dr. Coke being in America at the time of
Mr. Wesley's death, the Deed was suffered to lie dormant till his return. The
three Executors then took the advice of two of the most eminent Counsellors in
the kingdom, who informed them, that the Deed was of a testamentary nature,
and therefore superseded the Will, with respect to the books, &c. The Deed was
then presented to the Judge of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury, who received
it as the third Codicil of Mr. Wesley's Will; on which the three Executors
delivered up their general Probate, and received a new one, limited to those
particulars which were not mentioned in the Deed. At the same time a Probate
was granted by the Court to the seven Trustees, constituting them Executors for
all the books, pamphlets, and copyrights, of which Mr. Wesley died possessed;
and empowering them to pay all his debts and legacies.”--EDIT.
o
o:
o
ENRolled IN His MAJESTY's HIGH courT OF CHANCERY.
Co all to subom thege 33rtgents gball come, JOHN WESLEY,
late of Lincoln College, Oxford, but now of the City-Road,
London, Clerk, sendeth greeting:--
{{H}treag divers buildings, commonly called chapels, with a mes
suage and dwelling-house, or other appurtenances, to each of
the same belonging, situate in various parts of Great Britain,
have been given and conveyed, from time to time, by the
said John Wesley, to certain persons and their heirs, in each
of the said gifts and conveyances named; which are enrolled
in His Majesty’s High Court of Chancery, upon the acknow
ledgment of the said John Wesley (pursuant to the Act of
Parliament in that case made and provided); upon trust, that
the Trustees in the said several Deeds respectively named,
and the survivors of them, and their heirs and assigns, and
the Trustees for the time being, to be elected as in the said
Deeds is appointed, should permit and suffer the said John
Wesley, and such other person and persons as he should for
that purpose from time to time nominate and appoint, at all
times during his life, at his will and pleasure to have and
enjoy the free use and benefit of the said premises, that he
the said John Wesley, and such person and persons as he
should nominate and appoint, might therein preach and
expound God’s Holy Word; and upon further trust, that
the said respective Trustees, and the survivors of them, and
their heirs and assigns, and the Trustees for the time being,
should permit and suffer Charles Wesley, brother of the said
John Wesley, and such other person and persons as the said
Charles Wesley should for that purpose from time to time
nominate and appoint, in like manner during his life, to
have, use, and enjoy the said premises respectively, for the
like purposes as aforesaid; and after the decease of the sur
vivor of them, the said John Wesley and Charles Wesley,
then upon further trust, that the said respective Trustees, and
the survivors of them, and their heirs and assigns, and the
Trustees for the time being for ever, should permit and suffer
such person and persons, and for such time and times, as
should be appointed at the yearly Conference of the people
called Methodists, in London, Bristol, or Leeds, and no
others, to have and enjoy the said premises for the purposes
aforesaid: And whereas divers persons have, in like manner,
given or conveyed many chapels, with messuages and
dwelling-houses, or other appurtenances, to the same
belonging, situate in various parts of Great Britain, and also
in Ireland, to certain Trustees, in each of the said gifts
and conveyances respectively named, upon the like trusts,
and for the same uses and purposes as aforesaid (except only
that in some of the said gifts and conveyances, no life-estate
or other interest is therein or thereby given and reserved to
the said Charles Wesley): And whereas, for rendering
effectual the trusts created by the said several gifts or
conveyances, and that no doubt or litigation may arise with
respect unto the same, or the interpretation and true meaning
thereof, it has been thought expedient by the said John
Wesley, on behalf of himself as donor of the several chapels,
with the messuages, dwelling-houses, or appurtenances,
before-mentioned, as of the donors of the said other chapels,
with the messuages, dwelling-houses, or appurtenances, to
the same belonging, given or conveyed to the like uses and
trusts, to explain the words, “Yearly Conference of the
people called Methodists,” contained in all the said Trust
Deeds, and to declare what persons are members of the
said Conference, and how the succession and identity
thereof is to be continued:--
footu tsjertfort ti)tāt pregents suitmegg, that, for accomplishing the
aforesaid purposes, the said John Wesley doth hereby
declare, that the Conference of the people called Methodists,
in London, Bristol, or Leeds, ever since there hath been
any yearly Conference of the said people called Methodists
in any of the said places, hath always heretofore consisted
of the Preachers and Expounders of God’s Holy Word,
commonly called Methodist Preachers, in connexion with, and
under the care of, the said John Wesley, whom he hath
thought expedient year after year to summons to meet him,
in one or other of the said places, of London, Bristol, or
Leeds, to advise with them for the promotion of the Gospel
*:: of Christ, to appoint the said persons so summoned, and the
, is other Preachers and Expounders of God’s Holy Word,
o: also in connexion with, and under the care of, the said
20 John Wesley, not summoned to the said yearly Conference,
o to the use and enjoyment of the said chapels and premises
o, so given and conveyed upon trust for the said John Wesley,
c and such other person and persons as he should appoint
3: during his life as aforesaid, and for the expulsion of
* unworthy and admission of new persons under his care, and
: into his connexion, to be Preachers and Expounders as
o aforesaid, and also of other persons upon trial for the like
i purposes; the names of all which persons so summoned by
o the said John Wesley, the persons appointed, with the
o chapels and premises to which they were so appointed,
o: together with the duration of such appointments, and of
o those expelled or admitted into connexion or upon trial,
o with all other matters transacted and done at the said
o yearly Conference, have, year by year, been printed and
o:
published under the title of “Minutes of Conference.”
£Int, these pregents further suitmegg, and the said JohnWesley doth
hereby avouch and further declare, that the several persons
o herein-after named, to wit, the said John Wesley and Charles
o Wesley; Thomas Coke, of the city of London, Doctor of
ors Civil Law; James Creighton, of the same place, Clerk;
to Thomas Tennant, of the same place; Thomas Rankin,
of the same place; Joshua Keighley, of Sevenoaks, in the
county of Kent; James Wood, of Rochester, in the said
county of Kent; John Booth, of Colchester; Thomas
Cooper, of the same place; Richard Whatcoat, of Norwich;
Jeremiah Brettel, of Lynn, in the county of Norfolk;
Jonathan Parkin, of the same place; Joseph Pescod, of
Bedford; Christopher Watkins, of Northampton; John
Barber, of the same place; John Broadbent, of Oxford;
Joseph Cole, of the same place; Jonathan Cousins, of the
city of Gloucester; John Brettel, of the same place; John
Mason, of Salisbury; George Story, of the same place;
- Francis Wrigley, of St. Austle, in the county of Cornwall;
o William Green, of the city of Bristol; John Moon, of
Plymouth-Dock; James Hall, of the same place; James
o Thom, of St. Austle, aforesaid; Joseph Taylor, of Redruth,
| in the said county of Cornwall; William Hoskins, of
Go Cardiff, Glamorganshire; John Leech, of Brecon; William
Saunders, of the same place; Richard Rodda, of Birming
ham; John Fenwick, of Burslem, Staffordshire; Thomas
Hanby, of the same place; James Rogers, of Macclesfield;
Samuel Bardsley, of the same place; John Murlin, of
Manchester; William Percival, of the same place; Duncan
Wright, of the city of Chester; John Goodwin, of the
same place; Parson Greenwood, of Liverpool; Zechariah
Udall, of the same place; Thomas Vasey, of the same
place; Joseph Bradford, of Leicester; Jeremiah Robert
shaw, of the same place; William Myles, of Nottingham;
Thomas Longley, of Derby; Thomas Taylor, of Sheffield;
William Simpson, of the same place; Thomas Carlill, of
Grimsby, in the county of Lincoln; Robert Scott, of the
same place; Joseph Harper, of the same place; Thomas
Corbit, of Gainsborough, in the county of Lincoln; James
Ray, of the same place; William Thompson, of Leeds, in
the county of York; Robert Roberts, of the same place;
Samuel Bradburn, of the same place; John Walton, of
Birstal, in the said county; John Allen, of the same place;
Isaac Brown, of the same place; Thomas Hanson, of Hud
dersfield, in the said county; John Shaw, of the same place;
Alexander Mather, of Bradford, in the said county; Joseph
Benson, of Halifax, in the said county; William Dufton,
of the same place; Benjamin Rhodes, of Keighley, in the
said county; John Easton, of Colne, in the county of
Lancaster; Robert Costerdine, of the same place; Jasper
Robinson, of the Isle of Man; George Button, of the same
place; John Pawson, of the city of York; Edward
Jackson, of Hull; Charles Atmore, of the said city of
York; Lancelot Harrison, of Scarborough; George Shad
ford, of Hull, aforesaid; Barnabas Thomas, of the same
place; Thomas Briscoe, of Yarm, in the said county of
York; Christopher Peacock, of the same place; William
Thom, of Whitby, in the said county of York; Robert
Hopkins, of the same place; John Peacock, of Barnard
Castle; William Collins, of Sunderland; Thomas Dixon,
of Newcastle-upon-Tyne; Christopher Hopper, of the same
place; William Boothby, of the same place; William
IHunter, of Berwick-upon-Tweed; Joseph Saunderson, of
Dundee, Scotland; William Warrener, of the same place;
Luncan M*Allum, of Aberdeen, Scotland; Thomas
Rutherford, of the city of Dublin, in the kingdom of Ireland;
Daniel Jackson, of the same place; Henry Moore, of the
city of Cork, Ireland; Andrew Blair, of the same place;
Richard Watkinson, of Limerick, Ireland; Nehemiah
Price, of Athlone, Ireland; Robert Lindsay, of Sligo,
Ireland; George Brown, of Clones, Ireland; Thomas
Barber, of Charlemont, Ireland; Henry Foster, of Belfast,
Ireland; and John Crook, of Lisburne, Ireland, Gentle
men; being Preachers and Expounders of God’s Holy
Word, under the care and in connexion with the said
John Wesley, have been, and now are, and do, on the day
of the date hereof, constitute the members of the said Con
ference, according to the true intent and meaning of the
said several gifts and conveyances wherein the words,
Conference of the people called Methodists, are mentioned
and contained; and that the said several persons before
named, and their successors for ever, to be chosen as here
after mentioned, are and shall for ever be construed, taken,
and be, the Conference of the people called Methodists.
Nevertheless, upon the terms, and subject to the regulations
herein-after prescribed; that is to say,
First, That the members of the said Conference, and their
successors for the time being for ever, shall assemble once
in every year, at London, Bristol, or Leeds, (except as
after-mentioned,) for the purposes aforesaid; and the time
and place of holding every subsequent Conference shall be
appointed at the preceding one, save that the next Confer
ence after the date hereof shall be holden at Leeds, in
Yorkshire, the last Tuesday in July next.
Second, The act of the majority in number of the Conference
assembled as aforesaid, shall be had, taken, and be the act
of the whole Conference, to all intents, purposes, and
constructions whatsoever.
Third, That after the Conference shall be assembled as afore
said, they shall first proceed to fill up all the vacancies
occasioned by death or absence, as after-mentioned.
Fourth, No act of the Conference assembled as aforesaid, shall
be had, taken, or be the act of the Conference, until forty
of the members thereof are assembled, unless reduced under
that number by death since the prior Conference, or absence
as after-mentioned; nor until all the vacancies occasioned by
death or absence shall be filled up by the election of new
members of the Conference, so as to make up the number
one hundred, unless there be not a sufficient number of
persons objects of such election; and during the assembly
of the Conference, there shall always be forty members
present at the doing of any act, save as aforesaid, or
otherwise such act shall be void.
Fifth, The duration of the yearly assembly of the Conference
shall not be less than five days, nor more than three weeks,
and be concluded by the appointment of the Conference,
if under twenty-one days; or otherwise the conclusion
thereof shall follow of course at the end of the said twenty
one days; the whole of all which said time of the assembly
of the Conference shall be had, taken, considered, and be
the yearly Conference of the people called Methodists;
and all acts of the Conference, during such yearly assembly
thereof, shall be the acts of the Conference, and none other.
Sixth, Immediately after all the vacancies occasioned by death
or absence are filled up by the election of new members as
aforesaid, the Conference shall choose a President and
Secretary of their assembly out of themselves, who shall
continue such until the election of another President or
Secretary in the next, or other subsequent Conference; and
the said President shall have the privilege and power
of two members in all acts of the Conference during his
presidency, and such other powers, privileges, and authorities,
as the Conference shall from time to time see fit to entrust
into his hands.
Seventh, Any member of the Conference absenting himself
from the yearly assembly thereof for two years successively,
without the consent or dispensation of the Conference, and
be not present on the first day of the third yearly assembly
thereof, at the time and place appointed for the holding
of the same, shall cease to be a member of the Conference
from and after the said first day of the said third yearly
assembly thereof, to all intents and purposes, as though he
were maturally dead. But the Conference shall and may
dispense with or consent to the absence of any member
from any of the said yearly assemblies for any cause which
the Conference may see fit or necessary; and such member,
whose absence shall be so dispensed with or consented to
by the Conference, shall not by such absence cease to be a
member thereof.
Eighth, The Conference shall and may expel and put out
o:
from being a member thereof, or from being in connexion
therewith, or from being upon trial, any person, member
of the Conference, or admitted into connexion, or upon trial,
for any cause which to the Conference may seem fit or
necessary; and every member of the Conference so expelled
and put out, shall cease to be a member thereof, to all
intents and purposes, as though he was naturally dead.
And the Conference, immediately after the expulsion of
any member thereof as aforesaid, shall elect another person
to be a member of the Conference, in the stead of such
member so expelled.
Ninth, The Conference shall and may admit into connexion
with them, or upon trial, any person or persons whom they
shall approve, to be Preachers and Expounders of God’s
Holy Word, under the care and direction of the Confer
ence; the name of every such person or persons so admitted
into connexion or upon trial as aforesaid, with the time and
degrees of the admission, being entered in the Journals or
Minutes of the Conference.-
Tenth, No person shall be elected a member of the Confer
ence, who hath not been admitted into connexion with the
Conference, as a Preacher and Expounder of God’s Holy
Word, as aforesaid, for twelve months.
Eleventh, The Conference shall not, nor may, nominate or
appoint any person to the use and enjoyment of, or to preach
and expound God’s Holy Word in, any of the chapels and
premises so given or conveyed, or which may be given or
conveyed upon the trusts aforesaid, who is not either a
member of the Conference, or admitted into connexion with
the same, or upon trial as aforesaid; mor appoint any person
for more than three years successively, to the use and
enjoyment of any chapel and premises already given, or to
be given or conveyed, upon the trusts aforesaid, except
ordained Ministers of the Church of England.
Twelfth, That the Conference shall and may appoint the place
of holding the yearly assembly thereof, at any other city,
town, or place, than London, Bristol, or Leeds, when it
shall seem expedient so to do.
Thirteenth, And for the convenience of the chapels and pre
mises already, or which may hereafter be, given or conveyed
upon the trusts aforesaid, situate in Ireland, or other parts
out of the kingdom of Great Britain, the Conference shall
and may, when and as often as it shall seem expedient, but
not otherwise, appoint and delegate any member or members
of the Conference, with all or any of the powers, privileges,
and advantages, herein-before contained or vested in the
Conference; and all and every the acts, admissions, expul
sions, and appointments whatsoever of such member or
members of the Conference, so appointed and delegated as
aforesaid, the same being put into writing, and signed by
such delegate or delegates, and entered in the Journals or
Minutes of the Conference, and subscribed as after
mentioned, shall be deemed, taken, and be, the acts, admis
sions, expulsions, and appointments of the Conference, to
all intents, constructions, and purposes whatsoever, from
the respective times when the same shall be done by such
delegate or delegates; notwithstanding anything herein
contained to the contrary.
Fourteenth, All resolutions and orders touching elections,
admissions, expulsions, consents, dispensations, delegations,
or appointments and acts whatsoever of the Conference, shall
be entered and written in the Journals or Minutes of the
Conference, which shall be kept for that purpose, publicly
read, and then subscribed by the President and Secretary
thereof for the time being, during the time such Conference
shall be assembled; and when so entered and subscribed,
shall be had, taken, received, and be, the acts of the Confer
ence, and such entry and subscription as aforesaid shall be
had, taken, received, and be, evidence of all and every such
acts of the said Conference, and of their said delegates,
without the aid of any other proof; and whatever shall not
be so entered and subscribed as aforesaid, shall not be had,
taken, received, or be, the act of the Conference: And the
said President and Secretary are hereby required and
obliged to enter and subscribe, as aforesaid, every act
whatever of the Conference.
Lastly, Whenever the said Conference shall be reduced under
the number of forty members, and continue so reduced for
three yearly assemblies thereof successively, or whenever the
members thereof shall decline or neglect to meet together
annually for the purposes aforesaid, during the space of three
years, that then, and in either of the said events, the Confer
ence of the people called Methodists shall be extinguished,
and all the aforesaid powers, privileges, and advantages shall
cease, and the said chapels and premises, and all other
chapels and premises, which now are, or hereafter may be,
settled, given, or conveyed, upon the trusts aforesaid, shall
vest in the Trustees for the time being of the said chapels
and premises respectively, and their successors for ever;
Upon TRUST that they, and the survivors of them, and the
Trustees for the time being, do, shall, and may appoint such
person and persons to preach and expound God’s Holy
Word therein, and to have the use and enjoyment thereof,
for such time, and in such manner, as to them shall seem
proper.
33robiott alsoaps, that nothing herein contained shall extend,
or be construed to extend, to extinguish, lessen, or abridge
the life-estate of the said John Wesley and Charles Wesley,
or either of them, of and in any of the said chapels and
premises, or any other chapels and premises, wherein they
the said John Wesley and Charles Wesley, or either of
them, now have, or may have, any estate or interest, power
or authority whatsoever.
§n suitmegg subtreof, the said John Wesley hath hereunto set
his hand and seal, the twenty-eighth day of February,
in the twenty-fourth year of the reign of our Sovereign
Lord George the Third, by the grace of God of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith,
and so forth, and in the year of our Lord one thousand
seven hundred and eighty-four.
Sealed and delivered (being first duly stamped) }
in the presence of
WILLIAM CLULow, Quality Court, Chancery-Lane, London.
RICHARD YouNG, Clerk to the said William Clulow.
Taken and acknowledged by the Rev. John Wesley, party
hereto, this 28th of February, 1784, at the Public Office,
before me,
The above is a true Copy of the original Deed, (which is
enrolled in Chancery,) and was therewith examined by us,
Dated Feb. 28th, 1784.
The Rev. John Wesley’s Declaration and Appointment of
the Conference of the people called Methodists, enrolled in
His Majesty’s High Court of Chancery, the ninth day of
March, in the year of our Lord 1784, being first duly
stamped according to the tenor of the Statutes, made for
that purpose.
o: ...”
|-
----- - - ------ ------ - - - ---- ___. _
- - -
- - -- -- ---------- ----
‘.
,”-
3 1293 03039 5754