To the Editor of the 'London Chronicle'
Date: January 2, 1761,
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1761)
Author: John Wesley
---
SIR, --Of all the seats of woe on this side hell few, I suppose, exceed or even equal Newgate. If any region of horror could exceed it a few years ago, Newgate in Bristol did; so great was the filth, the stench, the misery, and wickedness which shocked all who had a spark of humanity left. How was I surprised, then, when I was there a few weeks ago! (1) Every part of it, above stairs and below, even the pit wherein the felons are confined at night, is as clean and sweet as a gentleman's house; it being now a rule that every prisoner wash and clean his apartment throughly twice a week. (2) Here is no fighting or brawling. If any thinks himself ill-used, the cause is immediately referred to the Keeper, who hears the contending parties face to face and decides the affair at once. (3) The usual grounds of quarrelling are removed; for it is very rarely that any one cheats or wrongs another, as being sure, if anything of this kind is discovered, to be committed to a closer confinement. (4) Here is no drunkenness suffered, however advantageous it might be to the Keeper as well as the tapster. (5) Nor any whoredom, the women prisoners being narrowly observed and kept separate from the men; nor is any woman of the town now admitted --no, not at any price. (6) All possible care is taken to prevent idleness: those who are willing to work at their callings are provided with tools and materials, partly by the Keeper, who gives them credit at a very moderate profit; partly by the alms occasionally given, which are divided with the utmost prudence and impartiality. Accordingly at this time, among others, a shoemaker, a tailor, a brazier, and a coachmaker are working at their several trades. (7) Only on the Lord's Day they neither work nor play, but dress themselves as clean as they can, to attend the public service in the chapel, at which every person under the roof is present. None is excused unless sick; in which case he is provided gratis both with advice and medicines. (8) And, in order to assist them in things of the greatest concern (besides a sermon every Sunday and Thursday), they have a large Bible chained on one side of the chapel, which any of the prisoners may read. By the blessing of God on these regulations the prison now has a new face: nothing offends either the eye or ear; and the whole has the appearance of a quiet, serious family. And does not the Keeper [Samuel Johnson, in his Lives of the Poets, says that Abel Dagge, the keeper, treated savage with the utmost tenderness and civility, when confined in Newgate jail, Bristol, for debt. Dagge was one of the firstfruits of Whitefield's ministry in Bristol prison in 1737, and adorned his profession. see Journal, ii. 173; Life and Times of the Countess of Huntingdon, ii. 356-7; and letter of May 7, 1739.] of Newgate deserve to be remembered full as well as the Man of Ross? May the Lord remember him in that day! Meantime will not one follow his example? --I am, sir,
Your humble servant.