To Miss March
Date: COCKHILL, IRELAND, June 25, 1771.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1771)
Author: John Wesley
---
Undoubtedly the reward which is purchased for us by the blood of the covenant will be proportioned to what we are (through grace), what we do, and what we suffer. Whatever, therefore, prevents our doing good prevents our receiving so full a reward; and what can countervail that loss It is certainly right that we should bear one another's burthens; that we should weep with them that weep, and for them that weep not for themselves. 'When Jesus saw them weeping, He troubled Himself.' He willingly sustained that emotion; He voluntarily suffered that sorrow; and it is good for us to tread in His steps. 'But how far' Just so far as does not disqualify us for any other part of our duty; so far as softens, not unnerves, the mind, as makes us more, not less, zealous of good works.

Undoubtedly there are various kinds and various degrees of communion with God. We cannot confine it to one only; it may take in the exercise of every affection, either single or variously mixed together; and may run through all our outward employments. The most desirable prayer is that where we can quite pour out our soul and freely talk with God. But it is not this alone which is acceptable to Him. 'I love one,' said an holy man, 'that perseveres in dry duty.' Beware of thinking even this is labour lost. God does much work in the heart even at those seasons.

And when the soul, sighing to be approved,

Says, 'Could I love,' and stops, God writeth, 'Loved!'

And yet the comfort is that you need not rest here: you may go on until all your heart is love; till you 'rejoice evermore, pray without ceasing, and in everything give thanks.' You know this is the will of God concerning you in Christ Jesus.

I think Molly Penington [See letters of May 30, 1771, and Sept. 16, 1780.] enjoys this, and grows in grace continually. So do two or three more members in this Society. But they sadly want more searching preachers, and those that would help them forward by explaining the deep things of God.

Peace be with your spirit.