To Dr. Burton
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1736)
Author: John Wesley
---
ON BOARD THR SHIP ' SIMMONDS,' January 20, 1736.

HONOURED SIR,--Your prayers have not been in vain, for God hath greatly prospered us ever since we set out from London. We have wanted no manner of thing that is good. Plenty of temporal conveniences have been added to higher blessings, even those which we least expected. In the midst of the sick our health has been preserved. When the strong men fainted, and the experienced in this way of life fell down, I was not more affected than if I had been on land, nor ever prevented for one hour from reading, writing, or pursuing any other employment.

Whilst we were in Cowes Road, there were several storms, in one of which two ships were cast away on the back of the island, as we should have been had it not pleased God to detain us in that safe station. By this means, too, we have many opportunities of instructing and exhorting the poor passengers, most of whom at their embarking knew little more of Christianity than the name. But God has so assisted our little endeavors in catechizing the children, explaining the Scriptures, and applying them in private conversation, that we have reason to hope a great part of them are throughly awakened and determined to pursue the prize of their high calling.

We can't be sufficiently thankful to God for Mr. Oglethorpe's presence with us. There are few if any societies in England more carefully regulated than this is. The very sailors have for some time behaved in a modest, regular manner. The knowing that they are constantly under the eye of one who has both power and will to punish every offender keeps even those who, it is to be feared, have no higher principle, from openly offending against God or their neighbor; so that we have an appearance at least of Christianity from one end of the ship to the other, and those who do not love it rarely show their dislike, unless in a corner among their intimates. May the good God show them too, in this their day, the things that make for their peace! We have had but one storm since we were at sea, and that lasted but a few hours. One unaccustomed to the sea would have imagined the ship would have been swallowed up every moment. A single wave covered it over, burst into the cabin where we were with a noise and shock almost like that of a cannon, and, after having steeped one or two of us from head to foot, passed through into the great cabin, from which we emptied it out at the windows. This too I hope was not a little blessing, the fright it occasioned in several persons having made them more susceptible of useful impression.

May He who hath helped us and poured His benefits upon us continue to have you and yours under His protection! May He prosper all the designs of your Societies for His glory, and strengthen your hands against all the power of the enemy! He shall repay the kindness you have shown us for His sake, especially by making mention of us in your prayers: whereas none stands more in need than, honored sir,

Your most obliged and obedient servant.

On January 23, 1736, Wesley wrote to Sir John Thorold, whom he had succeeded in the Fellowship at Lincoln College. That letter has been lost; but Sir John's reply, on May 24, 1736, is given in the Journal, viii. 298-302.