To Hester Ann Roe
Date: BRISTOL, September 16, 1776.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1776)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR HETTY,--As I did not receive yours of August 28 before my return from Cornwall, I was beginning to grow a little apprehensive lest your love was growing cold. But you have sweetly dispelled all my apprehensions of that sort, and I take knowledge that you are still the same.

The happy change wrought in Miss Peggy Roe as well as in Miss Bradock may encourage you to catch every opportunity of speaking a word for a good Master. Sometimes you see present fruit. But if not, your labor is not lost; it may spring up' after many days.' I hope, though your cousins are tried, they will not be discouraged; then all these things will 'work together for good.' Probably, if they stand firm, religion will in a while leaven the whole family. But they will have need of much patience and gentleness as well as much resolution. If any particular place is proposed for their residence, you would' [do] well to send me word immediately. They should not abruptly refuse to go; but it would be matter of prayer and consideration. Boarders at Kingswood pay twenty pounds a year. There is no entrance-money or farther expense of any kind. The masters are men of sense, learning, and piety. They are all a family of love.

I am not sorry that you have met with a little blame in the affair; and I hope it was not undeserved. Happy are they that suffer for well doing! I was almost afraid all men would speak well of you. Do you feel no intermission of your happiness in Him Does He ' bid you even in sleep go on’ What do you usually dream of Do you never find any lowness of spirits Is there never any time that hangs upon your hands How is your health Are you entirely free of your cough and the pain in your side You see how inquisitive I am, because everything relating to you nearly concerns me. I once thought I could not be well acquainted with any one till many years had elapsed. And yet I am as well acquainted with you as if I had known you from your infancy. Away with that thought, ' I shall not have you long.' Let our Lord see to that. Let us enjoy to-day. You are now my comfort and joy! And I hope to be far longer than this little span of life, my dear Hetty,

Yours in tender affection.