1783





To Mrs. Barton

LONDON, July 5, 1783.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- Last month I made a little journey to Holland, from whence I returned yesterday. [He arrived in London about eleven on Friday night, July 4. For the visit, see Journal, vi. 416-30.] There is a blessed work at the Hague, Amsterdam, Utrecht, and many other of the principal cities; and in their simplicity of spirit and plainness of dress the believers vie with the old English Methodists. In affection they are not inferior to any. It was with the utmost difficulty we could break from them.

I am glad to hear so good an account of my two little maids. [Mrs. Barton’s daughters (see letter of Nov. 6). He was there in May 1782.] I found much love to them when I was at Beverley. Now is the time for them to choose that better part which shall never be taken from them. Now is the time for them to choose whether they will seek happiness in God or in the world. The world never made any one happy, and it is certain it never will. But God will. He says, --

Love shall from Me returns of love obtain;

And none that seek Me early seek in vain.

-- I am, with love to Brother Barton,

Your affectionate brother.

To William Black [1]

LONDON, July 13, 1783.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- It is a rule with me to answer all the letters which I receive. If, therefore, you have not received an answer to every letter which you have written, it must be either that your letter or my answer has been intercepted.

I do not wonder at all that, after that great and extraordinary work of God, there should be a remarkable decay. So we have found it in almost all places. A swift increase is generally followed by a decrease equally swift. All we can do to prevent it is continually to exhort all who have tasted that the Lord is gracious to remember our Lord's words, ‘Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation.’

Mr. Alline may have wit enough to do hurt; but I fear he will never have wit enough to do good. He is very far from being a man of sound understanding; but he has been dabbling in Mystical writers, in matters which are too high for him, far above his comprehension. I dare not waste my time in answering such miserable jargon. I have better work. But I have sent you (with other books) two volumes of Mr. Law’s works, which contain all that Mr. Alline would teach if he could: only it is the gold purged from the dross; whereas he would give you the gold and dross shuffled together. I do not advise you ever to name his name in public (although in private you must warn our brethren), but go on your way exactly as if there were no such person in the world.

The school at Kingswood is exceeding full; nevertheless there shall be room for you. And it is very probable, if you should live to return to Halifax, you may carry one or more preachers with you.

I will order Mr. Atlay to send the books you sent for to our German brethren. I hope you will live as brethren, and have a free and open intercourse with each other. I commend you to Him who is able to make you perfect, stablish, settle you; and am, my dear brother,

Your affectionate brother.

To John Evan

BRISTOL, July 19, 1783.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I write just two or three lines because perhaps it may be a comfort to you. I commend you for giving up all that you had. It was acting the part of an honest man. Now you are cast upon the good providence of God; and He will not leave you nor forsake you. I hope to see you after the Conference; and am

Your affectionate brother.

Mr. John Evan, In Lowbridge, Near

Gloucester.

To Elizabeth Ritchie

BRISTOL, July 20, 1783.

MY DEAR BETSY, -- It seemed a long time since I heard from you; but I believe your not writing was owing to your not knowing how to direct to me while I was abroad. [See letter of July 5.] The prayers of many were productive of many blessings, and in particular of the amazing friendship and goodwill which were shown us in every place. We always looked upon the Dutch as an heavy, dull, stoical people. But truly most, nay I may say all, with whom we conversed familiarly were as tender-hearted and as earnestly affectionate as the Irish themselves. Two of our sisters, when we left the Hague, came twelve miles with us on our way; and one of our brethren of Amsterdam came to take leave of us to Utrecht, above thirty miles. There are, indeed, many precious souls in Utrecht full of faith and love, as also at Haarlem, the Hague, and Amsterdam. And one and all (without any human teaching) dress as plainly as you do. I believe, if my life be prolonged, I shall pay them a visit at least every other year. Had I had a little more time, I would have visited our brethren in Friesland and Westphalia likewise; for a glorious work of God is lately broken out in both these provinces.

Miss Loten [Miss Loren, of Utrecht, corresponded with Wesley till his death. Henry Moore had read many of her letters. See Journal, vi. 426-9, vii. 200-1; Moore's Wesley, ii. 291; and letter of Sept. 20, 1789.] is an Israelite indeed; she is a pattern to all that are round about her. One would scarcely have expected to see the daughter of the head burgomaster dressed on a Sunday in a plain linen gown. She appears to have but one desire--that Christ may reign alone in her heart.

I do not remember any storm which traveled so far as that on the 10th. [See Journal, vi. 432-3.] It has been in almost all parts of England, but especially at Witney, near Oxford. The next night they had a far greater, which seemed to cover the whole town for four hours with almost one uninterrupted blaze; and it has made such an impression on high and low, rich and poor, as had not been known in the memory of man.

I expect a good deal of difficulty at this Conference, and shall stand in need of the prayers of you and your friends. [About the Bitstall Chapel case and the state of Kingswood School. See Journal, vi. 437-8.] Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am

Yours most affectionately.

To George Gidley

BRISTOL, July 30, 1783.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I cannot come into Cornwall myself this year. But I am in hopes one or more of our preachers will make a trial this autumn whether some good may not be done at Bideford. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Gidley, Supervisor, In Bide- ford, Devon.

To Elizabeth Padbury

BRISTOL, August 1, 1783.

MY DEAR BETSY, -- I am glad to find that you remember me still, and that your love is not grown cold. I love you much, and I trust always shall; as I doubt not you will always deserve it. I have found several (my own father was one) that could rejoice in the justice as well as mercy of God. But punishing is His strange work: He delights chiefly in showing mercy. I apprehend, when you find those seasons of dryness and heaviness, this is owing either to the agency of the devil, who can easily cloud our mind when God permits, or to the corruptible body pressing down the soul. But believe and conquer all! -- I am, my dear Betsy,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Padbury, In Whittlebury.

To William Robarts [2]

BRISTOL, August 3, 1783.

I have taken your advice, and reunited the Taunton and Tiverton Circuits. [The Devon Circuit had been divided into the Taunton and Tiverton Circuits in 1778, which were reunited in 1783.]

At the same time that I wrote to you I wrote to Mr. Jaques at Wallingford, who was barely a member of our Society. I wrote to the same effect as I wrote to you, and indeed nearly in the same words. He was so far from being offended that he immediately wrote me the most affectionate letter I ever received from him in my life; not only thanking me heartily, but (what I never expected) telling me what his income was and how he laid it out. Why did not Billy Robarts answer me in the same manner Had he less love than Mr. Jaques or more pride Consider, Billy, consider! You have certainly got out of the way which you and I walked in many years ago!

[The reply sent by Robarts is so much to the point that it is given in full.]

TIVERTON, August 6, 1783.

DEAR SIR, -- You are my father; as such I have loved and honoured you. Forty years I have been in your Connection; thirty-six I have been admitted an helper in the gospel thirty of which my labor have been without charge to my brethren, but not so to myself. Ten pounds a year upon an average (I think) have not discharged my various expense with the Connection, which I am fully conscious was as much as I ought at any time, and for seven years past more than my ability required. I have informed you again and again that I have exceeded my ability. Why would you not believe me If you were not satisfied, why did you not ask me in person You never found me concealed or disguised. Was it right, upon your own suspicion or any vague information, to upbraid me before the congregation and before company at table, and even then refuse to be set right Was it kind, was it common candor, after the plain answer I gave you in person last year to write me as you did Had my conduct at any time merited that you should put a negative upon all I could say or write even when I appealed to my God for the truth of it When I was informed after all this that you censured me in various companies at Bristol and in its vicinity as a man worth thousands and eat up of covetousness and love of this world, I was astonished, and could not avoid exclaiming, What is become of charity are justice and truth also fled from the earth where is the man that doeth to another as he would be done by Whether I have less love or more pride than Mr. Jaques I do not determine; but I hope he have not been treated with so much severity and so totally without cause as your injured

To William Robarts

BRISTOL, August 8, 1783.

DEAR BILLY, -- Not being well able to write myself, I use George Story’s hand. What I wrote to you before was not upon bare suspicion or from vague information, but I was really frightened by hearing you say some years ago that you had just been giving 3,000 for a little estate. Perhaps your substance is not so great now as then. Of the things which some officious person said I spoke concerning you I remember nothing; but I suppose they lost nothing in the telling. [See letter of Aug. 16.] -- I am, dear Billy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Peter Garforth [3]

BRISTOL, August 9, 1783.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I have borrowed the hand of a friend, not being able to write myself. You have great reason to praise God for the late remarkable instance of His goodness, which you mention. It really seems had it not been for the mighty power of prayer the boy would have been blind all his life, the more reason you have entirely to dedicate both him and yourself to His service. This is manifestly the sign of a gracious dispensation, and I trust it will be answered thereby. Watch and pray, and you will no more enter into temptation.-- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Garforth, At Skipton-

in-Craven, Yorkshire.

To Thomas Les [4]

BRISTOL, August 15, 1783.

Joseph Bradford is without delay to desire the assistance of our friends in London for the house at Nottingham. I hope all our brethren will exert themselves therein. The importance of the case he will himself explain.

Mr. Atlay will give you my ten pounds.

To Thomas Welch [5]

BRISTOL, August 15, 1785.

DEAR THOMAS, -- You seem to be the man I want. As to salary, you will have 30 a year; board, &c., will be thirty more. But do not come for money. (1) Do not come at all unless purely to raise a Christian school. (2) Anybody behaving ill I will turn away immediately. (3) I expect you to be in the school eight hours a day. (4) In all things I expect you should be circumspect. But you will judge better by considering the printed Rules. The sooner you come the better. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To William Robarts [6]

BRISTOL, August 16, 1783.

DEAR BILLY, -- The great God fill you with as much of His blessing as your heart can contain! Your letter did me good like a cordial: I am right glad that you explained yourself.

Never more come mistrust between us twain

-- Dear Billy, adieu.

To John Atlay

LEEDS, September 3, 1783.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- The schoolmasters for Kingswood are fixed, and are expected there every day. Mr. Simpson’s sister is the housekeeper, who is come hither in her way to Bristol. Let no man or woman go to West Street Chapel without my appointment. It is a matter of deep concern. The building or not building at Birstall does not depend upon me, but the trustees. [The day after this letter was written Wesley met the Bitstall trustees about building another chapel, ‘as near the present as may be,’ on ground bought by Dr. Coke for the purpose. See Minutes, 1783; Coke’s An Address to the Inhabitants of Birstall, 1782; and letter of Nov. 27 to Mrs. Bradburn.] J. Fenwick is to correct the press chiefly, in the absence of Dr. Coke, and to transcribe tracts for me. And he may receive his tittle salary (at least) till I return to London. I never expected the ten pounds to be returned. Take the dock if you can get it.--I am, with love to Sister Atlay,

Your affectionate brother.

To Robert Hall, Jun.

LEEDS, September 6, 1783.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am not at all well pleased with John Hampson for leaving the circuit, and hope he will soon be with you again. So undoubtedly will Mr. Myles, [William Myles and John Hampson, jun., were the newly appointed preachers at Nottingham.] if he is not with you already. Dr. Coke purposes to be with you on Tuesday se’nnight. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

You may give notice of Dr. Coke's preaching at seven on Tuesday evening.

To Mr. Robert Hall, jun., At Mr.

Math. Bagshaw's, In Nottingham.

To Jane Bisson

LONDON, October 2, 1783.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- It gives me much pleasure to find you are still happy in God, leaning upon your Beloved. [See letter of Aug. 4, 1787.] O may you increase therein more and more 1 May you be more and more holy, and you will be more and more happy. This I long for, even your perfection, your growing up in all things into Him that is our Head. O may you never endeavor

Loves all-sufficient sea to raise

By drops of creature happiness!

I send you a little book or two by Mr. Clarke. If I could be of any service to you in anything, it would be an unspeakable satisfaction to, my dear sister,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Howton [7]

BRISTOL, October 3, 1783.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- There will never be any trouble about the child, whether anything is paid or not; you need not be apprehensive of any demand upon that account.

Those which I saw at your house were a company of lovely children both in their persons and in their behavior. Some of them I am in hopes of meeting there again if I should live till spring. The account you gave of that sick maiden is very remarkable; and her spirit must, I trust, influence others.

It is the glory of the people called Methodists that they condemn none for their opinions or modes of worship. They think and let think, and insist upon nothing but faith working by love.--I am, with love to Sister Price,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Howton, At Mrs. Price’s

Boarding-school, Worcester.

To the Preachers in America [8]

BRISTOL, October 3, 1783.

DEAR BROTHER, -- 1. Let all of you be determined to abide by the Methodist doctrine and discipline published in the four volumes of Sermons and the Notes upon the New Testament, together with the Large Minutes of the Conference.

2. Beware of preachers coming from Great Britain or Ireland without a full recommendation from me. Three of our traveling preachers have eagerly desired to go to America; but I could not approve of it by any means, because I am not satisfied that they thoroughly like either our discipline or our doctrine. I think they differ from our judgment in one or both. Therefore, if these or any other come without my recommendation, take care how you receive them.

3. Neither should you receive any preachers, however recommended, who will not be subject to the American Conference and cheerfully conform to the Minutes both of the American and English Conferences.

4. I do not wish our American brethren to receive any who make any difficulty of receiving Francis Asbury as the General Assistant. Undoubtedly the greatest danger to the work of God in America is likely to arise either from preachers coming from Europe, or from such as will arise from among yourselves speaking perverse things, or bringing in among you new doctrines, particularly Calvinism. You should guard against this with all possible care; for it is far easier to keep them out than to thrust them out.

I commend you all to the grace of God; and am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. ----- [9]

LONDON, October 12, 1783.

I am glad to hear that you had a safe though it was a slow passage to Dublin, and that your master received you not in a civil but in an affectionate manner. I really hope this is a token that God is turning your captivity. And if you serve Him in earnest, He will withhold from you no manner of thing that is good. I do not well know who your father is; your mother I remember perfectly well. It seems but as yesterday since I was conversing with Miss Lovelace at Athlone. She had then strong desires to be not only almost but altogether a Christian. If she and your father cast their care on Him that careth for them, He will deliver them out of all their trouble. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Jasper Winscorn

LONDON, October 13, 1783.

DEAR JASPER, -- You and I have been old friends. We have known one another for many years. Friendship therefore requires me to tell you my thoughts without either disguise or reserve.

Your son, an hopeful young man, fearing God, falls in love with an agreeable, well-bred, sensible woman. After some delays, he takes a wrong step: he marries her without your consent. For this you are angry and forbid him your house; and I cannot blame you.

You may say, ‘Well, what would you advise me to do now’ I advise you to forgive him. I advise you to lay aside your anger (it is high time), and to receive him again (occasionally) into your house. For you need forgiveness yourself; and if you do not forgive, you cannot be forgiven.

You will perhaps say, ‘Why, I have forgiven him; but he shall never come into my house.’ And what if God should say the same to you Then you had better never have been born!

But beside, what would follow if you should persist in treating your son thus

Probably his patience would be worn out, and he would contract resentment, perhaps bitterness, if not hatred toward you; and if so, what must follow Why, your implacable anger will cause your son’s damnation.

‘But she has settled her fortune upon herself.’ I cannot blame her if she has. Every woman has a right so to do. ‘But she will not let him travel with her.’ Nay, but he does not desire it, knowing it would be a double expense and inconvenient on many accounts. [See letter of Dec, 10, 1785.]

Nay, Jasper, take advice. Show yourself a man of sense, a man of piety, and a real friend to

Your affectionate brother.

To Hannah Ball

LONDON, October [18], 1783.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- Your wisdom is, as far as is possible, not to think or speak of Mr. W----- at all. You have better things to think of -- namely, that God is returning to His people. There is a beginning already; but you should continually expect to see greater things than these.

‘Temptations,’ says Mr. Haliburton, ‘and distinct deliverance from temptation, profit us much’; and ‘He prepareth for us,’ as Kempis observes, ‘occasions of fighting that we may conquer.’ [Book II. chap. xi.] Never scruple to declare explicitly what God has done for your soul. And never be weary of exhorting the believers to ‘go on to perfection.’ When they are athirst for this in any place, the whole work of God goes on. -- I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Elizabeth Padbury [10]

LONDON, October 29, 1783.

MY DEAR BETSY, -- I love to see anything that comes from you, although it be upon a melancholy occasion. Nothing can be done in the Court of King's Bench till the latter end of next week at the soonest, and till then I am trying all milder means which may possibly avail. If nothing can be done this way, we can but fight at Sharp’s. But prayer and fasting are of excellent uses; for if God be for us, who can be against us Probably I may visit you this winter. -- I always am, dear Betsy,

Yours most affectionately.

To Thomas Longley [11]

LONDON, November 5, 1785.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- What you mention is an exceeding odd case. I hardly remember the like. I refer Samuel Edwards wholly to you. If you cannot trust him, he must go home. If you can, you may receive him again as a fellow laborer -- that is, if he is sensible of his fault, of his very uncommon pride and stubbornness and unadvisableness, contrary both to religion and to reason. But you can’t receive him unless he promises for the time to come to take your advice or reproof, not as an affront, not as ‘trampling him under-foot,’ but as a favor and an act of real kindness. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Longley, At Mr. M. Dobinson’s,

In Derby.

To Mrs. Barton

LONDON, Noveraber 6, 1783.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I am always well pleased to hear from you especially when you tell me that God has dealt well with you. I trust He has yet greater blessings in store by and for you and for the little flock at Beverley. I was glad of the little time we had together, and hoped it would not be in vain. I found love to your two little maidens [See letter of July 5.]: there is good seed sown in their hearts, which, if it be carefully watered, will probably bring forth fruit to your comfort and to the glory of God. Let your husband and you go on hand in hand, stirring up the gift of God that is in you, and running with resignation and patience the race that is set before you. You have met and undoubtedly will meet with manifold temptations. But you have had full proof that God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape that you may be able to bear it. O tarry thou the Lord's leisure! Be strong, and He shall comfort thy heart. And put thou thy trust in the Lord. -- I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Captain Richard Williams

LONDON, November 9, 1783.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I know the talents which God has lent me, and I dare not bury any of them in the earth. I am a debtor both to the learned and the unlearned. And in the Magazine I apply to both; chiefly, indeed, to the unlearned, because these are the far greater number. And still I keep my original points in view, -- He died for all to save them from all sin.

I think the lines on Slavery will do well! [See letters of Feb. 25 to Taylor, and Dec. 10.] They are both sensible and poetical. -- I am, dear Richard,

Your affectionate brother.

To Capt. Richa. Williams, In Poldice,

Near Truro, Cornwall.

To Mrs. Nail [12]

LONDON, November 12, 1783.

DEAR SISTER, -- Mr. Wesley desires me to inform you that he has written to Mr. Pritchard on the subject of your letter, and you may expect to hear farther from him soon. He seems highly displeased with Mr. Pritchard for what he has done. -- I am Yours,

To Mr. Alexander

NEAR LONDON, November 21, 1783.

DEAR SIR, -- It is very certain your day of grace is not passed: if it were, you would be quite easy and unconcerned. It is plain the Lover of souls is still striving with you and drawing you to Himself. But you have no time to lose: for ‘now is the accepted time; now is the day of salvation!’ It is therefore your wisdom (without considering what others do, whether clergyman or layman) to attend to one thing -- that is, ‘to work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.’ And nothing can be more sure than that, if you do this, if it be indeed your one care to ‘seek the kingdom of God and His righteousness, all other things shall be added unto you.’ To His protection I commit you and yours; and am, dear sir,

Your affectionate brother.

I write a line to your son:

NEAR LONDON, November 21, 1783.

DEAR JAMES, -- Only let your actions correspond with your words, and then they will have weight with all that hear them. It seems highly probable to me that Providence does not intend you should be a tradesman.

I have known a young man that feared God acquire as much learning in one year as children usually do in seven. Possibly you may do the same. If you have a desire to try, and we should live till July, I will give you a year's schooling and board at Kingswood School, and you will then be the better able to judge what it is that God calls you to. -- I am

Yours affectionately.

To Walter Churchey

NEAR LONDON, November 21, 1783.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You have indeed had a sea of troubles. But I have not yet heard any one say it was your own fault; which I wonder at, because it is the way of the world still (as it was in the days of Job) always to construe misfortune into sin. But you and I know that there is a God in the world, and that He has more to do in it than most men are aware of. So little do they advert to that great truth, ‘Even the very hairs of your head are all numbered.’

One thing only I have heard of you, which, if it be true, I should not commend: I mean, that you have wholly forsaken the poor Methodists, [Churchey adds this note: ‘This was a misrepresentation.--W.C.’] and do not so much as attend the public preaching. One was mentioning this a few days ago, when I was saying something in favor of you; and it stopped my mouth; nay, supposing it true, I do not know what to say yet. For surely, when affliction presses upon us, we need every possible help. Commending you to Him that careth for you, -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

PS.--My kind love to Sister Churchey.

To Mr. Churchey, Near the Hay,

Brecon.

To Mrs. Dowries

NEAR LONDON, November 21, 1783.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- Through the blessing of God I find no difference at all between the health and strength which are now given me and that which I had forty years ago. Only I had then many pains which I have not now.

You are enabled to give a very clear and standing proof that weakness of nerves cannot prevent joy in the Lord. Your nerves have been remarkably weak, and that for many years, but still your soul can magnify the Lord and your spirit rejoice in God your Savior!

Your affectionate brother.

To Ann Loxdale

NEAR LONDON, November 21, 1783.

MY DEAR MISS LOXDALE, -- It is probable your letter came to Bristol during the time of my illness, and was then laid so carefully by that it never was found since. I have reason to think some other letters wrote about that time met with the same misfortune. One in particular from a lovely woman at the Hague, which I was exceedingly sorry to lose. [The letter from Mm. M.F. Loren, dated Hague, July 16, 1783, was apparently found afterwards, and appears in Arminian Mag. 1792, pp. 50-1. Wesley describes the family in Journal, vi. 421, 427: see also letter of July 20.]

I believe Mr. Walsh’s nervous disorders gave rise to many if not most of those temptations to which many persons of equal grace but firmer nerves are utter strangers all their lives. As you never yet experienced anything of the kind, so I am persuaded you never will. Yet I do not wonder at the horrid temptations of Gregory Lopez; because he was in a desert--that is, (so far) out of God's way.

I see much of the goodness and wisdom of God in the particular trial you are now under. As you speak to me without reserve, I will speak to you in the same manner. But summon up all your faith and resignation, or you will not be able to bear it.

I cannot doubt at all but some years ago he was earnestly seeking salvation. But I have more reasons to believe that he is now far, very far, from it. It was with doubting conscience I refrained from expelling him the Society: (1) because I heard he was deeply, uncommonly covetous, and because I knew that he mortally hated Mr. Rogers and did him all the ill offices he could; (2) because he equally hated that blessed creature Hetty Roe; and (3) because he is a determined enemy to perfection. [See letters of July 24, 1782, and Dec. 9, 1783.]

Herein I have given you strongest proof of the sincerity with which I am, my dear Miss Loxdale,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Bradburn

SHEERNESS, November 27, 1783.

My DEAR BETSY, -- Although our brethren at Birstall were not so admirable as I could have desired, yet I do not repent me of my journey: I am well pleased that I did my part. [See letter of Sept. 3.] You are now among a teachable and a loving people. And as you have fewer crosses, I expect you will have better health. Yet crosses of one kind or another you must still expect. Otherwise you must go out of the world. But every cross will be proportioned to your strength; and you will always find His grace is sufficient for you.

When I talked with Mrs. Karr about your affair, [See letter of Feb. 26 to Mrs. Bradburn.] I did not observe that she resented anything. She spoke of you with much tenderness; but if she does not write, she is certainly a little disgusted. It seems you have nothing to do but to sit still, and in due time God will order all things well.

I am glad you have had a little time with my dear Miss Ritchie; there would be no jar between her spirit and yours. -- I am, with love to Sammy Bradburn, my dear Betsy,

Yours most affectionately.

To Benjamin Chappel [13]

November 27, 1783.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- It is so long a time since I heard from you that I began to be in doubt whether you had forgotten your old friends or was safe landed in a better world. As I find you are still in the land of the living, I hope you are still making the best of life and laboring by every possible means to make your calling and election sure. Without doubt you have found many trials, and will find many more. But still you know in whom you have trusted, and who is able to deliver you out of all. But what means of grace have you Have you any church within any reasonable distance If you have, how often have you divine service Twice on every Sunday Have you a clergyman that loves or fears God Though, if he does not, it will not hinder you of the blessing attending the divine ordinances. But if you have no clergyman, see that you constantly meet together, and God will be where two or three are gathered together.

If Sister Morse is a lively, zealous, and judicious Christian, she may be of much use among you. But I doubt whether Henry Alline [See letters of July 13, 1783, and May 11, 1784.] be not the person concerning whom our brethren in Cumberland wrote to me: who has wrote and published a book which is full of broad, ranting Antinomianism. If it is he, he is a wild, absurd man, wiser in his own eyes than seven men that can render a reason; and has done much mischief among the serious persons there, setting every man's sword against his brother. If it be the same man, have a care of him, or he will do more harm among you than ever he can do good. I should think some of our brethren from Cumberland would have zeal and courage enough to come over to you now and then and impart some of their fire to you.

If the case of the island be as you say, why do not the inhabitants send a petition to the Government It seems this would be a very seasonable time.

It will be a difficult thing to find apprentices who will be willing to take so long a journey to a cold and uncomfortable place. I am glad to hear so good an account of your wife. See that you strengthen each other's hands in God. Beware of lukewarmness. Beware of cleaving to the present world. Let your treasure and your hearts be above! -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Benj. Chappel, At St. John’s,

Newfoundland.

To Isaac Twycross

LONDON, November 29, 1783.

DEAR ISAAC, -- I love you well, and would be glad to do you any service that is in my power. If I should find any person that has need of a serious curate, I would not fail to recommend you. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

Rev. Mr. Twycross, In Dagenham, Essex.

To Ann Loxdale [14]

LONDON, December 9, 1783.

MY DEAR NANCY, -- Because I loved you, and because I thought it my duty, I wrote freely to you on a tender point. But I have done. I do not know that I shall speak one word more concerning it. The regard which I have for you will not suffer me to give you any pain which answers no good purpose. So you may still think him as holy as Thomas Walsh; I will say nothing against it.

Only beware of one snare of the devil. Do not tack things together which have no real connection with each other: I mean, your justification or sanctification and your marriage. God told you that you was sanctified. I do not say, ‘God told you you should be married to that man.’ Do not jumble these together; if you do, it may cost you your life. Profit by the friendly warning of, my dear Nancy,

Yours affectionately.

To Captain Richard Williams [15]

LONDON, December 10, 1783.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I have directed your lines to the editor of the General Post. But both he and Mr. Pine will insert in their papers only what they believe will promote the sale of them.

You send me an agreeable account of the work of God in Cornwall and in some places that I do not know. I know nothing of Wheal Rose, nor of the Copper House at Hayle: I hope Mr. Edwards will continue in the same state he is now. I thought the Calvinists were resolved to run away with the Society at Kirly. But the Universal Lover of Souls is stronger than them! He hath said, ‘Hitherto shall you come, and no farther!’ The work of God (Brother Asbury sends me word) goes on both steadily and swiftly in America. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Capt. Riehl. Williams, At Poldice,

Near Truro, Cornwall.

To Matthem Mayer

LONDON, December 13, 1783.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- No chastening is joyous for the present; but it will bring forth peaceable fruit. The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away -- that He may give you Himself. We will make room for the little boy at Kingswood. You may send him whenever you have an opportunity. If you choose it rather, you may change places for two or three months with one of the preachers in any of the neighboring circuits. I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Joseph Taylor

LONDON, December 24, 1783.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- Look into the Minutes concerning the building of preaching-houses, and see that the directions there laid down be observed. No one can object to your making a collection for the house in your circuit. [See letter of Feb. 25 to him.] I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.