To his Wife
Date: GWENNAP, September 1, 1777.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1777)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR,--I sincerely wish a reunion with you if it could be upon good terms. Otherwise it would not continue; and then the last error would be worse than the first. But what are those terms on which it probably would continue? In order to know we must state the case; which I will do as briefly as I can, leaving out all unnecessary circumstances. [See letters of July 15, 1774, and Oct. 2, 1778.]

Some years since, without my consent or knowledge, you left me and settled at Newcastle.

I received you again without any terms--nay, without any acknowledgement that you had done wrong.

Two years ago you left me again without my consent or knowledge. A few days since, I met you, and (to my great surprise) you seemed willing to return. I was willing to receive you upon these terms: (1) restore my papers; (2) promise to take no more.

But upon reflection I see I was too hasty. For you have given copies of my papers, and these you cannot recall. Likewise you have spoken all manner of evil against me, particularly to my enemies and the enemies of the cause I live to support. Hereby many bad men have triumphed and been confirmed in their evil ways; and many good but weak men have been stumbled, and some have drawn back to perdition. A sword has been put into-the hands of the enemies of God, and the children of God have been armed against one another.

Things standing thus, if I was to receive you just now without any acknowledgement or reparation of these wrongs, it would be esteemed by all reasonable men a confirmation of all you have said.

But it may be asked, 'What reparation are you either able or willing to make? '

I know not if you are willing to make any. If you are, what reparation are you able to make? Very little indeed; for the water is sprit, and cannot be gathered up again.

All you can do now, if you are ever so willing, is to unsay what you have said. For instance, you have said over and over that I have lived in adultery these twenty years. Do you believe this, or do you not? If you do, how can you think of living with such a monster. If you do not, give it me under your hand. Is not this the least you can do?