To Mary Bishop
Date: LONDON, November 22, 1769.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1769)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR SISTER,--It is exceedingly strange. I should really wonder (if I could wonder at any weakness of human nature) that so good a woman as Lady Huntingdon, and one who particularly piques herself on her catholic spirit, should be guilty of such narrowness of spirit. Let it teach us a better lesson! [Henry Venn was then preaching to crowded audiences in the Countess of Huntingdon's chapel at Bath. See letter of Dec. 26.] Let us not vary in thought or word from the old Methodist principle, 'Whosoever doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother and sister and mother.'

We have other instances of persons who now enjoy the peace of God and yet do not know the time when they received it. And God is sovereign: He may make what exceptions He pleases to His general rule. So this objection is easily set aside; and so is that of your age. The Spirit of the Lord can give understanding either in a longer and shorter time. And I doubt not but He will give you favour in the eyes of your sisters. You have only to go on in simplicity, doing the will of God from the heart and trusting in the anointing of the Holy One to teach you of all things.

I am glad you are acquainted with the Miss Owens. [Wesley says on Sept. 16, 1772: 'I went to Publow, which is now what Leytonstone was once. Here is a family indeed. Such mistresses, and such a company of children, as, I believe, all England cannot parallel!' See Journal v. 484; and letter of Aug. 22, 1772.] Encourage one another to be altogether Christians. Defy fashion and custom, and labour only

To steer your useful lives below

By reason and by grace.

Let not the gentlewoman entrench upon the Christian; but be a simple follower of the Lamb.

I expect to hear soon what has occurred since you wrote last. And I hope you will always speak without any reserve to, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.