To William Robarts
Date: BRISTOL, August 3, 1783.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1783)
Author: John Wesley
---
I have taken your advice, and reunited the Taunton and Tiverton Circuits. [The Devon Circuit had been divided into the Taunton and Tiverton Circuits in 1778, which were reunited in 1783.]

At the same time that I wrote to you I wrote to Mr. Jaques at Wallingford, who was barely a member of our Society. I wrote to the same effect as I wrote to you, and indeed nearly in the same words. He was so far from being offended that he immediately wrote me the most affectionate letter I ever received from him in my life; not only thanking me heartily, but (what I never expected) telling me what his income was and how he laid it out. Why did not Billy Robarts answer me in the same manner Had he less love than Mr. Jaques or more pride Consider, Billy, consider! You have certainly got out of the way which you and I walked in many years ago!

[The reply sent by Robarts is so much to the point that it is given in full.]

TIVERTON, August 6, 1783.

DEAR SIR, -- You are my father; as such I have loved and honoured you. Forty years I have been in your Connection; thirty-six I have been admitted an helper in the gospel thirty of which my labor have been without charge to my brethren, but not so to myself. Ten pounds a year upon an average (I think) have not discharged my various expense with the Connection, which I am fully conscious was as much as I ought at any time, and for seven years past more than my ability required. I have informed you again and again that I have exceeded my ability. Why would you not believe me If you were not satisfied, why did you not ask me in person You never found me concealed or disguised. Was it right, upon your own suspicion or any vague information, to upbraid me before the congregation and before company at table, and even then refuse to be set right Was it kind, was it common candor, after the plain answer I gave you in person last year to write me as you did Had my conduct at any time merited that you should put a negative upon all I could say or write even when I appealed to my God for the truth of it When I was informed after all this that you censured me in various companies at Bristol and in its vicinity as a man worth thousands and eat up of covetousness and love of this world, I was astonished, and could not avoid exclaiming, What is become of charity are justice and truth also fled from the earth where is the man that doeth to another as he would be done by Whether I have less love or more pride than Mr. Jaques I do not determine; but I hope he have not been treated with so much severity and so totally without cause as your injured