To his Nephew Charles Wesley
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1784)
Author: John Wesley
---
DUNDEE, May. 12, 1784.

DEAR CHARLES, - I doubt not but both Sarah and you are in trouble because Samuel has 'changed his religion.' Nay, he has changed his opinions and mode of worship. But that is not religion; it is quite another thing. 'Has he, then,' you may ask, 'sustained no loss by the change' Yes, unspeakable loss; because his new opinion and mode of worship are so unfavorable to religion that they make it, if not impossible to one that once knew better, yet extremely difficult.

'What, then, is religion' It is happiness in God, or in the knowledge and love of God. It is 'faith working by love, producing' righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.' In other words, it is an heart and life devoted to God; or communion with God the Father and the Son; or the mind which was in Christ Jesus, enabling us to walk as He walked. Now, either he has this religion or he has not.' If he has, he will not finally perish, notwithstanding the absurd, unscriptural opinions he has embraced and the superstitious and idolatrous modes of worship. But these are so many shackles which will greatly retard him in running the race that is set before him. If he has not this religion, if he has not given God his heart, the case is unspeakably worse: I doubt if he ever will; for his new friends will continually endeavor to hinder him by putting something else in its place, by encouraging him to rest in the form, notions, or externals, without being born again, without having Christ in him, the hope of glory, without being renewed in the image of Him that created him. This is the deadly evil. I have often lamented that he had not this holiness, without which no man can see the Lord. But though he had it not, yet in his hours of cool reflection he did not hope to go to heaven without it. But now he is or will be taught that, let him only have a right faith (that is, such and such notions), and add thereunto such and such externals, and he is quite safe. He may, indeed, roll a few years in purging fire; but he will surely go to heaven at last!

Therefore you and my dear Sarah have great need to weep over him. But have you not also need to weep for yourselves For have you given God your hearts Are you holy in heart Have you the kingdom of God within you righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost the only true religion under heaven O cry unto Him that is mighty to save for this one thing needful! Earnestly and diligently use all the means which God hath put plentifully into your hands! Otherwise I should not at all wonder if God permits you also to be given up to a strong delusion. But whether you were or were not, whether you are Protestant or Papist, neither you nor he can ever enter into glory, unless you are now cleansed from all pollution of flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness in the fear of God! - I am, dear Charles,

Your affectionate Uncle.