1775



To Martha Chapman

LUTON, January 11, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I hope with God's help to be at Newbury on, Thursday, March 2; and to have the pleasure of seeing you there, unless something unforeseen should hinder.

You have lately had a wintry season at Watlington: now expect the return of spring. Beware you are not weary or faint in your mind! Even bodily weakness may you to this; especially when there appears to be no increase, but rather a decay, of the work of God. Yet I do you apprehend you are yet at liberty to remove from Watlington.

Cannot Hannah Ball step over for two or three days and kindle a flame among you If she does not come, look for One greater than her. How soon It may be before you see another day.--I am, dear Patty,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Patty Chapman, At Watlington,

Near Tetsworth, Oxfordshire.

To Francis Wolfe
LUTON, January 11, 1775

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Be zealous and active for a good Master, and you will see the fruit of your labor. But watch over Joseph Moore. If he falls in love, there is an end of his usefulness.

Ever since that madman took away her office in Witney from Nancy Bolton, Witney Society has drooped; such as Wycombe Society would do if you took away Hannah Ball from them. She has all Hannah's grace, with more sense. See that she be fully employed. You have not such another flower in all your gardens. Even Patty Chapman does not equal her. --I am, with love to Sister Wolfe,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Elizabeth Ritchie
LONDON, January 17, 1775.

MY DEAR BETSY,--I beg, if you love me, you will send me a minute account how you are both in body and mind. Some of the Mystic writers do not choose to speak plainly; some of them know not how. But, blessed be God, we do; and we know there is nothing deeper, there is nothing better in heaven or earth than love! There cannot be, unless there were something higher than the God of love! So that we see distinctly what we have to aim at. We see the prize and the way to it! Here is the height, here is the depth, of Christian experience! ‘God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him.'

Mr. Fletcher has given us a wonderful view of the different dispensations which we are under. I believe that difficult subject was never placed in so clear a light before. It seems God has raised him up for this very thing--

To vindicate eternal Providence

And justify the ways of God to man.

By confining yourself to those who write dearly your understanding will be opened and strengthened far more than by reading a multiplicity of authors; at the same time your heart will be enlarged, and, I trust, more and more united to

Yours affectionately.

To Samuel Bardsley

LONDON, February 1, 1775.

DEAR SAMMY, There is something exceedingly remarkable in that sudden breaking out of the work at A----. This is undeniably the Lord's doing, and leaves no room for man to glory.

Wherever you are vehemently exhort the believers to ‘go on to perfection.' Read yourself with much prayer, and recommend to them, the Plain Account of Christian Perfection, and those two sermons The Repentance of Believers and The Scripture Way of Salvation.--I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Sam. Bardsley, At Mr. James

Walker's, In Sheffield.

To Christopher Hopper

LONDON, February 1, 1775.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I am glad to hear so good an account with regard to the preaching-houses at Liverpool and Warrington. Indeed, it may be doubted whether we should contribute toward those houses which are not settled according to our plan.

It pleases God to continue my strength hitherto, and my disorder gives me little uneasiness. I expect to be at Stroud (from Bristol), Monday, March 13; Tuesday, 14, at Worcester; Thursday, 16, Birmingham; Friday, 17, Newcastle; Saturday, 18, Macclesfield; Monday, 20, Manchester; Tuesday, 21, Northwich. Whether it will be more advisable then to steer by Chester or Liverpool I do not see clearly. Let us work while the day is.--I am, with love to Sister Hopper,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

Surely it cannot be that you should find in the house at Newcastle an account which John Fenwick sent me, and that you should send it back to him!

To Ann Bolton

LONDON, February 8, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I doubt whether we have not been wanting in one thing. When persons were in their [first] love, we have generally suffered that love to grow cold before we spoke to them of perfection. Would it not have been better to speak to them just then And how often might the first love have been changed into pure love!

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Mary Bishop

LONDON, February 11, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--To be enabled to relieve those that are in want is one excellent fruit of this self-denial. But you must not imagine this will be the only one. No: you have a message from God to some of those to whom no one dare speak the plain truth; and He will confirm the word of His messenger, especially to those that are in weakness or pain or under any kind of affliction. At such a time greatness stands aloof, and they are as accessible as common persons.

In religion as well as in all things else it is 'use that brings perfectness.' I have long labored under the same infirmity with you; and I find but one way to conquer. Take up your cross; when the occasion offers, break through: speak, though it is pain and grief unto you. And it will be easier and easier, till you resemble an eminent surgeon, who once told my brother, ' Mr. Wesley, you know I would not hurt a fly, I would not give pain to any living thing. But if it was necessary I could scrape all the flesh off of a man's bones and never turn my head aside.'

A clear conviction of the superior advantages of a single life certainly implies a call from God to abide therein, supposing a person has received that gift from God. But we know all cannot receive this saying; and I think none ought to make any vows concerning it, because, although we know what we are and what we can do nova, yet we do not know what we shall be. The spiritual advantages of that state are set down in the little tract on that subject, together with the means which are proper to be used by those who desire to retain those advantages. If at any time Providence should seem to call any person to relinquish these advantages, I would earnestly advise her not to lean to her own understanding (less in this case than any other), but to consult one or more spiritual friends, and resolutely stand to their award.

There is much good in Miss Bosanquet; and you may do her good, for she loves and will bear plain dealing.--I am, my dear Miss Bishop,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Bishop, Near the Cross Bath, In Bath.

To Miss March
February 11, 1775.

There seems to be in our excellent friend something too near akin to apathy. 'A clergyman,' said one (but I do not agree with him in this), 'ought to be all intellect, no passion.' She appears to be (I will not affirm she is) at no great distance from this. It is true by this means we might avoid much pain, but we should also lose much happiness. Therefore this is a state which I cannot desire. Rather give me the pleasure and pain too; rather let

Plain life, with heightening passions rise,

The boast or burthen of an hour.

But who has attained this Who treads the middle path, equally remote from both extremes I will tell you one that did (although the remembrance of her still brings tears into my eyes), that lovely saint Jane Cooper! There was the due mixture of intellect and passion! I remember one of the last times I saw her, before her last illness, her look, her attitude, her words! My dear friend, be you a follower of her, as she was of Christ.

To Peter Bohler [1]

LONDON, February 18, 1775.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--When I say, 'I hope I shall never be constrained to speak otherwise of them' (the Moravians), I do not mean that I have any expectation this will ever happen. Probably it never will. I never did speak but when I believed it was my duty so to do. And if they would calmly consider what I have spoken from March 10, 1736, and were open to conviction, they might be such Christians as are hardly in the world besides. I have not lost sight of you yet. Indeed, I cannot if you are 'a city set upon a hill.'

Perhaps no one living is a greater lover of peace or has labored more for it than I, particularly among the children of God. I set out near fifty years ago with this principle, ' Whosoever doeth the will of my Father who is in heaven, the same is my brother and sister and mother.' But there is no one living that has been more abused for his pains even to this day. But it is all well. By the grace of God I shall go on, following peace with all men, and loving your Brethren beyond any body of men upon earth except the Methodists.

Wishing you every gospel blessing, I remain

Your very affectionate brother.





To Thomas Wride [2]

LONDON, February 24, 1775.

DEAR TOMMY,--Beware of your own spirit! You bite like a bull-dog; when you seize, you never let go. I advise you to think of William Hunter no more; go on your way as if he was under the earth.

At a Quarterly Meeting, if the collection is only six pounds and two preachers are present, they commonly share it between them. In this case I do not say they defraud a third preacher who is expected; but I say they act unkindly.

But you should tell me without fear or favor who has neglected the round.

Part of the books which I borrowed of Mr. Hammond I left at Waterford with one who has promised to send them back directly. The other part one promised to send from Dublin. I am ashamed of their vile negligence. I hope to be in Dublin next month; and am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Rankin [3]

LONDON, March 1, 1775.

DEAR TOMMY,--I think the March packet will do as well as the April packet; so I answer you without delay.

As soon as possible you must come to a full and clear explanation both with Brother Asbury (if he is recovered) and with Jemmy Dempster. But I advise Brother Asbury to return to England the first opportunity.

There is now a probability that God will hear the prayer and turn the counsels of Ahithophel into foolishness. It is not unlikely that peace will be re-established between England and the Colonies. But certainly the present doubtful situation of affairs may be improved to the benefit of many. They may be strongly incited now ‘to break off their sins by repentance, if it may be a lengthening of their tranquillity.’--I am, my dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

PS.--To-morrow I intend to set out for Ireland.

I add a line to all the preachers:---

LONDON, March 1, 1775.

MY DEAR BRETHREN,--You were never in your lives in so critical a situation as you are at this time. It is your part to be peace-makers, to be loving and tender to all, but to addict yourselves to no party. In spite of all solicitations, of rough or smooth words, say not one word against one or the other side. Keep yourselves pure, do all you can to help and soften all; but beware how you adopt another's jar.

See that you act in full union with each other: this is of the utmost consequence. Not only let there be no bitterness or anger but no shyness or coldness between you. Mark all those that would set one of you against the other. Some such will never be wanting. But give them no countenance; rather ferret them out and drag them into open day.

The conduct of T. Rankin has been suitable to the Methodist plan: I hope all of you tread in his steps. Let your eye be single. Be in peace with each other, and the God of peace will be with you.--I am, my dear brethren,

Your affectionate brother.

[Charles Wesley also wrote to Rankin.]

March 1, 1775.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--To spare you the expense, I delayed answering your letter; but I bear you always on my heart, and rejoice when the Lord blesses you with success. He giveth grace, more grace, to the humble; therefore wrestle with Him for deep humility.

As to the public affairs, I wish you to be like-minded with me. I am of neither side, and yet of both; on the side of New England and of Old. Private Christians are excused, exempted, privileged, to take no part in civil troubles. We love all and pray for all with a sincere and impartial love. Faults there may be on both sides; but such as neither you nor I can remedy: therefore let us and all our children give ourselves unto prayer, and so stand still and see the salvation of God. My love to Captain Webb when you see him, and to Mr. Bowden, to whom I owe letters, and much love. Show yours for me by praying more for me and mine. Yours in the old love.

To Joseph Benson [4]
BRISTOL, March 12, 1775.

DEAR JOSEPH,--I can no more trust John Bredin in the North than in the South of Scotland. I see no way for him but to Ireland. He must return to his loom. I have had complaints from all quarters. He must no longer bring a reproach upon the gospel. You must make as good a shift as you can with Brother Watkinson till more help comes.

You know what dreadful inconveniences have ensued from regarding private interest more than the public, from showing pet to particular persons at the expense of the general good. If this be done in the present instance, it will be at your door, not mine; for I do hereby give you full authority to send John Bredin back to his own home. I think the sooner this is done the better, For until he is thoroughly humbled he will only be an hinderer of the work of God and a stumbling-block to the people.--I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

I hope to be in Manchester on the 20th instant, and soon after in Dublin.

To Ann Bolton [5]
WORCESTER, March 15, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--If I could have seen you, though it had been only for an hour, it would have given me a very sensible satisfaction. I cannot easily express that union of spirit which I feel whenever I think of you. There is I know not what in your whole spirit and behavior which has always given me unspeakable pleasure; and when I look upon you (you know to whom the glory is due!), I am often ready to cry out, 'Thou perfect pattern of true womanhood!' But I know good is the will of the Lord; therefore I am content. If it is best, I shall see my dear friend again before I take my long journey; and if I do not see you till we meet in a better world,

Surely our disembodied souls shall join,

Surely my friendly shade shall mix with thine.

To die is not to be lost; but our union will be more complete in the world of spirits than it can be while we dwell in tenements of clay.

Certainly till persons experience something of the second awakening, till they are feelingly convinced of inbred sin so as earnestly to groan for deliverance from it, we need not speak to them of present sanctification. We should first labor to work that conviction in them. When they feel it and hunger and thirst after full salvation, then is the time to show them it is nigh at hand, it may be received just now by simple faith.

I can now hardly expect (if I should live to return to England) to see you before next autumn. Let me, however, have the pleasure of hearing from you; and give a place in your memory and your prayers to, my dear Nancy,

Your ever affectionate brother.

Direct to me at Dublin.

To Miss Bolton, At Witney,

Oxfordshire.

To Martha Chapman

WORCESTER, March 15, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You only tell me in general that your health is declining; but you do not say in what manner or from what cause. When did you begin to feel any decay of health In what manner was you affected What did you imagine it was owing to How have you been since from time to time What means of recovery have you used, and with what effect Write to me as particularly as you can on these heads, directing to me in Dublin. It is our duty to take care of our bodily health; but what is this to an healthful mind Let your mind be

All praise, all meekness, and all love.

And for the rest 'tis equal all.--I am, dear Patty,

Yours affectionately.

To John Fletcher [6]

NORTHWICH, March 22, 1775.

DEAR SIR,--I have read over your papers, and hope they will be of use. But you have a little disappointed me. I expected a fictitious and a genuine Creed for Perfectionists, suitable to your Arminian Creeds. I know not whether your last tract was not as convincing as anything you have written. That method of untwisting the truth and falsehood which had been so artfully woven together has enabled many to distinguish one from the other more dearly than ever they did before.

What a good Providence it is that different persons have different ways of writing! Many are convinced or affected by your way of writing who receive no benefit from mine. They are not to be reached by a few words: you must say a great deal, or you lose your labor. Heavy foot cannot overtake them; but when your light horse falls upon them on every side, they are utterly overthrown. I think the address to the Perfectionists and Imperfectionists will be well bestowed. And it is well you have bestowed a little time on Mr. Toplady. He might have been angry if you had taken no notice of him.

It seems our views of Christian Perfection are a little different, though not opposite. It is certain every babe in Christ has received the Holy Ghost, and the Spirit witnesses with his spirit that he is a child of God. But he has not obtained Christian perfection. Perhaps you have not considered St. John's threefold distinction of Christian believers: little children, young men, and fathers. All of these had received the Holy Ghost; but only the fathers were perfected in love.

But one thing seems to have escaped you still. What are the charms of Calvinism unde faces ardent How is it so many fall in love with her

To-morrow I hope to be at Chester, and to embark on board the first vessel that offers. Commending myself to your prayers, I am, dear sir, Your affectionate brother.

To Elizabeth Ritchie

NORTHWICH, March 23, 1775.

MY DEAR BETSY,--I am glad you have had an opportunity of spending a little time at Leeds and with Miss Bosanquet. This, I doubt not, has been a blessed means of increasing your spiritual strength. And I trust you will find more and more opportunity of using whatever strength you have, even at Otley. Wherever the work of God revives, we are more particularly called to work together with Him. Now be instant in season and out of season! Redeem the time! Buy up every opportunity. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening slack not thy hand; and God will give the increase!

In a day or two I expect to embark. Possibly in autumn we may meet again; and in the meantime I am persuaded you will not forget

Yours affectionately.

To Martha Chapman
DUBLIN, April 5, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--The apothecary seems to have understood your case; but you have done right in leaving off the taking of medicines. But withal you should use all the exercise you can, particularly in the open air. And use what little strength you have to the glory of Him that gave it. Warn every one and exhort every one, if by any means you may save some.--I am, my dear Patty,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Chapman, At Watlington,

Near Nettlebed, Oxon.

To Thomas Rankin
PORTARLINGTON, April 2I, 1775.

DEAR TOMMY,--I am glad there is so good an understanding between Jemmy Dempster and you. He is an upright man, and, unless I am much mistaken, a friend both to the Methodist doctrine and discipline.

I am sorry for poor T--- R---. It is certain God did lift up his head, and I hoped that his besetting sin would no more gain dominion over him. However, you must in no wise give him up. And he has much more need of comfort than of reproof. His great danger is despair.

Brother Asbury has sent me a few lines, and I thank him for them. But I do not advise him to go to Antigua. Let him come home without delay. If one or two stout, healthy young men would willingly offer themselves to that service, I should have no objection; but none should go unless he was fully persuaded in his own mind.

You are a bold man, Tommy, to commence author in these critical times. I wish the success may answer your expectation; there is a call for every help. I am afraid you will soon find a day of trial; the clouds are black both over England and America. It is well if this summer passes over without some showers of blood. And if the storm once begins in America, it will soon spread to Great Britain.

I have a friendly letter from ---, who writes warmly against the ---. Pray remember my love to him and his wife. I am glad to find he is still walking in the good old way. He sends me word that one or two men of fortune are gone out to preach the gospel. If they are, I expect little from them. God hath chosen the weak to confound the strong.

Go on, doing and suffering the will of our Lord!--I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Richard Morgan [7]
WATERFORD, April 28, 1775.

DEAR SIR,--I am now going to give you one of the greatest yet most thankless instances of friendship. Prudence (so called) would restrain me from it. But love is stronger than prudence.

Great was the concern which I felt when I conversed with Miss Morgan, a child so spoiled to all intents and purposes I have not seen in the course of fifty years either in Europe or America. I know not what she is fit for. Does she regard the reproof of either father or mother Have not you humored her out of all her sense, all her good nature, and even good breeding What behavior was that which I saw with my own eyes What words which I heard with my own ears No weakness, no pain could excuse these. Pain should soften, not roughen our temper. And what a wife must a woman of such a temper make! what a torment must she be to any man of feeling! Happy would it be both [for] her and you if God would speedily take her to Himself!

I could not but be concerned for you likewise. You have often desires to be a Christian: an inward Christian, a Bible Christian, a man happy in God. What hinders Scraping up more money Cui bono Have you not already more than does you good ' What, would you have me be idle ' No. Am I idle But I labor for eternity, for treasure in heaven, for satisfying riches. Go thou and do likewise!

If you receive this in love, you may profit thereby. If you show it to your wife and daughter, you will not hurt me, but you will thereby renounce all future intercourse with

Your truly affectionate servant.

To Richard Morgan, Esq.,

No. 35 Stephen's Green, Dublin.

To James Dempster [8]
BALLINROBE, May 19, 1775.

DEAR JEMMY,--That one point I earnestly recommend, both to Brother Rankin and you and all our preachers--by prayer, by exhortation, and by every possible means, to oppose a party spirit. This has always, so far as it prevailed, been the bane of all true religion, more especially when a country was in such a situation as America is now. None but the God of almighty love can extricate the poor people out of the snare. O what need have you to besiege His throne with all the power of prayer!--I am, dear Jemmy,

Yours affectionately.

To Thomas Rankin, in America





BALLINROBE, May 19, 1775.
DEAR TOMMY,--That letters travel very slow from us to America is a great inconvenience. But it is a still greater that they travel so uncertainly; sometimes reaching you too late, sometimes not at all.

I doubt not but Brother Asbury and you will part friends: I shall hope to see him at the Conference. He is quite an upright man. I apprehend he will go through his work more cheerfully when he is within a little distance from me.

We must speak the plain truth wherever we are, whether men will hear or whether they will forbear. And among our Societies we must enforce our Rules with all mildness and steadiness. At first this must appear strange to those who are as bullocks unaccustomed to the yoke. But after a time all that desire to be real Christians see the advantage of it.

I am afraid Mr. B--- is a weak brother, a little enlightened in his understanding, and having a kind of faith. But I would rather (of the two) be in the case of poor T--- R--- than of him. I think there is more probability of his being a real Christian than of the other's.

Never was there a time when it was more necessary for all that fear God, both in England and in America, to stir up the gift of God that is in them and wrestle with God in mighty prayer. In all the other judgments of God the inhabitants of the earth learn righteousness. When a land is visited with famine or plague or earthquake, the people commonly see and acknowledge the hand of God. But wherever war breaks out, God is forgotten, if He be not set at open defiance. What a glorious work of God was at Cambuslang and Kilsyth from 1740 to 1744! But the war that followed tore it all up by the roots and left scarce any trace of it behind; insomuch that when I diligently inquired a few years after, I could not find one that retained the life of God!--I am, my dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mary Bosanquet





CLONES, May 29, 1775.
MY DEAR SISTER,--I was particularly glad to hear from you at this time, as I wanted to know how you was going on and whether you was the person concerning whom one of our preachers warily asked my advice. Whether you should part with your house and things pertaining to it is a very important question. The answering of this depends upon many circumstances which I am not yet acquainted with. But necessity has no law. It must be done, if your income will not otherwise answer the expenses.

The last day of June I hope to be in Dublin, and the end of July in England. If I have a ready passage, probably I may have an opportunity of hiding myself a day or two with you '; but I do not desire any of the preachers to come to me till I send for them. If they do, I shall run away. I will not be in a crowd.

Probably you know whether Mr. Saunderson is at Knares-borough. If he is, pray take up a cross for me. Write to him in my name, and tell him I desire him without delay or excuse to return to Bristol; otherwise he will disoblige me for ever.--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To his Brother Charles
LONDONDERRY, June 2, 1775.

DEAR BROTHER,--I thought it strange that poor S. F. should leave me nine hundred pounds in debt. But it is stranger still that John Atlay should have paid sixteen hundred out of nine, and that I am an hundred and sixty pounds in debt notwithstanding!

Mr. Wathen's method of radical cure I shall hardly try I am very easy, and that is enough.

I am persuaded Billy Baynes's eye is single; therefore he will be useful. Our other friend should have known his own mind. We parted only for four pounds a year.

I am exceeding glad that T. Rankin does not print till his papers have passed through our correction. I was afraid he would not have been so patient. Just what I thought at first, I think still of American affairs. If a blow is struck, I give America for lost, and perhaps England too. Our part is to continue instant in prayer.

Sammy will not only be better but quite well if you do not kill him with kindness.

Has my friend taken an house at Bristol Is Noah with her What are they doing Mr. Madan has behaved well. Res ipsa reduxit in gratiam.

Preach as much as you can and no more than you can. You never will be much stronger till you add change of air to exercise, riding two or three hundred miles point blank forward. Now you have an opportunity. Meet me at Leeds with honest John Murlin. When you are tired, you may change places with him. You would return a stout, healthy man.

I purpose writing to Mr. Fletcher shortly. I do not remember that he has touched the corner-stone of their hypothesis--‘the covenant of redemption.’ One would not wish to be easy without it. Just here we must stop reasoning or turn Calvinists. This is the very strength of their cause.

Peace be with you and yours! Adieu!

To Miss March
CHARLEMONT, June 9, 1775.

Very possibly, if I should live seven years longer, we should be acquainted with each other. I verily think your reserve wears off, though only by an hair's breadth at a time. Quicken your pace. What you do, do quickly. 'Scarce anything important enough to write upon'! Why, could you not say something about yourself And is there anything relating to your welfare which is not important to me Am not I concerned in everything which concerns you which either lessens or increases your happiness I want you to be as happy and (in order thereto) as holy as an angel, that you may do the will of God on earth as angels do in heaven.

I am less careful about your increase in knowledge any farther than it tends to love. There is a danger of your laying more stress on this than sound reason requires. Otherwise you would reap much profit from sermons, which do not improve your knowledge--which do not apply to the understanding so directly as to the heart. I feel more want of heat than light. I value light; but it is nothing compared to love. Aim at this, my dear friend, in all public exercises, and then you will seldom be disappointed. Then you will not stop on the threshold of perfection (I trust you do not now), but will press on to the mark, to the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, till you experimentally know all that love of God which passeth all (speculative) knowledge.

The lengthening of your life and the restoring your health are invaluable blessings. But do you ask how you shall improve them to the glory of the Giver And are you willing to know Then I will tell you how. Go and see the poor and sick in their own poor little hovels. Take up your cross, woman! Remember the faith! Jesus went before you, and will go with you. Put off the gentlewoman; you bear an higher character.

You are an heir of God and joint-heir with Christ ! Are you not going to meet Him in the air with ten thousand of His saints O be ready!

To William Alwood [9]
ARMAGH, June 11, 1775.

DEAR BILLY,--I am not easy to have this thing hang any longer. I therefore desire that you will immediately fix a day and summon all the trustees, preachers, stewards, to meet you on that day at Chester, to determine that affair at once and to bring it to a final issue.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Rankin
CLONMAIN, NEAR ARMAGH, June 13, 1775.

DEAR TOMMY,--I am afraid our correspondence for the time to come will be more uncertain than ever, since the sword is drawn; and it is well if they have not on both sides thrown away the scabbard. What will the end of these things be either in Europe or America It seems, huge confusion and distress, such as neither we nor our fathers had known 1 But it is enough if all issues in glory to God and peace and goodwill among men.

I am sorry for poor T--- R---. I well hoped God had thoroughly healed his backsliding, and so lifted up his head that he would have fallen no more. But the case is not desperate yet; you must in no wise give him up. I have scarcely ever known an habitual drunkard finally reclaimed before he had relapsed more than once or twice. Your point is, first save him from the occasions of sin, then incite him not to east away hope. Nothing but this, despair of conquering, can totally destroy him. As long as he keeps up the faintest hope he will strive against sin.

My brother wrote me word that he had received a copy of the tract that you have written. Something of the kind may be very seasonable. Never had America such a call to repentance. For unless general reformation prevent general destruction, what a scene will soon be opened I Ruin and desolation must soon overspread the land and fair houses be turned into ruinous heaps. But what are those strange phenomena which you speak of Send me an account of just so much as you can depend upon.

Should not you appoint in America (as we do in England and Ireland) one or more general days of fasting and prayer--I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Earl of Dartmouth, Secretary of State for the Colonies [10]

IN THE WAY TO DUBLIN, June 14, 1775.

MY LORD,--I would not speak, as it may seem to be concerning myself with things that lie out of my province. But I dare not refrain from it any longer; I think silence in the present case would be a sin against God, against my country, and against my own soul.

But what hope can I have of doing good, of making the least impression upon your Lordship where so many have spoken in vain, and those far better qualified to speak on so delicate a subject

They were better qualified in some respects; in others they were not. They had not less bias upon their minds; they were not free from worldly hopes and fears. Their passions were engaged; and how easily do these blind the eyes of the understanding! They were not more impartial. Most of them were prejudiced in the highest degree. They neither loved the King nor his Ministers. Rather they hated them with a perfect hatred. And your Lordship knowing this, if you was a man, could not avoid having some prejudice to them; in which case it would be hardly possible to feel the full force of their arguments.

They had not better means of information, of knowing the real tempers and sentiments, either of the Americans on the one hand, or of the English, Irish, and Scots on the other. Above all, they trusted in themselves, in their own power of convincing and persuading. I trust only in the living God, who hath the hearts of all men in His hand.

And whether my writing do any good or no, it need do no harm. For it rests within your Lordship's breast whether any eye but your own shall see it.

All my prejudices are against the Americans. For I am an High Churchman, the son of an High Churchman, bred up from my childhood in the highest notions of passive obedience and non-resistance. And yet, in spite of all my rooted prejudice, I cannot avoid thinking (if I think at all) that an oppressed people asked for nothing more than their legal rights, and that in the most modest and inoffensive manner which the nature of the thing would allow.

But waiving this, waiving all considerations of right and wrong, I ask, Is it common sense to use force toward the Americans

A letter now before me says, 'Four hundred of the Regulars and forty of the Militia were killed in the last skirmish.' What a disproportion! And this is the first essay of raw men against regular troops!

You see, my Lord, whatever has been affirmed, these men will not be frightened. And it seems they will not be conquered so easily as was at first imagined. They will probably dispute every inch of ground, and, if they die, die sword in hand.

Indeed, some of our valiant officers say, 'Two thousand men will clear America of these rebels.' No, nor twenty thousand, nor perhaps treble that number, be they rebels or not. They are as strong men as you; they are as valiant as you, if not abundantly more valiant. For they are one and all enthusiasts --enthusiasts for liberty. They are calm, deliberate enthusiasts. And we know how this principle

Breathes into softest souls stem love of war,

And thirst of vengeance, and contempt of death.

We know men animated with this will leap into a fire or rush upon a cannon's mouth.

'But they have no experience of war.' And how much more have our troops How few of them ever saw a battle! 'But they have no discipline.' That is an entire mistake. Already they have near as much as our army. And they will learn more of it every day. So that in a short time they will understand it as well as their assailants.

'But they are divided, among themselves: so you are informed by various letters and memorials.' So, I doubt not, was poor Rehoboam informed concerning the ten tribes! So (nearer our times) was Philip informed concerning the people of the Netherlands! No, my Lord, they are terribly united; not in the Province of New England only, but down as low as the Jerseys and Pennsylvania the bulk of the people are so united that to speak a word in favor of the present English measures would almost endanger a man's life. Those who inform me of this (one of whom was with me last week, lately come from Philadelphia) are no sycophants; they say nothing to curry favor; they have nothing to gain or lose by me. But they speak with sorrow of heart what they have seen with their eyes and heard with their own ears.

Those men think one and all, be it right or wrong, that they are contending pro aris et focis, for their wives, children, liberty! What advantage have they herein over men that fight only for pay! none of whom care a straw for the cause wherein they are engaged, most of whom strongly disapprove of it.

Have they not another considerable advantage Is there occasion to recruit the troops Their supplies are at hand, all round about them: ours are three thousand miles off.

Are we then able to conquer the Americans, suppose they are left to themselves Suppose all our neighbors stand stock still and leave us and them to fight it out But are we sure of this Are we sure that all our neighbors will stand stock still I doubt they have not promised it. And if they had, could we rely upon those promises

Yet it is not probable they will send ships or men to America. Is there not a shorter way Do they not know where England and Ireland lie And have they not troops as well as ships in readiness All Europe is well apprised of this; only the English know nothing of the matter! What if they find means to land but ten thousand men where are the troops in England or Ireland to oppose them Why, cutting the throats of their brethren in America! Poor England in the meantime!

'But we have our militia, our valiant, disciplined militia; these will effectually oppose them.' Give me leave, my Lord, to relate a little circumstance of which one then on the spot informed me. In 1776 a large body of militia were marching towards Preston against the rebels. In a wood which they were marching by, a boy happened to discharge his fowling-piece. The soldiers gave all for lost, and by common consent threw down their arms and ran for life. So much dependence is to be placed on our valorous militia!

But, my Lord, this is not all. We have thousands of enemies, perhaps more dangerous than French or Spaniards. They are landed already; they fill our cities, our towns, our villages. As I travel four or five thousand miles every year, I have an opportunity of conversing freely with more persons of every denomination than any one else in the three kingdoms. I cannot therefore but know the general disposition of the people, English, Scots, and Irish; and I know an huge majority of them are exasperated almost to madness. Exactly so they were throughout England and Scotland about the year 1640; and in great measure by the same means--by inflammatory papers, which were spread, as they are now, with the utmost diligence in every corner of the land. Hereby the bulk of the people were effectually cured of all love and reverence for the King; so that, first despising, then hating him, they were just ripe for open rebellion. And I assure your Lordship so they are now: they want nothing but a leader.

Two circumstances more deserve to be considered: the one that there was at that time a general decay of trade almost throughout the kingdom; the other that there was an uncommon dearness of provisions. The case is the same in both respects at this day. So that even now there are multitudes of people that, having nothing to do and nothing to eat, are ready for the first bidder; and that, without inquiring into the merits of the cause, would flock to any that would give them bread.

Upon the whole I am really sometimes afraid that 'this evil is of the Lord.' When I consider (to say nothing of ten thousand other vices shocking to human nature) the astonishing luxury of the rich and the profaneness of rich and poor, I doubt whether general dissoluteness of manners does not demand a general visitation. Perhaps the decree is already gone forth from the Governor of the world. Perhaps even now,

As he that buys surveys a ground,

So the destroying angel measures it around.

Calm he surveys the perishing nation,

Ruin behind him stalks and empty desolation.

But we Englishmen are too wise to acknowledge that God has anything to do in the world! Otherwise should we not seek Him by fasting and prayer before He lets the lifted thunder drop O my Lord, if your Lordship can do anything let it not be wanting! For God's sake, for the sake of the King, of the nation, of your lovely family, remember Rehoboam! Remember Philip the Second! Remember King Charles the First!--I am, with true regard, my Lord,

Your Lordship's obedient servant.

To Lord North, First Lord of the Treasury [11]
ARMAGH, June 15, 1775.

MY LORD,--I would not speak, as it may seem to be concerning myself with things that lie out of my province. But I dare not refrain from it any longer; I think silence in the present case would be a sin against God, against my country, and against my own soul.

But what hope can I have of doing good, of making the least impression upon your Lordship, when so many have spoken in vain, and those far better qualified to speak on so delicate a subject They were better qualified in some respects; in others they were not. They had not less bias upon their minds; they were not free from worldly hopes and fears. Their passions were engaged; and how easily do those blind the eyes of their understanding! They were not more impartial; most of them were prejudiced in the highest degree. They neither loved the King nor his Ministers; rather they hated them with a perfect hatred; and your Lordship knows that you could not, if you were a man, avoid having some prejudice to them. In this case it would be hardly possible to feel the full force of their arguments. They had not better means of information, of knowing the real tempers and sentiments, either of the Americans on the one hand, or the English, Irish, or Scots on the other. Above all, they trusted in themselves, in their own power of convincing and persuading: I trust only in the living God, who hath the hearts of all men in His hands. And whether my writing do any good or no, it need do no harm; for it rests within your Lordship's breast whether any eye but your own shall see it.

I do not intend to enter upon the question whether the Americans are in the right or in the wrong. Here all my prejudices are against the Americans; for I am an High Churchman, the son of an High Churchman, bred up from my childhood in the highest notions of passive obedience and non-resistance. And yet, in spite of all my long-rooted prejudices, I cannot avoid thinking, if I think at all, these, an oppressed people, asked for nothing more than their legal rights, and that in the most modest and inoffensive manner that the nature of the thing would allow.

But waiving this, waiving all considerations of right and wrong, I ask, Is it common sense to use force toward the Americans A letter now before me, which I received yesterday, says, 'Four hundred of the regulars and forty of the militia were killed in the late skirmish.' What a disproportion is this! And this is the first essay of raw men against regular troops! You see, my Lord, whatever has been affirmed, these men will not be frightened. And it seems they will not be conquered so easily as was at first imagined. They will probably dispute every inch of ground, and, if they die, die sword in hand. Indeed, some of our valiant officers say, ' Two thousand men will clear America of these rebels.' No, nor twenty thousand, be they rebels or not, nor perhaps treble that number. They are as strong men as you; they are as valiant as you, if not abundantly more valiant, for they are one and all enthusiasts--enthusiasts for liberty. They are calm, deliberate enthusiasts. And we know how this principle

Breathes into softer souls stem love of war,

And thirst of vengeance, and contempt of death.

We know men animated with this spirit will leap into a fire or rush into a cannon's mouth.

'But they have no experience in war.' And how much more have our troops Very few of them ever saw a battle. 'But they have no discipline.' That is an entire mistake. Already they have near as much as our army. And they will learn more of it every day; so that in a short time, if the fatal occasion continue, they will understand it as well as their assailants. 'But they are divided amongst themselves.' So you are informed by various letters and memorials. So, doubt not, was poor Rehoboam informed concerning the ten tribes! So, nearer our own times, was Philip informed concerning the people of the Netherlands. No, my Lord, they are terribly united. Not in the Province of New England only, but down as low as the Jerseys and Pennsylvania. The bulk of the people are so united that to speak a word in favor of the present English measures would almost endanger a man's life. Those who informed me of this (one of whom was with me last week, lately come from Philadelphia) are no sycophants; they say nothing to curry favor; they have nothing to gain or lose by me. But they speak with sorrow of heart what they have seen with their own eyes and heard with their own ears.

These men think, one and all, be it right or wrong, that they are contending pro aris et focis, for their wives, children, and liberty! What an advantage have they herein over many that fight only for pay, none of whom care a straw for the cause wherein they are engaged, most of whom strongly disapprove of it! Have they not another considerable advantage Is there occasion to recruit the troops Their supplies are at hand and all round about them: ours are three thousand miles off!

Are we, then, able to conquer the Americans, suppose they are left to themselves, suppose all our neighbors should stand stock still and leave us and them to fight it out But we are not sure of this. Nor are we sure that all our neighbors will stand stock still. I doubt they have not promised it; and if they had, could we rely upon those promises Yet it is not probable they will send ships or men to America. Is there not a shorter way Do they not know where England and Ireland lie And have they not troops as well as ships in readiness All Europe is well apprised of this; only the English know nothing of the matter! What if they find means to land but ten thousand men Where are the troops in England or Ireland to oppose them Why, cutting the throats of their brethren in America! Poor England in the meantime!

'But we have our militia---our valiant, disciplined militia. These will effectually oppose them.' Give me leave, my Lord, to relate a little circumstance of which I was informed by a clergyman who knew the fact. In 1716 a large body of militia were marching towards Preston against the rebels. In a wood which they were passing by a boy happened to discharge his fowling-piece. The soldiers gave all for lost, and by common consent threw down their arms and ran for life. So much dependence is to be placed on our valorous militia!

But, my Lord, this is not all. We have thousands of enemies, perhaps more dangerous than French or Spaniards. As I travel four or five thousand miles every year I have an opportunity of conversing freely with more persons of every denomination than any one else in the three kingdoms. I cannot but know the general disposition of the people--English, Scots, and Irish; and I know a large majority of them are exasperated almost to madness. Exactly so they were throughout England and Scotland about the year 1640; and in a great measure by the same means--by inflammatory papers which were spread, as they are now, with the utmost diligence in every corner of the land. Hereby the bulk of the population were effectually cured of all love and reverence for the King. So that, first despising, then hating him, they were just ripe for open rebellion. And, I assure your Lordship, so they are now. They want nothing but a leader.

Two circumstances more are deserving to be considered: the one, that there was at that time a decay of general trade almost throughout the kingdom; the other, there was a common dearness of provisions. The case is the same in both respects at this day. So that even now there are multitudes of people that, having nothing to do and nothing to eat, are ready for the first bidder; and that, without inquiring into the merits of the cause, would flock to any who would give them bread.

Upon the whole, I am really sometimes afraid that this evil is from the Lord. When I consider the astonishing luxury of the rich, and the shocking impiety of rich and poor, I doubt whether general dissoluteness of manners does not demand a general visitation. Perhaps the decree is already gone forth from the Governor of the world. Perhaps even now,

As he that buys surveys a ground,

So the destroying angel measures it around.

Calm he surveys the perishing nation;

Ruin behind him stalks, and empty desolation.

--I am, with true regard, my Lord,

Your Lordship's obedient servant.

To Thomas Wride [12]
DUBLIN, July 22, 1775.

The present question concerns not John Floyd but Thomas Wride.

The words which I heard you speak at Limerick were such as no civilized Turk or heathen would have suffered to come out of his mouth. I hoped this would have been the last time; but you now repeat the same in cool blood. Your letter was read at the Conference, and our brethren desired me to inform you are no longer fit for our Connection. Such a foul-mouthed rafter (upon whatever provocation) is quite unfit for a Methodist preacher. Such base language is too bad for the fishwives of Billingsgate. It is such as an archangel would not use to the devil. You must have done with it for ever if you desire to have any farther fellowship with John Wesley.

To Ann Bolton [13]

BOLTON, July 25, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I wanted much to hear from you, and am glad to find you are not moved from your steadfastness.

At present I have but just time to tell you that on Monday, August the 14th, I hope to be at Witney, in my way to Wales, and to see my dear friend there. I can hardly preach before seven o'clock, as I am to come from London that day. Time is short. Remember, my dear Nancy,

Your ever affectionate brother.

PS.--I did not receive yours of May 8 till yesterday.

To Miss Bolton, At Witney,

Oxfordshire. Cross Post.

To Hannah Ball

LEEDS, July 28, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Undoubtedly that is our calling, to stand fast in glorious liberty, whatever God is pleased to give or take away. We may feel, and yet resign, like the Marquis De Renty when he apprehended his wife was dying. And this is a proof, not of want of affection, but of such an affection as is well pleasing to God.

You will have need now to use double diligence to stir up the gift of God in those who have been hindered from attending His word, lest they should be faint in their mind.--I am, my dear sister, Your affectionate brother.

To James Dempster [14]
NEAR LEEDS, July 28, 1775.

DEAR JEMMY,--Last month I was at the gates of death. But it pleased God just then to rebuke the fever, so that my pulse began to beat again after it had totally ceased. Since that time I have been gradually recovering strength, and am now nearly as well as ever. Let us use the short residue of life to the glory of Him that gave it!--I am

Yours affectionately.

To John King [15]
NEAR LEEDS, July 28, 1775.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Always take advice or reproof as a favor; it is the surest mark of love.

I advised you once, and you took it as an affront; nevertheless I will do it once more.

Scream no more, at the peril of your soul. God now warns you by me, whom He has set over you. Speak as earnestly as you can, but do not scream. Speak with all your heart, but with a moderate voice. It was said of our Lord, ' He shall not cry'; the word properly means, He shall not scream. Herein be a follower of me, as I am of Christ. I often speak loud, often vehemently; but I never scream, I never strain myself. I dare not; I know it would be a sin against God and my own soul. Perhaps one reason why that good man Thomas Walsh, yea and John Manners too, were in such grievous darkness before they died was because they shortened their own lives.

O John, pray for an advisable and teachable temper! By nature you are very far from it; you are stubborn and headstrong. Your last letter was written in a very wrong spirit. If you cannot take advice from others, surely you might take it from

Your affectionate brother.

To Mary Lewis [16]
NEAR LEEDS, July 28, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--By the blessing of God I am at least as well as I was before my late illness; and I have now recovered my strength, which returned by slow degrees from the time I got into the open air.

Your being fully employed has been a means of preserving you from a thousand snares. Young persons who have little to do are in the greatest danger of all others. But in all your business you can hold fast that point--' This one thing I do': I love God; I serve God; I work out my own salvation. What else upon earth is worth a thought All besides passes away like a dream.

As many of our brethren have desired that Mr. Muffin may spend another year at Bristol, Mr. Saunderson cannot be there next year, were it only on this account. Two preachers never stay two years together in one place, unless one of them be a supernumerary. But I doubt his late behavior is another objection; for I am afraid the observations you make concerning it are but too well grounded.

Your letters are never too long. I have more letters to write than you; therefore mine are shorter.

Keep close to Him that loves you, and He will soon make you partaker of your hope. All things are ready!--I am, my dear Molly,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Lewis, At Mr. Flower's, On the Key, Bristol.

To Thomas Rankin
NEAR LEEDS, July 28, 1775.

DEAR TOMMY,--I rejoice to hear that the work of our Lord still prospers in your hands. If the temple is built even in troublous times, it is not by the power of man. I rejoice, too, over honest Francis Asbury, and hope he will no more enter into temptation. Do not despair of poor T---- R---- He is not out of God's reach yet. I know no reason why we should not print the names of the American preachers. You may print an edition of the Christian Pattern, and apply the profits of it to the payment of the debt. The Societies should pay the passage of the preachers. But you must not imagine that any more of them will come to America till these troubles are at an end.

Certainly this is the point which we should insist upon in season and out of season. The universal corruption of all orders and degrees of men loudly calls for the vengeance of God; and inasmuch as all other nations are equally corrupt, it seems God will punish us by one another. What can prevent this but an universal, or at least a general, repentance Otherwise we have great reason to fear God will soon say,

'Sword, go through that land and destroy it.'

Those clergymen should be lovingly advised not to hurt our preachers. I will pay your arrears. We have only to live to-day! God will take care of to-morrow.--I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse
NEAR LEEDS, July 28, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I will talk with Lancelot Harrison at the Conference, and consider what is best to be done. A surgeon in London has lately published a treatise on A New Method of Curing Sore Legs, which I believe has never failed. I think Mr. Woodhouse will not die yet, unless it be by the help of physicians and surgeons. If Mr. Barnard chose to dissolve the partnership, Mr. Hutton could not help it. But he cannot expect to have so much custom at first as an old, well-known shop.

Let us be ready to do and suffer all the will of God our Lord: then what can hurt us--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse, At Mr. Hutton's,

In Epworth, Near Thorne, Yorkshire.

To Ann Bolton
NEAR LEEDS, July 30, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--God has done great things for us already. But we shall see greater things than these. We have reason to hope that there will be a larger shower of grace than any we have yet known. But we cannot tell whether the general blessing will be preceded by a general visitation. God has long been drawing us to our good and using every gentle means of reforming a sinful nation. But if this will not avail, He will take another way; He will send affliction to cure sin.

If Miss Hurrell and you are separated for a season, it may be a means of making you more useful to each other when you are restored to each other. In the meantime you have a Friend who is able to supply all your wants, and from whom you never need be separated in time or in eternity.

From the time that the fever burned I have been continually recovering strength, though by slow degrees. At present I am nearly the same as before my illness. And I ever am, my dear Nancy,

Yours affectionately.

To his Brother Charles [17]
LEEDS, July 31, 1775.

DEAR BROTHER,--I must not delay answering your important question, ' What can be done with William Pine ' If he still, after my earnest warning, 'every week publishes barefaced treason,' I beg you would once more warn him in my name and in your own; and if he slights or forgets this warning, then give him his choice either to leave us quietly or to be publicly disowned. At such a time as this, when our foreign enemies are hovering over us and our own nation is all in a ferment, it is particularly improper to say one word which tends to inflame the minds of the people.

My strength is gradually increasing. Except the shaking of my hand, I am now nearly as I was before my illness, but I hope more determined to sell all for the pearl.

Peace be with you and yours! Adieu!

To his Brother Charles
LEEDS, August 4, 1775.

DEAR BROTHER,--The Conference (a blessed one) was concluded this morning, and I am as strong as I was when it began. I do not advise you to accept of the invitation: I read a letter to-day which I do not like.

Nay, Mr. Saunderson is 'settled in Bristol '--that is, as a local preacher.

Such an Address to the Americans would be highly seasonable. Have you heard anything of the Africans

I hope to be in London on Tuesday evening and the Thursday in the following week at Brecon.

As matters are now, I let the Orphan House alone, lest the remedy should be worse than the disease. I have likewise a good letter from T. Rankin. He and all our brethren expect sufferings. Hitherto they have behaved extremely well. I must write by post to Sister Castleman and my other Bristol friends. Peace be with you and yours! Adieu!

To Thomas Vasey [18]
NEAR LEEDS, August 5, 1775.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I trust you will not turn again into folly, but watch and pray that you enter not into temptation.

Mr. Wolfe, the assistant in Salisbury circuit, is a mild tender-hearted man. I hope he will be of service to you, and so may Mr. Undrell your other fellow laborer. You are now called more than ever to redeem the time, to walk humbly and closely with God; and to be a man of one business. One that have nothing to do but to save your own soul and those that hear you.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Tho. Vasey, At the Preaching-house, Sarum.

To Damaris Perronet
NEAR LEEDS, August 6, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I believe my late illness has already answered many wise ends of Providence. It has been a blessing to me and to many others--a fresh proof that God doeth all things well.

I doubt not but Brother Wood' and his fellow laborer will be still zealous and active for God; and if so, his work will surely increase at Sevenoaks and the Wells as well as other places. Nay, I do not despair of poor Canterbury; it is not out of God's reach.

I dreamed last night that the Spaniards were come, and were searching all houses and putting men to the torture. But on a sudden they were vanished out of the land, I could not tell how. My Betsy should not think that I am ever so busy as not to have leisure to read and answer her letters. I think Philothea, too, since I am alive again, should have written to me either in verse or prose.--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To his Brother Charles
LONDON, August 10, 1775.

DEAR BROTHER,--I would do everything to oblige those on either side, except speaking evil of the other.

My route is this: Monday, August 14, Witney; Tuesday, 15, Gloucester; Wednesday, 16, The Hay; Thursday and Friday, Brecon; Saturday, Carmarthen (Deo vo/.); Monday, 28, Bristol.

I sent your order to Sam. Heaton.

I believe it will be best to accept of Mr. Castleman's invitation at Bristol, and to go straight to his house. I come back through Cardiff; if you could get thither, I could bring you home. It is not safe to live or die without love.

Peace be with you all! Adieu.

I wish Sammy Lewis would meet me on the 28th at the Old Passage.

To Thomas Rankin [19]

LONDON, August 13, 1775.

DEAR TOMMY,--I do not give up T---- R---- yet; he is not out of God's reach.

I am not sorry that Brother Asbury stays with you another year. In that time it will be seen what God will do with North America, and you will easily judge whether our preachers are called to remain any longer therein. If they are, God will make their way plain and give you favor even with the men that delight in war. Even in the Civil War of Rome Atticus stood firm in the esteem of both the contending parties. And so did the Archbishop of Cambray during the War in the Netherlands; not only the officers but the common soldiers, when they went by, treating him with love and regard. The clouds do indeed gather more and more, and it seems an heavy storm will follow; certainly it will, unless the prayers of the faithful obtain a longer reprieve.

'The preachers at the bottom of all this outcry' No, indeed; nor any of the Americans. They are only the tools of men on this side the water, who use them for deadly purposes. The scheme lies deep, and the wise men of the world imagine it cannot fail of success. But I trust One wiser than them will yet turn the counsel of Athithophel into foolishness.

A few weeks ago I was at the gates of death in the North of Ireland. But the fever felt His touch and fled. And I am now just as I was before it came. You did well to remove the books into a place of safety, if any such can be found in America. It is no wonder that the spirits of the men that know not God are sharpened into madness, that human creatures become and commence lions and bears; this is the genuine fruit of war! Certainly, if they persecute in one city, you should flee into another. Peace be with your spirits.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ann Bolton

GLOUCESTER, August 15, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I have been thinking of you much to-day, and with a good deal of satisfaction. And yet there was one thought which was not pleasing: I thought you did not care for my company. You seemed almost studiously to avoid it. At other times, indeed, you have been encumbered with much company or hurried with preparing for them; but it was not so now. I therefore rather impute it (for I will not ascribe it to want of love) to your bodily disorder. Perhaps it was painful to you to talk. If so, this was reason good. I had rather not convene with you at all than increase your pain. I was therefore glad (although I felt your pain) that I did not see you this morning. It was fit for you to rise at so un-seasonable an hour. But you must make it up by writing and by telling me how you are in soul and body. I want you to [be] all a flame of holy love! I want you now to do His will as angels do in heaven! to be all life, all fire, all light in the Lord! and yet not quite to forget, my dear Nancy,

Yours most affectionately.

To John Fletcher
BRECON, August 18, 1775.

DEAR SIR,--We followed your advice, and were more exact than ever in examining the preachers both as to grace and gifts. A solemn awe was spread through the whole assembly, knowing that God was in the midst of us. And the consequence was far beyond what we could expect--namely, a confidence in each other, and a full conviction that the outcry raised by Mr. Hilton and others was totally without foundation.

I have now received all your papers, and here and there made some small corrections. I suppose you have read Dean Tucker's Letters to Dr. Kippis. I read them in my journey from Gloucester hither, and never before saw so clearly the rise and progress of Predestinarianism. Does not he show beyond all contradiction that it was hatched by Augustine in spite to Pelagius (who very probably held no other heresy than you and I do now); that it spread more and more in the Western Church till the eleventh century; that Peter Lombard then formed it into a complete system; that in the twelfth century Thomas Aquinas bestowed much pains in explaining and confirming it; that in the thirteenth Duns Scotus did the same; that Ignatius Loyola and all the first Jesuits held it, as all the Dominican and Augustine Friars (with the Jansenists) do to this day; that Bellarmine was firm in it, as were the bulk of the Romanists, till the Council of Trent, when, in furious opposition to Luther and Calvin, they disclaimed their ancient tenets.

When you do not write, you must travel. I think the sooner the better. Sit still till I die, and you may sit still for ever.

I do not perceive that you have granted too much, or that there is any difference between us. The Address to the Perfect I approve of most, and think it will have a good effect. But there may be some danger of growing too voluminous, for then the work will come into fewer hands.

The doctrine of Justification and Salvation by Faith are grievously abused by many Methodists. We must guard as many as we can.--I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Earl of Dartmouth, Secretary of State for the Colonies
HAVERFORDWEST, August 23, 1775.

MY LORD,--A letter which I received from Mr. Lowland yesterday occasions my giving you this trouble. You told him the Administration have been assured from every part of the kingdom that trade was as plentiful and flourishing as ever and the people as well employed and as well satisfied.

Sir, I aver from my own personal knowledge, from the testimony of my own eyes and ears, that there cannot be a more notorious falsehood than has been palmed upon them for truth. I aver that in every part of England where I have been (and I have been east, west, north, and south within these two years) trade in general is exceedingly decayed and thousands of people are quite unemployed. Some I know to have perished for want of bread; others I have seen creeping up and down like walking shadows. I except three or four manufacturing towns, which have suffered less than others.

I aver (2) that the people in general all over the nation are so far from being well satisfied that they are far more deeply dissatisfied than they appear to have been even a year or two before the Great Rebellion, and far more dangerously dissatisfied. The bulk of the people in every city, town, and village where I have been do not so much aim at the Ministry, as they usually did in the last century, but at the King himself. He is the object of their anger, contempt, and malice. They heartily despise His Majesty and hate him with a perfect hatred. They wish to imbue their hands in his blood; they are full of the spirit of murder and rebellion; and I am persuaded, should any occasion offer, thousands would be ready to act what they now speak. It is as much as ever I can do, and sometimes more than I can do, to keep this plague from infecting my own friends. And nineteen or twenty to whom I speak in defense of the King seem never to have heard a word spoken for him before. I marvel what wretches they are who abuse the credulity of the Ministry by those florid accounts.

Even where I was last, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, a tenant of Lord Dartmouth was telling me,

' Sir, our tradesmen are breaking all round me, so that I know not what the end will be.' Even in Leeds I had appointed to dine at a merchant's; but before I came the bailiffs were in possession of the house. Upon my saying, 'I thought Mr.---- had been in good circumstances,' I was answered, 'He was so; but the American war has ruined him.'

When I began the enclosed, I designed to send it to Mr. Wharton, according to his desire. But upon reflection, I judged it not improbable that he might make a bad use of it; and thought it might be more advisable to send it directly to your Lordship.

To Samuel Bradburn [20]
LAUNCESTON, August 31, 1775.

DEAR SAMMY,--Trust in the Lord, and do good; so shalt thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed.

Yours affectionately.

Bradburn replied:

REVERAND AND DEAR SIR,--I have often been struck with the beauty of the passage of Scripture quoted in your letter, but I must confess that I never saw such useful explanatory notes upon it before. --I am, reverend and dear sir, your obedient and grateful servant,

To John Crook [21]
BRISTOL, September 22, 1775.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I have wrote to Mr. Harrison, Hume, and Brooks in the Isle, and told them my plan for helping them, which is this. Go you down directly in the White-haven Circuit to labor there as a third preacher. Then let the three preachers visit the Isle in turns, each staying a month at a time. If the Bishop comes, you should immediately send him in my name the First Part of the Earnest Appeal; and you spread among the richer of the Society the Plain Account of the Methodists, and the Advice to the Methodists, with all the single Sermons. Let Mr. Mason go over first, and you next. You see, in your [case] your wife is considered.

Your affectionate brother.

You may write to Jacob Rowell at Yarm, and tell him I desire the young man he wrote to me of may go into Lincolnshire in your place. The sooner the better.

Mr. Mason, at Whitehaven.

To be left at the Methodist

Preaching-house, Cumberland.

To Alexander Hume
BRISTOL, September 22, 1775.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I rejoice to hear that God has made Mr. Crook's labor of love profitable to some of you, and cannot blame you for desiring to have him with you a little longer.' I will write to Mr. Mason, the Assistant at Whitehaven, that Mr. Crook is coming to be a third preacher in that circuit. The three preachers may then visit the Isle month by month; so that you will have Mr. Crook one month in three. They will all teach you that religion is holy tempers and holy lives, and that the sum of all is love.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Alexander Hume, In Peeltown,

Isle of Man.

To John Fletcher
LONDON, October 6, 1775.

DEAR SIR,--I came hither a quarter of an hour ago. Your answer to Mr. Shirley will, I trust, do great good. I cannot but hope it will be of service to himself; for, to say the truth, he does not seem to be sensible that he has done anything amiss. He does not appear to have the least conception of having injured me. I was going to print an edition of your letters here; but I will wait till your Sixth Letter comes, to which I think it will be exceeding proper to annex that you wrote to me. I shall now be here and hereabouts for some months. The Lord give you a right judgement in all things, and evermore to rejoice in His holy comfort--I am, dear sir,

Yours most affectionately.

To his Brother Charles
RAMSBURY PARK, October 17, 1775.

DEAR BROTHER,--It takes time to set people's heads right; but we must despair of nothing. I have cast my bread upon the waters, and should have been content though there had been no present fruit. Some hours this morning I devote to 'Americanus.' What is material I shall endeavor to answer. It is well if I can give as good an account of everything else as of my change of judgement.

I find a danger now of a new kind--a danger of losing my love for the Americans: I mean for their miserable leaders; for the poor sheep are 'more sinned against than sinning,' especially since the amazing informations which I have received from James Ireland. Yet it is certain the bulk of the people both in England and America mean no harm; they only follow their leaders, and do as they are bid without knowing why or wherefore.

On Friday I hope to be in London and to talk with the committee about building a new Foundery. This is a lovely spot and a lovely family. 'Tis pity but you could call here. It is four miles from Marlborough, and only a mile north of the London road. Peace be with you and yours! Adieu!

To his Brother Charles [22]

NEWBURY, October 19, 1775.

DEAR BROTHER,--Last night I received a curious anecdote from Mr. Merchant, the Independent minister here. He told me, 'Mr. Evans of Bristol (the elder) informed me that he dined with you (J. W.) at a merchant's house in Bristol; that he asked you how you was affected when you read the answer to your late tract: and you answered, Not at all; for you had never read it, and never would: to which he replied, That was not fair.'

Where lies the mistake The answer to my late tract is dated October 2. But I left Bristol October 1. Consequently no such conversation could exist. I fancy I have caught hold of the thread, and can unravel the whole. Last year a gentleman I did not know (who I suppose was Mr. Evans) dined with me at Mr. Wraxall’s; and probably he might speak to me (though I do not remember it) of some tract which I had then published. If so, there is only an harmless mistake of Mr. Merchant's, who misunderstood what Mr. Evans said.

But this makes it still more probable that his son is the author of the letter to me. 'Tis pity! Some of our friends at Bristol should tell him that he has quite lost himself; that he has forgotten all decency and good manners, and writes like a pert, self-conceited young man. I think a man of sense that could command his temper would make him a little ashamed. Adieu!

To Robert Costerdine [23]
LONDON, October 20, 1775.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I am sorry for poor Jer. Cocker. Twice or thrice God has lifted him out of the mire. If he fall again, I doubt he will rise no more.

It is the business of Tho. Hanson to remit that money to you. I know it was allowed at the Quarterly Meeting, for I was there myself. I wonder Tommy has not sent it to John Atlay. However, you may draw upon Brother Atlay for it.

Visit all the Society from house to house, and you will soon see fruit of it.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Rankin
LONDON, October 20, 1775.

DEAR TOMMY,--The account given in our newspapers of my death was not wholly without foundation; for I was only not dead, my pulse being quite gone and 'the wheel at the cistern without motion.' But then our Lord stepped in, and

The fever owned His touch, and fled.

My strength returned by swift degrees; and I am now at least as well as before my illness.

In the country places I believe you will have the largest harvest, where they know little and talk little about politics. Their hearts are engaged with something better, and they let the dead bury their dead. I am glad you are going into North Carolina; and why not into South Carolina too I apprehend those provinces would bear much fruit, as most parts of them are fresh, unbroken ground: And as the people are farther removed from the din of war, they may be more susceptible of the gospel of peace.

A paper was sent to me lately, occasioned by the troubles in America; but it would not do good. It is abundantly too tart; and nothing of that kind will be of service now. All parties are already too much sharpened against each other; we must pour water, not oil, into the flame. I had written a little tract upon the subject before I knew the American ports were shut up. [A Calm Address to our American Colonies. ' The ports being just then shut up by the Americans, I could not send it abroad, as I designed. However, it was not lost; within a few months, fifty or perhaps an hundred thousand copies, in newspapers and otherwise, were dispersed throughout Great Britain and Ireland.’ See Green’s Bibliography, No. 305.] I think there is not one sharp word therein; I did not design there should. However, many are excessively angry, and would willingly burn me and it together. Indeed, it is provoking; I suppose above forty thousand of them have been printed in three weeks, and still the demand for them is as great as ever.

I was glad to receive yours by Captain Crawford. I am entirely of your mind. I am persuaded love and tender measures will do far more than violence. And if I should have an interview with a great man (which seems to be not unlikely), I will by the grace of God tell him so without any circumlocution. Our time is in God's hands; let us stand ready for all things!---I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Jasper Winscom [24]

LONDON, October 20, 1775.

DEAR BROTHER,--I should have had no objection at all to Brother Skinner's going into Kent, but that it would interfere with our making a fair trial of the Isle of Wight. I would have this done without delay; and I much approve of the method you propose. We will help you out (as I said) with regard to the expense. I hope you will be able to procure the meetinghouse. Peace be with you and yours.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To his Brother Charles [25]
LONDON, October 28, 1775.

DEAR BROTHER,--I am just returned from Bedford. I have not seen the King these dozen years. I don't know what you mean by Dr. Smyth's book. It was best to take no notice of the angry ones.

At Ramsbury Park, about a mile to the left of the high road, lives James Nind, local preacher, and general steward for the circuit, on a farm of five hundred pounds a year. His wife, Sally Nind, is one of the most amiable women I know. They mightily desire that you would spend a few nights with them.

I am just putting into the press 'a new edition of the Address, corrected'; in which my change is accounted for, and two of the questions fully answered To the third, ' Why did not the Parliament tax them before' Mr. Madan answers, ' Because they were wiser; they knew the mischief that would ensue.' Dr. Johnson is in France.

I have not heard lately from Shoreham. If the worst comes, you must make shift at the Foundery for a week or two. I can put up another bed in that which was Jenny's room.

I do not think you are wise in destroying those papers. Some of them might have been useful to many.

When I was in Bristol, I ordered that Hugh Saunderson should preach on Thursday night. None but you should take his place. Joseph Pilmoor may preach on Friday or Monday. Some much like, others much dislike, H. Saunderson; but his audience generally is not small. However, I will refer him to you; but I wish you would fix Thursday.

Mr. Fletcher would not be safe without you or me. I should like a conference with Mr. Madan. I have a second friendly letter from him to-day. Peace be with you and yours! Adieu!

Pray give my love to T. Lewis, and tell him I thank him for his letter. If the persons now taken up are hanged, it may be the saving of the nation.

To Joseph Benson [26]
LONDON, October 30, 1775.

DEAR JOSEPH,--John Fenwick has sent me a minute account of the manner how Miss Hurrell came to speak in the room at Sunderland; and Alexander Paterson has given me a particular narration of what occurred on Sunday the 22nd instant. It seems--thus much is plain at least--that she has no more place at Sunderland; and I doubt whether we may not add, nor at any place in the Newcastle Circuit.

I am glad to hear that the word of God prospers in your hands. But you never will see the full fruit of your labors till you take up your cross and visit all the Society, rich and poor, from house to house.--I am, dear Joseph,

Yours affectionately.

To Thomas Taylor [27]

LONDON, October 30, 1775.

DEAR TOMMY,--At all hazards bring them into discipline; either mend them or end them. I think Mr. Cayley will do more good than harm. He is not now blameable with respect to his wife. She will not live with him. I shall have no objection to your mentioning Colne house if we live to see another Conference. It seems to be really a pressing case.

I advise you: (1) Be electrified (if need be) eight or ten times. (2) Keep your body always open, and that by food (as baked, boiled, or roasted apples) rather than by physic. (3) Wash your head every morning with cold water, and rub it well with a coarse hempen towel. (4) I advise you and Sister Taylor to breakfast three or four weeks on nettle tea. Then you will find preaching, especially in the morning, one of the noblest medicines in the world.--I am, with love to Nanny, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To John Mason
LONDON, November 1, 1775.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--T. Wride aimed at discipline exceeding well for a raw beginner. But he could not have so much weight as an experienced preacher. You will therefore supply what was wanting in his, and Brother Linnell will more than supply the place of honest, dull David Evans. So that I expect there will be no inconsiderable increase in the Societies this year, particularly at Whitehaven and Carlisle. Everywhere fail not to declare to them the whole counsel of God, and that in the plainest manner you can devise; but, above all, visit from house to house.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To his Brother Charles
LONDON, November 3, 1775.

DEAR BROTHER,--The Proposals and Preface will be sent on Monday. In the Preface to the new edition of the Address (which I will send with the Proposals) there is, I think, a sufficient answer to Mr. Evan's letter. But Mr. Raikes is right: if it bears no name, it has no title to any answer.

No man is a good judge in his own cause. I believe I am tolerably impartial; but you are not (at least, was not some time since) with regard to King Charles I. Come and see what I say. If the worst comes, we can agree to disagree.

The History has been some time in the press. The first volume is nearly printed. The paper is good; so is the type; and, what is stranger, the execution too. So much for your first letter.

Still I know not whom you mean by Dr. Smyth; unless it be the young clergyman in Ireland, who is a poet, but not of the first magnitude.

'Why were they not taxed for an hundred and fifty years ' How shockingly ignorant of the law are our lawyers! yea, and the whole body of the Lords and Commons into the bargain! to let Lord Chatham, Mr. Burke, &c. &c., so long triumph in this argumentum palmarium! Why, it is a blunder from top to bottom. They have been taxed over and over since the Restoration, by King Charles, King William, Queen Anne, and George II. I can now point out chapter and verse.

I think Mr. Madan grows more and more loving. Res ipsa jam reduxit in gratiam. I shall be right glad to see him. I hear nothing from Cornwall; and no news, you know, is good news.

Pray tell Brother Southcote I like his treatise well. I am writing something nearly on the subject. I am desired to preach at Bethnal Green Church on Sunday se'nnight, and purpose to print my sermon. You may guess a little of the tenor of it by the text: ' Lo, I have sinned and done wickedly; but these sheep, what have they done '

I hope Sally is better. Peace be with you all! Adieu!

To James Rouquet [28]
LONDON, November 8, 1775.

DEAR JEMMY,--I say, I remember nothing of that book, neither of title nor of the argument. But I will send to the bookseller's to-morrow for the book; and if I have read, I cannot but remember when I see it again. Afterwards you will hear more particularly from

Your affectionate brother.

But remember the merits of the cause do not turn upon this.

To Christopher Hopper

LONDON, November 11, 1775.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--There was something very awful in that storm which I suppose reached all over England and Ireland; although it seems not to have been altogether so violent in London as in most other places. I am sorry for Captain Davis and his widow. The judgements of God are abroad. The prayer-meetings may be of great use not only to individuals but to the whole nation. I see nothing besides prayer that can avail. For the one question is, ' Have we a right to tax or no ' If we have, they are rebels, and accountable to God and man for all the blood that is shed. If we have not, they are innocent, and the blood lies at our door. Will they allow this right or can we give it up--I am, with love to Sister Hopper,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To James Rouquet





LONDON, November 12, 1775.
DEAR JAMES,--I will now simply tell you the thing as it is. As I was returning from the Leeds Conference, one gave me the tract which you refer to, part of which I read on my journey. The spirit of it I observed to be admirably good; and I then thought the arguments conclusive. In consequence of which, I suppose (though I do not remember it), I recommended it both to you and others; but I had so entirely forgotten it, that even when it was brought to me the other day I could not recollect that I had ever seen it.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To William Pine [29]
LONDON, November 14, 1775.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Take care you be not carried away with the torrent. You stand on slippery ground.

I have wrote more largely to Mr. Rouquet, and refer you to his letter for particulars. Let no warm man persuade you to take any step which you may repent as long as you live.--I am, with love to Sister Pine,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mary Bosanquet

WESTMINSTER, November 15, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I cannot immediately give an answer to your question, because we have not yet received an answer from the Committee for letting the City lands. If they grant our petition and allow us a piece of ground to build on (as it is most probable they will), there will be no time for any one to come to London in hope of procuring money for other buildings. Our friends will certainly give all that they can spare toward erecting a new Foundery, and all will be little enough.

One great difference between the outward and inward work of God is, inward holiness is mostly instantaneous, given in a large degree at the moment when we are justified, or when we are sanctified or saved from inbred sin; but outward holiness is mostly gradual--wrought by little and little while we deny ourselves and take up our cross and work together with Him.

I think you would do well to have a thorough consultation with two or three of our friends that understand the world. Certainly these might be found in or near Leeds. And whatever was then judged best should be speedily and rigorously put in execution.--I am, my dear sister,

Your ever affectionate brother.





To John Valton [30]

DEPTFORD, November 20, 1775.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--We had hardly any frost last winter; perhaps you will have little more the ensuing. I am commonly more pinched by the November cold than by that which comes after Christmas. But, be that as it may, our wisdom is to take no thought for the morrow. And with every temptation that comes to-day there is a way to escape. You are just in your place, doing and suffering the will of your Lord in the way to which He has called you. Go on in His name and in the power of His might. Exhort all men to believe in Him now, and all believers now to grasp the prize, to look for Christ in a pure and sinless heart--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. John Valton, At Mr. Hans', In High Wycombe.

To Ann Bolton
LONDON, November 26, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I was asked the other day 'whether you was as lively and as useful as in times past.' I could truly say, ' I believed you was.' And have I not good ground so to believe I have narrowly observed you for' several years; I have read you over with a lover's eye, with all the friendly jealousy I could; I have marked all your tempers and all your words and actions that fall under my notice; I have carefully weighed you in the balance; and, blessed be God, I have not found you wanting. Once and again I had found you (what is so rarely found) capable of taking advice in the most delicate instance. And if I have sometimes thought your affection to me was a little cooler than formerly, I could not blame you for this; I knew something of myself, and therefore laid the blame where it was due. And I do not desire you to love me any farther than it is

a scale

Whereby to heavenly love thou may'st ascend.

But are you gaining ground with regard to inward life Is your heart more and more acquainted with God and devoted to Him and are you laboring to be more and more useful How go on the little flock at Witney How often do you visit them How is your health Everything that relates to you, nearly concerns, my dear Nancy,

Yours affectionately.

Write soon, and write freely.

To Samuel Bardsley

NORWICH, November 27, 1775.

DEAR SAMMY,--Whenever you want anything, you should tell me without delay. If Tommy Colbeck will give you two guineas, it may be deducted out of the book money. I am glad you go again to Skipton, and hope to see it myself if I live till summer. At present I am better than I was before my fever; only it has stripped me of my hair. The more pains you take, the more blessing you will find, especially in preaching full salvation receivable now by faith.--I am, dear Sammy,

Yours affectionately.

To Mr. Bardsley, At Mr. Garforth's,

At Skipton-in-Craven, Yorkshire. North Post.

To Mrs. Crosby

NORWICH, November 29, 1775.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I believe many of our friends had a real impression from above that this sickness should not be unto death. So we have a new one, added to a thousand proofs, that God hears the prayers of them that fear Him.

That observation does really hold in London--those who are the avowed enemies of Christian Perfection are in general the warmest enemies of King George and of all that are in authority under him; yet the counsel of the Lord shall stand, and He will turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness.

Betsy Hurrell will do no harm if she comes to Leeds again. I suppose it was for her sake chiefly that awful event was permitted. And it has had the effect which was designed. She was greatly humbled on the occasion.

I believe Mr. Fletcher would take a letter well.--I am, dear Sally,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Crosby, At Miss Bosanquet’s,

Near Leeds. North Post.





To the Editor of 'Lloyd's Evening Post' [31]

NORWICHCH, November 29, 1775.

SIR,--I have been seriously asked, From what motive did you publish your Calm Address to the American Colonies

I seriously answer, Not to get money. Had that been my motive, I should have swelled it into a shilling pamphlet and have entered it at Stationers' Hall.

Not to get preferment for myself or my brother's children. I am a little too old to gape after it for myself; and if my brother or I sought it for them, we have only to show them to the world.

Not to please any man living, high or low. I know mankind too well. I know they that love you for political service love you less than their dinner, and they that hate you hate you worse than the devil.

Least of all did I write with a view to inflame any; just the contrary. I contributed my mite toward putting out the flame which rages all over the land. This I have more opportunity of observing than any other man in England. I see with pain to what an height this already rises in every part of the nation. And I see many pouring oil into the flame by crying out, ' How unjustly, how cruelly the King is using the poor Americans, who are only contending for their liberty and for their legal privileges! '

Now, there is no possible way to put out this flame or hinder its rising higher and higher but to show that the Americans are not used either cruelly or unjustly; that they are not injured at all, seeing they are not contending for liberty (this they had even in its full extent, both civil and religious); neither for any legal privileges, for they enjoy all that their Charters grant. But what they contend for is the illegal privilege of being exempt from parliamentary taxation;--a privilege this which no charter ever gave to any American colony yet; which no charter can give, unless it be confirmed both by King, Lords, and Commons; which, in fact, our Colonies never had, which they never claimed till the present reign, and probably they would not have claimed it now had they not been incited thereto by letters from England. One of these was read, according to the desire of the writer, not only at the Continental Congress, but likewise in many congregations throughout the Combined Provinces. It advised them to seize upon all the King's officers; and exhorted them, 'Stand valiantly only for six months, and in that time there will be such commotions in England that you may have your own terms.'

This being the real state of the question without any coloring or aggravation, what impartial man can either blame the King or commend the Americans

With this view, to quench the fire, by laying the blame where it was due, the Calm Address was written--Sir, I am

Your humble servant.

As to reviewers, newswriters, London Magazines, and all that kind of gentlemen, they behave just as I expected they would. And let them lick up Mr. Toplady's spittle still, a champion worthy of their cause.

To Elizabeth Ritchie [32]
NORWICH, November 29, 1775.

MY DEAR BETSY,--' Temptations,' says one, ' and distinct deliverances from temptations avail much.' I do not doubt but you have found it so with regard to your late trials; although there are none which it is harder to withstand at your time of life. I am glad you were enabled to withstand that plausible temptation which few young women have power to resist, particularly when you had to encounter the persuasions of those you esteemed and loved.

Mr. Cayley, I think, will do some good; and I am persuaded he will do no hurt. I am glad Mr. Tennant has given you a little more employment; and a glorious employment it is! to be' a fellow worker with God!' Oh may you be found faithful! Be zealous for God! Be diligent! Be patient! And never forget

Yours affectionately.

To Caleb Evans [33]

LONDON, December 9, 1775.

REVEREND SIR,--You affirm (1) that I once 'doubted whether the measures taken with respect to America could be defended either on the foot of law, equity, or prudence.' I did doubt of these five years, nay indeed five months ago.

You affirm (2) that I 'declared' (last year) 'the Americans were an oppressed, injured people.' I do not remember that I did; but very possibly I might.

You affirm (3) that I then' strongly recommended An Argument for the Exclusive Right of the Colonies to Tax Themselves.' I believe I did; but I am now of another mind.

You affirm (4) 'You say in the Preface, I never saw that book.' I did say so. The plain case was, I had so entirely forgotten it that even when I saw it again I recollected nothing of it till I had read several pages. If I had, I might have observed that you borrowed more from Mr. Parker than I did from Dr. Johnson. Though I know not whether I should have observed it, as it does not affect the merits of the cause.

You affirm (5) ' You say, But I really believe he was told so'; and add, ' Supposing what I asserted was false, it is not easy to conceive what reason you could have for believing I was told so.' My reason was, I believed you feared God, and therefore would not tell a willful untruth; so I made the best excuse for you which I thought the nature of the thing would admit of. Had you not some reasons to believe this of me, and therefore to say (at least), ' I hope he forgot it'

'But at this time I was perfectly unknown to you.' No, at this time I knew you wrote that tract; but, had I not, charity would have induced me to hope this even of an entire stranger.

You now have my 'feeble reply'; and if you please to advance any new argument (personal reflections I let go), you may perhaps receive a farther reply from

Your humble servant.

To Walter Churchey [34]
LONDON, December 21, 1775.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--A few days ago my brother gave me a letter of yours dated November 24. I am surprised that one who has passed a winter in Scotland should complain of cold in Wales. It is not a good sign. I advise no one above twenty to think of learning Greek or Latin; he may employ his time abundantly better. But if John Broadbent has a turn for learning languages, by all means let him learn Welsh. This will turn to good account. And now is his time; you can direct and assist him herein. Meantime persuade him to refrain from screaming, and he will do well.

I may speak in confidence to you; take care it do not transpire. Put no confidence either in T---- or his wife. I stand in doubt of them both.

The printer is hastening on with the History; yet still I think him slow.--I am, with love to Sister Churchey,

Your affectionate brother.

To the Society Pro Fide et Christianismo [35]
LONDON, December 23, 1775.

GENTLEMEN,--I was out of town when your favor of January last came to London; and its being through some mistake mislaid occasioned my not seeing it for a considerable time after my return. Otherwise I should have set all other business aside in order to acknowledge the favor. It gave me a particular satisfaction to observe the zeal with which you still prosecute the glorious mark you have undertaken. May the Author and Finisher of our Faith and of every good work give you to see abundant fruit of your labor.

The large Dissertation upon Divine Providence will, I trust, be of great service, in particular to those who fear God and desire to acknowledge Him in all their ways. This is a subject the more needful to be explained and defended, because the wise men of this world explode everything of the kind, asserting that the race is always to the swift and the battle to the strong and success to men of understanding.

Although it is rather to be desired than expected that the general plan of modern education may be amended, yet a treatise on that subject, which was printed in England some years since, has not been without success. A few have dared to go out of the common road and to educate their children in a Christian manner; and some tutors of the University have trained up them under their care in a manner not unworthy of the primitive Christians.

We have hardly heard in our country of any such thing as a Mission into Lapland. If the common accounts of the Laplanders are true, they are some of the lowest of the human species, raised not many degrees either in understanding or manners above the beasts of the field. Whoever, therefore, they are that undertake to form these into men and into Christians, they will have need of more than common measure both of understanding, faith, and patience. But, still, there is nothing too hard for God; and nothing impossible to him that believe.

One thing, gentlemen, I am particularly surprised at in the account of the Society with which you favor me--that in Sweden men of rank, of quality, of eminence are not ashamed of the gospel of Christ; are not ashamed openly to espouse His cause and to give a public testimony that they believe the Bible.

May the God whom you serve prosper all your endeavors for His glory and the public good. This is the sincere wish of, gentlemen,

Your obliged and obedient servant.

To the Earl of Dartmouth, Lord Privy Seal [36]

LONDON, December 24, 1775.

MY LORD,--The corrections made in Mr. Fletcher's papers which your Lordship was so kind as to make, as well as those made by the gentlemen who perused them, will prevent several objections.

Having this occasion, I take the liberty to mention to your Lordship a thing of another nature. The nation is already involved in many troubles. And we know not how many more may follow. Are we able to extricate ourselves out of them all If we have so much wisdom and strength that we need no help from man, are we quite sure that we need no help from God I know your Lordship is not of that opinion. But if we need it, why are we ashamed to ask for it to ask for it in the manner our forefathers did, in solemn public fasting and prayer What if others fast for strife and contention! Is that any reason that we should not do it from a better motive Why may not the people of England as well as the people of Nineveh seek His help who hath all power in heaven and in earth

My Lord, my heart is full. Suffer me to speak; and if I speak as a feel, yet as a feel bear with me. Has your Lordship been ashamed (if every one else was) to mention this to His Majesty Who besides your Lordship is likely to do it Did prudence hinder you from doing it Was that Christian or worldly prudence Is it possible for your Lordship quite to avoid this, standing in such a place and with such company Is the God whom you serve able to deliver you from drinking at all into their spirit yea, from sinking a little into their ways doing evil that good may come Now your Lordship has need of the whole armor of God; but, above all, of the shield of faith, that you may not decline, no not for an hour, the exact line marked out for you by the Great King; that you may keep yourself pure, whatever others do; and may answer the design of Him who hath raised you up for this very thing, and placed you so near His Majesty that he might have one counselor at least who dares not flatter but will speak the truth from his heart. And how much depends upon your faithfully using it No less, perhaps, than the temporal prosperity of an whole nation (may not one say of more than one nation) which is just now brought to an awful crisis. May the God of wisdom direct you in all your counsels and arm you with invincible courage and firmness and patience to do and suffer whatever may be for His glory and for the public good.

So prays, my Lord,

Your Lordship's obedient servant.

To Christopher Hopper

LONDON, December 26, 1775.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I see no possibility of accommodation. The one point is, Has the Supreme Power a right to tax or not If they have, they cannot, they ought not to give it up. But I say, as Dean Tucker, 'Let them drop.' Cut off all other connection with them than we have with Holland or Germany. Four-and-thirty millions they have cost us to support them since Queen Anne died. Let them cost us no more. Let them have their desire and support themselves.

You sent Harry Brooke one book; but I left two, the larger of which was not sent. If it is lost, I must buy another.

The disorder is universal throughout Great Britain and Ireland; but hitherto scarce any die of it in London; so God lightly afflicts us at first. It is well if the people will now hear the rod and Him that hath appointed it.--I am, with love to Sister Hopper, Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Francis Wolfe

LONDON, December 26, 1775.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--So the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away! He hath done all things well. What a word was that of Mr. De Renty on a like occasion!--' I cannot say but my soul is greatly moved at the sense of so great a loss. Nevertheless I am so well satisfied that the will of the Lord rather than that of a vile sinner is done, that, were it not for offending others, I could shout and sing.'

Now give yourself up more entirely and unreservedly to God. You have nothing else to care for but the things of the Lord, how you may please the Lord.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Francis Wolfe, In South Wilts.





To the Printer of the 'Gazetteer'

LONDON, December 28, 1775.

Between twenty and thirty editions of the Primitive Pysick, or, A Rational and easy Method of Curing most Diseases, have been published either in England or Ireland. In one or more of these editions stand these words: ' Give one or more drachms of verdigris.' I thank the gentleman who takes notice of this, though he might have done it in a more obliging manner.

Could he possibly have been ignorant (had he not been willingly so) that this is a mere blunder of the printer that I wrote grains, not drachms However, it is highly proper to advertise the public of this; and I beg every one that has the book would take the trouble of altering that word with his pen.

Yours, &c.