To Ann Bolton
Date: BRISTOL, September 15, 1777.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1777)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR SISTER,---You know how nearly I am concerned in whatever relates to you. My regard for you has been invariable ever since you was with me in London. I then set you-down for my inalienable friend, and such I trust you will always be, until the union of our spirits will be complete where our bodies part no more.

Why, then, should I not speak (as I have done hitherto) in all simplicity. Why should I not tell you just what rises in my heart even on the most delicate occasion! I cannot once suppose you will take it amiss. I speak plainly because I love you.

God has lately delivered you out of imminent danger, that of being unequally yoked with an unbeliever. That he is so now will admit of no dispute. And it is not plain that ever he was otherwise. It is highly probable that he never was: that he either wore the appearance of religion for a time, or deceived himself as well as others by mistaking good desires, transient desires for good tempers, whether those desires were real----. But it is certain they were not deep; and as they were chiefly from love to you, it is scarce possible they could have been lasting.

And now, instead of praising God for your great deliverance, you are [set] against Him, as [if] it were no deliverance at all! You are fretting and grieving yourself because the snare is broken, because your soul is taken out of the net! But must not this grieve the Holy Spirit of God? What deep unthankfulness! And it is well if here be not a little inordinate affection lying at the bottom of all; otherwise it is a mere device of Satan to hinder you soaring aloft upon the wings of love. My Nancy, arise and shake yourself from the dust! You have acted wisely and faithfully. God has heard your prayer. He is well pleased with the sacrifice you have made [Admit] no thought to the contrary; and if one should, give no place to it--no, not for a moment. And whenever you are troubled on this or any account, [Miss Bolton seems to have replied at once. See letters of April 24 and Sept. 27.] what human friend can you unbosom yourself to more freely than to, my dear, Nancy,

Your tenderly affectionate.