To Elizabeth Ritchie
Date: BRISTOL, July 20, 1783.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1783)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BETSY, -- It seemed a long time since I heard from you; but I believe your not writing was owing to your not knowing how to direct to me while I was abroad. [See letter of July 5.] The prayers of many were productive of many blessings, and in particular of the amazing friendship and goodwill which were shown us in every place. We always looked upon the Dutch as an heavy, dull, stoical people. But truly most, nay I may say all, with whom we conversed familiarly were as tender-hearted and as earnestly affectionate as the Irish themselves. Two of our sisters, when we left the Hague, came twelve miles with us on our way; and one of our brethren of Amsterdam came to take leave of us to Utrecht, above thirty miles. There are, indeed, many precious souls in Utrecht full of faith and love, as also at Haarlem, the Hague, and Amsterdam. And one and all (without any human teaching) dress as plainly as you do. I believe, if my life be prolonged, I shall pay them a visit at least every other year. Had I had a little more time, I would have visited our brethren in Friesland and Westphalia likewise; for a glorious work of God is lately broken out in both these provinces.

Miss Loten [Miss Loren, of Utrecht, corresponded with Wesley till his death. Henry Moore had read many of her letters. See Journal, vi. 426-9, vii. 200-1; Moore's Wesley, ii. 291; and letter of Sept. 20, 1789.] is an Israelite indeed; she is a pattern to all that are round about her. One would scarcely have expected to see the daughter of the head burgomaster dressed on a Sunday in a plain linen gown. She appears to have but one desire--that Christ may reign alone in her heart.

I do not remember any storm which traveled so far as that on the 10th. [See Journal, vi. 432-3.] It has been in almost all parts of England, but especially at Witney, near Oxford. The next night they had a far greater, which seemed to cover the whole town for four hours with almost one uninterrupted blaze; and it has made such an impression on high and low, rich and poor, as had not been known in the memory of man.

I expect a good deal of difficulty at this Conference, and shall stand in need of the prayers of you and your friends. [About the Bitstall Chapel case and the state of Kingswood School. See Journal, vi. 437-8.] Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am

Yours most affectionately.