To James Hutton
Date: BRISTOL, May 14, 1739.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1739)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BRETHREN, -- On Monday, the 7th instant, about twelve of us met at six in the morning at our room in Baldwin Street. Others came after; some of whom were employed until six in the evening in intercession, prayer, and thanksgiving.

About eight I was preparing to go to Pensford (the minister having sent me word I was welcome to preach in either of his churches), when a messenger brought me the following note:

SIR,--Our minister, being informed you are beside yourself, does not care you should preach in any of his churches.

We found, however, a very convenient place on Priest-down, near Publow, half a mile from Pensford, where was an attentive, serious congregation. But many of them appeared not a little amazed at hearing that strange doctrine that.

‘Christ is made of God unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.’

About four thousand were afterwards at the Brickyard, whom I exhorted ‘to become as little children.’

After preaching at Newgate the next morning, I set out for Bath. We were turned out of the ground where I used to preach. But God opened the heart of a Quaker (one Richard Merchant) to offer me his ground, where I preached ‘Christ our wisdom’ to a thousand or fifteen hundred people. Afterwards he called me aside and said, ‘My friend, deal freely with me. I have much money, and it may be thou hast little. Tell me what thou wilt have.’ I accepted his love, after expounding at Mr. Dibble's window to many in the house and many out of it. O pray ye for the soul of Richard Merchant!

On Wednesday, 9th, after the service at Newgate, we took possession of the ground where the room is to be built. [See Journal, ii. 194n; and letter of April 27, 1741, to Whitefield.] We have also articled to pay the workmen about 160 pounds as soon as it is finished. As to the money, God will see to that. At four I was much enlarged at Baptist Mills, in recommending the childlike temper. The company was about two thousand or two thousand five hundred, our usual congregation there. It was this evening agreed at our Society that the leaders of the bands meet together at 5.30 every Wednesday evening.

The next day, several curious persons being at Nicholas Street, and a fine lady among the rest, I was desired in a note given me to pray for her; and she was ‘almost persuaded to be a Christian.’

Friday, 11th, as we were going to the second Society in the evening, we were desired to call upon a young woman who was in the agonies of despair. With much difficulty we brought her to the Society; where, almost as soon as we began praying for her, the enemy was cast out, and she was filled with peace and joy in believing.

Saturday, 12th, Mr. Labbe, who had been often in doubt, chiefly from the objections his wife made, was quite astonished at Newgate; for God overtook her there, so that she knew she was accepted in the Beloved. Thence we went and laid the first stone of our house with the voice of praise and thanksgiving. Three or four thousand were present at the Bowling Green this afternoon; and at Weavers’ Hall in the evening, in answer to our prayers ‘that our Lord would then show whether He was willing that all men should be saved,’ three persons immediately sunk down, and in a short time were raised up and set at liberty.

Sunday, 13th, about six thousand were at the Bowling Green, where I explained the beginning of the 13th of the First of Corinthians. At Hanham I ended my sermon on ‘The scripture hath concluded all under sin, &c.’ to about four thousand, our usual congregation. The church at Clifton was much too small for us in the afternoon; but those who were without could hear as well as they within. About six thousand were at Rose Green, where I was desired by a young woman to go into her chariot, whom I found quite awakened, and longing for Christ, after having been for some years the finest, gayest thing in Bristol. She came with me to Gloucester Lane Society, where God overtook her three or four weeks ago. Here a young woman, after strong pangs, received the gift of the Holy Ghost.

My dear brethren, pray much for and write all of you to

Your weak but loving brother.

Dear Jemmy, send me fifty more Hymns immediately. I give the Homilies [See letter of May 8.] and sell the sermons on Free Grace. Is that right Adieu!

[This note is written on the outside of the letter by someone who had carried out the commission:]

‘B. W.'s [Brother Wesley's] things is left at the Inn by Hobburn bridge.’