To Mrs. Pendarves
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1731)
Author: John Wesley
---
July 19 [1731].

Is it utterly impossible that I should hear a little oftener from dear Aspasia I can't be entirely satisfied till you assure me it is; that you have too many employments of a noble kind, and too many more useful and pleasing entertainments, to allow you a vacant hour to throw away upon me, so often as once a month. So soon as I am assured of this I shall cease to importune you about it; but while I have any hope of success I can't give up a cause the gaining of which would so much add to my happiness.

I can't help being more desirous now than even at other times of hearing from you, because of an imputation that has lately been thrown upon me, which I would fain, if it were possible, remove. I have been charged with being too strict, with carrying things too far in religion, and laying burdens on myself, if not on others, which were neither necessary nor possible to be borne. [See letters of June 11 (to his mother) and Nov. 17.] A heavy charge indeed! To be too strict! That is to blaspheme the law of God as not strict enough. To carry duties too far! Why, what is this but to change holiness itself into extravagance To impose unnecessary burdens! Then am I an hinderer as well as slanderer of the religion I live to recommend; then have I added to the words of God's Book, and He shall add to me all the plagues that are written in it.

Do not therefore blame me, Aspasia, for using every means to find whether I am thus guilty or no; and particularly for appealing to the judgment of one who in this is not likely to be prejudiced in my favor. Those among whom chiefly your lot is cast are not accused of too much strictness. Whatever other ill weeds may flourish there, a Court is not a fit soil for this. Give me leave, then, to lay freely before you what my sentiments in this point are, and to conjure you to tell me with the same freedom which of them you disapprove of.

My present sense is this: -- I was made to be happy: to be happy I must love God; in proportion to my love of whom my happiness must increase. To love God I must be like Him, holy as He is holy; which implies both the being pure from vicious and foolish passions and the being confirmed in those virtuous and rational affections which God comprises in the word charity. In order to root those out of my soul and plant these in their stead, I must use (1) such means as are ordered by God; (2) such as are recommended by experience and reason.

Thus far I believe we are all agreed; but in what follows we are not: for (1) as to the end of my being, I lay it down for a rule that I can't be too happy or therefore holy; and infer thence that the more steadily I keep my eye upon the prize of our high calling the better, and the more of my thoughts and words and actions are directly pointed at the attainment of it. (2) As to the instituted means, I likewise lay it down for a rule that as ' none teach like God,' so there are none like them; and consequently that I am to use them every time I may, and with all the exactness I can. As to prudential means, I believe this rule holds--of things indifferent in themselves, whatever hinders the extirpating my vile affections or the transferring my rational ones to proper objects, that to me is not indifferent, but resolutely to be abstained from, however familiar and pleasing: again of things indifferent in themselves, whatever helps me to conquer vicious and advance in virtuous affections, that to me is not indifferent, but to be embraced, be it ever so difficult or painful. These are the points which I am said to carry too far; whether I do or no, I beg you would not delay to inform me.

Perhaps it may not be long before I have it in my power at once to return my thanks for that favor (which I shall wait for with some impatience) and to hear your sentiments more fully on some of these subjects. I extremely desire to see one of my sisters who is lately come to town [His uncle Matthew Wesley, a surgeon, who lived near Temple Bar, visited Epworth in 1731, and offered to take Martha Wesley to live with him in London.]; which, with the hopes of waiting upon Aspasia, makes me greatly wish to spend a few days there. If your journey [In a letter of May 27, ~73~, to her sister, Mrs. Pendarves (Auto. and Corr. i. 272) speaks of a proposed visit to Ireland with Mr. and Mrs. Wesley of Dangan, of whom she had seen much in London. See next letter.] begins before I can have that happiness, yet it will be some satisfaction to me to reflect that you are with those who are equally willing as well as far more able to entertain you than

Your most obliged, obedient CYRUS.

Araspes joins with me in wishing all happiness to Aspasia. Adieu.