To Philothea Briggs
Date: DUBLIN, July 13, 1771,
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1771)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR PHILLY,--Truth and falsehood, and so right and wrong tempers, are often divided by an almost imperceptible line. It is the more difficult to distinguish right and wrong tempers or passions, because in several instances the same motion of the blood and animal spirits will attend both one and the other. Therefore in many cases we cannot distinguish them but by the unction of the Holy One. In the case you mention all self-complacency or self-approbation is not pride. Certainly there may be self-approbation which is not sin, though it must occasion a degree of pleasure. 'This is our rejoicing, even the testimony of our conscience toward God.' And this joy is neither better nor worse for being accompanied with a natural motion of the blood and spirits. Equally natural and equally innocent is the joy which we receive from being approved of those we love. But in all these instances there is need of the utmost care, lest we slide from innocent joy or self-approbation into that which is not innocent, into pride (thinking of ourselves more highly than we ought to think), or vanity, a desire of praise; for 'thin partitions do their bounds divide.' [ Dryden's Absalom and Achitophel, i. 163: 'Great wits are sure to madness near allied, And thin partitions do their bounds divide.']

Certes, I have for many days

Sent my poetic herd to graze. [Prior's Erle Robert's Mice: 'Certes, I have those many days Sent myne poetic herd to graze.']

In youth it is almost natural to write verses, especially at leisure times. But I have no leisure time; my every hour is constantly and fully employed.

You have no business to begin any dispute with your young acquaintance. If she begin with you, say but little, till you carry her Predestination Calmly Considered, and desire her to give it a calm and serious reading. That book is such an hotch-potch as I have seldom seen, and is brimful of Antinomianism (as are all Mr. Romaine's writings [See Tyerman's Wesley, ii. 534.]). I advise you to think and speak as little about it as possible. Here and there he blunders upon the truth, as in the sentence which she quoted.

I remember nothing particular in the sealing of that letter. In about ten days I expect to embark for England. Be all in earnest! and always speak without reserve to, my dear Philly,

Yours affectionately.