To his Brother Charles
Date: LONDON, February 8, 1763.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1763)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR BROTHER, -- I think now the sooner you could be here the better; for the mask is thrown off. George Bell, John Dixon, [John and Elizabeth Dixon resigned their membership on Jan. 28 (Journal, v. 5).] Joseph Calvert, Benjamin Biggs, [Benjamin Biggs, whom John Murlin met at Whitehaven, was for three or four years his inseparable companion. He embarked with him in July 1758 for Liverpool; but the captain took them to the Isle of Man. Biggs was the only person present when his master, Sir James Lowther, died. The next heir, Sir William, gave him 50 a year for life, which he spent in doing good. On July 18, 1761, John Fletcher was at a meeting in Biggs’s house. See Wesley’s Veterans, ii. 161; Moore’s Mrs. Fletcher, p. 373; and letter of May 16, 1759.] &c. &c., have quitted the Society and renounced all fellowship with us. I wrote to Thomas, [Maxfield. See letters of Jan. 5 and 7.] but was not favored with an answer. This morning I wrote a second time, and received an answer indeed! The substance is, ‘You take too much upon you. We will not come up.’

I know all the history of the Turk. [See letters of Jan. 5 and Feb. 26.] I must leave London on Friday to bury Mrs. Perronet. [Wesley had ‘paid the last office of love’ (administered the Holy Communion) to her on Jan. 10. See Journal, v. 4, 8.] She died on Saturday morning.

The answer to the Bishop (who has broke his leg) is forthcoming. [Wesley’s letter to Bishop Warburton had just been published.] Mr. Madan wrote the Queries. I let him have the last word. I should not wonder if a dying saint were to prophesy. Listen to Sally Colston’s [Charles Wesley prayed by Mr. Colston, ‘desirous to be with Christ,’ at Bristol on Sept. 2, 1739. A letter from Sarah Colston is given in the Journal, iii. 197-8, dated Bristol, June 6, 1745, describing the happy death of ‘another of my charge,’ and closing with the words, ‘Oh that when He comes He may find me watching!’] last words!

Molly Westall died last week in huge triumph.

J. Jones does good. I have seen the Colonel. [Colonel Gallatin. See letter of July 19, 1750.] James Morgan [Morgan was closely associated with Maxfield. See letter of Jan. 8, 1757.] has lately been in a violent storm, and is scarce alive. I advise him to retire to Kingswood for a season. We need all your prayers. God is preparing thoroughly to purge His floor. O let us be instant eukairws akairws. [2 Tim. iv. 2: ‘in season, out of season.’]

We join in love to Sally. Adieu!

[Charles wrote at the back of this letter: ‘Himself confirming my prophecy of the Ranters.’]