To the Rev. Mr. L. ---
Date: LONDON, October 25, 1786.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1786)
Author: John Wesley
---
Last night I had a long conversation with a few sensible men concerning going to church. [The conversation was evidently at Deptford. See Journal, vii. 217.] I asked them what objection they had to the hearing of Mr. L---. They answered, 'They could not hear him. He generally spoke so low that they lost a good part of what he said; and that what they could was spoken in a dead, cold, languid manner, as if he did not feel anything which he spoke.' This would naturally disgust them the more, because Dr. C[oke] leaned to the other extreme. I doubt there is some ground for their objection. But I should think you might easily remove it. I asked again, Have you any objection to anything in his behavior 'They answered, 'One thing we cannot approve of - his being ashamed of the Methodists. His never recommending or defending them at all, we think, is a full proof of this; for everyone knows his near relation and his many obligations to you. They know how you have loved and cherished him from a child.' They might have added, 'You owe your whole education to him; and therefore, in effect, your ordination, your curacy, your school, yea, and your wife: none of which you would in all likelihood have had had it not been for him.'

I would add a word upon this head myself. I do not think you act wisely. Not one of your genteel friends can be depended on: they are mere summer flies. Whereas, had you condescended to make the Methodists your friends, they would have clave to you, one and all. And they are already no inconsiderable body of people; besides that they are increasing more and more.

Suffer me now to speak a word between you and me. Is not the reason of your preaching so languidly and coldly, that you do not feel what you say And why not Because your soul is not alive to God! Do you know that your sins are forgiven I fear not. Can you say, 'I know that my Redeemer liveth' I doubt, if you did know it once, whether you know it now Have you fellowship with the Father and the Son Alas! 'tis well if you know what it means! And are you content to have your portion in this world Do you favor only earthly things Then I do not wonder that you are shy to the Methodists; for they are not to your taste! O think and pray to-day! For I do not promise you that you shall live another year! I now give you a full proof that I am

Your truly affectionate.