To his Wife
Date: EVERSHAM, March 30, 1751.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1751)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR LOVE, -- Methinks it is a long, long time since I wrote to you. So it seems, because while I am writing I see you before me: I can imagine that I am sitting just by you,

And see and hear you all the while

Softly speak and sweetly smile.

Oh what a mystery is this! That I am enabled to give you up to God without one murmuring or uneasy thought! Oh who h so great a God as our God Who is so wise, so merciful My dear Molly, who can have such reason to praise Him as we have And I chiefly, to whom He has given an help so meet for me, as well as power to enjoy you to His glory, and to let you go whenever He calls.

Mrs. Seward, [Probably the widow of William Seward, Whitefield’s friend and helper in Georgia (see letter of May 8, 1739). Mr. Keech had been buried on March 20, and ‘his widow and daughter were sorrowing; but not as without hope, neither did they refrain from the preaching one day. So let my surviving friends sorrow for me’ (Journal, iii. 518).] Mrs. Keech, and many more here desire to be tenderly remembered to you. The first day you was here one of them said, ‘There is a wife for Mr. John Wesley,’ and earnestly affirmed ‘it would be so.’ And when the newspaper came, they all agreed ‘you was the person.’

Now, my deal is the time for you to overcome evil with good. Conquer Sally Clay and Sister Aspernell [Two devoted London Methodists. See Journal, vi. 9-10, 390; and letter of Nov. 9, 1755, to Mr. Gillespie.] altogether, with as many more as come in your way. Oh if God would give us Mr. Blisson too! Spare no pains. Let not the interview Mr. Lloyd spoke of [See next letter.] be forgotten or delayed. I hope Mr. Crook [See previous letter.] is entered upon his business, and that you find him capable of it. He had grace too once!

Whatever you do, do not lose your hour of retirement. And then in particular let my dearest friend remember me!

I hope my dear Jenny [Jenny Vazeille, his step-daughter.] gains ground.