To James Hutton
Date: BRISTOL, May 7, 1739.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1739)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BRETHERN, -- We understood on Monday that the Keeper of Newgate was much offended at the cries of the people on whom the power of God came. And so was a physician, who wishes well to the cause of God, but feared there might be some fraud or delusion in the case. To-day one who had been his patient and his acquaintance for many years was seized in the same manner. At first he would hardly believe his own eyes and ears; but when her pangs redoubled, so that all her bones shook, he knew not what to think; and when she revived in a moment and sang praise, he owned it was the finger of God.

Another that sat close to Mr. Dagge, [Abel Dagge, Keeper of Newgate and a convert of Whitefield's. See Journal, ii. 173n; and letter of Jan. 2, 1761.] a middle-aged woman, was seized at the same time. Many observed the tears trickle down his cheeks; and I trust he will be no more offended.

Tuesday, May. 1, I went to the colliers in the middle of Kingswood, and prayed with them (several being in tears) in a place formerly a cock-pit, near which it was agreed to build the schoolhouse, being close to the place where the stone was laid by our brother Whitefield. Many were offended at Baldwin Street in the evening; for the power of God came mightily upon us. Many who were in heaviness received the comforts of the Holy One, and ten persons remission of sins. A Quaker who stood by was very angry at them, and was biting his lips and knitting his brows, when the Spirit of God came upon him also, so that he fell down as one dead. We prayed over him, and he soon lifted up his head with joy and joined with us in thanksgiving.

Wednesday, 2nd, another mourner received comfort at Newgate. We afterwards went to a neighboring house, to read a letter wrote against me as a false teacher for opposing Predestination. A rigid asserter of it was present when a young woman came in (who had received remission of sins) all in tears and in deep anguish of spirit. She said she had been in torment all night by reasoning, and verily believed the devil had possession of her again. In the midst of our prayers she cried out, ‘He is gone, he is gone: I again rejoice in God my Savior.’ Just as we rose from giving thanks, another young woman reeled four or five steps and then dropped down. We prayed with her; she is now in deep poverty of spirit, groaning day and night for a new heart.

I did not mention that one John Haydon, a weaver, was quite enraged at what had occurred in Baldwin Street, and had labored above measure to convince all his acquaintance that it was all a delusion of the devil. We were now going home, when one met us and informed us that John Haydon was fallen raving mad. It seems he had sat down with an intention to dine, but had a mind first to end the sermon on Salvation by Faith. At the last page he suddenly changed color, fell off his chair, and began screaming terribly and beating himself against the ground. I came to him between one and two, and found him on the ground, the room being full of people, whom his wife would have kept away; but he cried out, ‘No; let them all come; let all the world see the just judgment of God.’ Two or three were holding him as well as they could. He immediately fixed his eyes upon me, and, stretching out his arm, said, ‘Aye, this is he I said was a deceiver of the people. But God has overtaken me. I said it was a delusion; but this is no delusion.’ Then he roared aloud, ‘O thou devil! thou cursed devil! yea, thou legion of devils! thou canst not stay in me. Christ will cast thee out. I know His work is begun. Tear me to pieces, if thou wilt; but thou canst not hurt me.’ He then beat himself again against the ground, and with violent sweats and heavings of the breast strained as it were to vomit (which, with many other symptoms I have since observed in others at or near the time of their deliverance, much inclines me to think the evil spirit actually dwells in every one till he receives the Holy Ghost). After we had been praying about half an hour, he was set at liberty.

From him I went to Baptist Mills, where about two thousand persons stayed, notwithstanding several showers. I testified to them the holiness and happiness of true believers from those words of St. Peter, ‘Him hath God exalted . . . to give unto Israel repentance and remission of sins. And we are His witnesses of these things; and so is the Holy Ghost, whom God hath given to them that believe Him.’ Returning to John Haydon, we found his body quite worn out and his voice lost; but his soul was in peace, rejoicing in hope of the glory of God, and full of love and the Holy Ghost. [See Journal, ii. 189.]

The female bands meeting at seven, and a young woman complaining of blasphemous thoughts and an inability to pray, we began praying for her, during which another young woman (Miss [Elizabeth] Cutler) fell into a strong agony, and received power in a few minutes to cry out, ‘My Lord and my God!’ The next day I visited Anthony Purver [See previous letter.] (a Quaker) at Frenchay; with whom was a Dutchman, lately arrived from Ireland, who I verily think is full of the Spirit and breathes nothing but Jesus Christ. On Friday evening at Gloucester Lane Society a woman [Mrs. England.] received remission of sins.

Saturday, 5th, six Quakers, three from Ireland, one from the North, and two from Frenchay, met six of us by appointment. We prayed together, and our hearts were much enlarged towards one another. At four (being forbid to preach any more at the Poorhouse) I preached at the Bowling Green to about two thousand on those words (at the request of an unknown friend), 'Be still, and know that I am God.'

Sunday, 6th, I preached in the Bowling Green to about seven thousand on Matthew xviii. 3; on Hanham Mount to about three thousand on Galatians iii. 22 (after a young woman had received remission of sins); at Clifton to a church full and many hundred in the churchyard on Christ our wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; and at Rose Green to about five thousand on ‘The scripture hath concluded all under sin, &c.’

O my dear, dear brethren, pray that, when I have preached to others, I may not myself be a castaway!