To William Black
Date: INVENESS, May 11, 1784.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1784)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BROTHER, - I am glad you have given a little assistance to our brethren at Halifax and along the coast. There is no charity under heaven to be compared to this, the bringing light to the poor heathens, that are called Christians, but nevertheless still sit in darkness and the shadow of death. I am in great hopes that some of the emigrants from New York are really alive to God. And if so, they will every way be a valuable acquisition to the province where their lot is now cast. This may be one of the gracious designs of God's providence in bringing them from their native country. And if they not only themselves grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, but are likewise happy instruments in His hand of imparting that knowledge to others, they will have unspeakable reason to praise God both in time and in eternity.

There is no part of Calvinism or Antinomianism which is not fully answered in some part of our writings, particularly in the Preservative against Unsettled Notions in Religion. I have no more to do with answering books. It will be sufficient if you recommend to Mr. Alline's [See letter of Nov. 27, 1783, to Benjamin Chappel.] friends some of the tracts that are already written. As to himself, I fear he is wiser in his own eyes than seven men that can render a reason.

The work of God goes on with a steady pace in various parts of England. But still the love of many will wax cold, while many others are continually added to supply their place. In the West of England, in Lancashire, and in Yorkshire God still mightily makes bare His arm. He convinces many, justifies many, and many are perfected in love.

My great advice to those who are united together is: Let brotherly love continue! See that ye fall not out by the way! Hold the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace! Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ! - I am

Your affectionate brother.