To Mr. Wesley
Date: February 23, 1782.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1782)
Author: John Wesley
---
REVEREND SIR, -- I am, as you are, an Arminian. I am well acquainted with your religious tenets, and have read most, if not all, of your Works; and though I do not entirely fall in with you in every article of your creed, yet I have much respect to your character, great reverence for your principles in general, and an entire affection for your person. Depending upon the acknowledged candor of your disposition and your uniform zeal for the truth, I expect your attention and answers to the following questions: --

Is it your wish that the people called Methodists should be or become a body entirely separate from the Church

Answer. No.

If not, when, that is how often, and where, I mean upon what description of teachers of the Establishment, are they to attend

A. I advise them to go to church.

More particularly, if the fall, the corruption, and natural impotence of man, his free and full redemption in Christ Jesus through faith working by love, should be taught and inculcated and offered to the attention of all at the church of the parish where they reside, are they then in your opinion bound in conscience to hear, or may they at their own option forbear

A. I do not think they are bound in conscience to attend any particular church.

Or, if they are at liberty to absent themselves, are they at liberty, that is, have they a Christian privilege, to censure this doctrine in the gross, to condemn such teachers, and boldly to pronounce them ‘blind leaders of the blind’

A. No; by no means.

Lastly. Whenever this happens, is it through prejudice or rational piety Is it through bigotry or a catholic spirit Is it consistent with Christian charity Is it compatible with a state of justification Or is it even allowable in the high habit of evangelical perfection

A. I think it is a sin.

Your unequivocal answers to these interesting queries, in the Arminian Magazine, will oblige, reverend sir,

I have answered simply to your questions, whether they be proposed out of good or ill will.