To Miss Cummins
Date: CLONMAIN, June 8, 1773.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1773)
Author: John Wesley
---
Do not think it strange, my dear Miss Cummins, that I write to you; the regard I have for you constrains me. It is possible I may see you no more: I am not young, and you are not healthy; nay, and the ten thousand gates of death stand continually open to every child of man. Will you take it ill, then, that I tell you freely you have been much upon my mind Ever since I saw you first, I felt an earnest desire that you should be wise and happy; that you should make the best of a few uncertain days, and improve the time which flees away as a shadow and knows not to return. Believe me, my dear maid, what are called pleasures and diversions can give you no solid happiness. They are poor, empty, insignificant trifles; and you was made for better things. You are not only to consider yourself as having an agreeable person; you are an immortal spirit. You was made a little lower than the angels, that you may live with them for ever. You are come forth from God, and are returning to God as fast as a few fleeting years can carry you. But I am in pain for you: I am concerned lest you should forget this, like other pretty, giddy, unthinking creatures. What if it should be said of you,--

At dawn poor Stella danced and sung;

The gazing youth around her bowed:

At night her passing-bell was rung;

I saw, and kissed her in her shroud!

O make haste! Be a Christian, a real Bible Christian now! You may say, ‘ Nay, I am a Christian already.’ I fear not. (See how freely I speak.) A Christian is not afraid to die. Are not you Do you desire to depart and to be with Christ A Christian is happy in God. Are you Can you say,

I noting need, beneath, above,

Happy, happy in Thy love

A Christian (though perhaps he never heard the name of a Methodist) has power over all sin. Have you If not, it is certain you may; for God is no respecter of persons. Whatsoever He has given to any other He is willing to give to you also. O let your heart cry to Him, ‘ What I know not teach Thou me. Let me not die before I long to die! Give me the wisdom that sitteth by Thy throne, and reject me not from among Thy children!’ To His care I tenderly commit you; and am, my dear Miss Cummins,

Yours affectionately.

If you love me, hear Mr. Saunderson preach.