To his Brother Charles
Date: SAVANNAH, March 22, 1736.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1736)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR BROTHER, -- How different are the ways wherein we are led! Yet, I hope, toward the same end. I have hitherto no opposition at all. All is smooth and fair and promising. Many seem to be awakened. All are full of respect and commendation. We can't see any cloud gathering. But this calm cannot last; storms must come hither too: and let them come, when we are ready to meet them.

'Tis strange so many of our friends should still trust in God. I hope, indeed, whoever turns to the world, Mr. Tackner and Betty, with Mr. Hird's family and Mr. Burk, will zealously aim at the prize of their high calling. These especially I exhort, by the mercies of God, that they be not weary of well-doing, but that they labor more and more to be meek and lowly, and daily to advance in the knowledge and love of God.

I hope, too, Mr. Weston, Mr. Moore, Mr. Allen, and Mr. White, as well as Mr. Ward and his wife, continue in the same wise resolutions. I must not forget Mr. Reed and Mr. Daubry, both of whom I left fully determined to shake off every weight, and with all their might to pursue the one thing needful.

Conciones omnes meas jamnunc habes, praeter istas quas misi. Aliquae in pyxide sunt (de qua ne verbum scribis) una cum Bibliis in quarto. Liber de Disciplina quam celerrime potes, remittendus est. Quanta est concordia fratrum! Tui vole et fratris Bi. [‘You have now all my sermons, beside those which I have sent. Some are in the box (of which you write not a word) together with the Bible in quarto. The Book of Discipline must be sent back as soon as possible. How great is the concord of brethren! I mean of thee and brother B’ (Benjamin Ingham).]

You are not, I think, at liberty stfesa e t ‘, ‘e sfta s ‘aps se. [' To turn to the Gentiles till your own countrymen shall cast you out.'] If that period comes soon, so much the better. Only in the meanwhile reprove and exhort with all authority, even though all men should despise thee. pseta s e at. ['It shall turn to thee for a testimony ': see Luke xxi. 13.]

I conjure you, spare no time or address or pains to learn the true cause t pa d t f . ['Of the former distress of my friend.'] I much doubt you are the right. t ‘a ’t p at. Ge, fss sta d. Gfe , p e d fe p at. ['God forbid that she should again in like manner miss the mark. Watch over her, keep her as much as possible. Write to me, how I ought to write to her.']

If Mr. Ingham [Benjamin Ingham had gone to Prederica with General Oglethorpe on Feb. 16, and welcomed Charles on his landing there in March.] were here, I would try to see you. But omit no opportunity. of writing. de pasa ‘a. ‘ te es ae, etea, stea, fea t e. se, ‘a ta at s at sa. ['I stand in jeopardy every hour. Two or three are women, younger, refined, God-fearing. Pray that I know none of them after the flesh.']

Let us be strong and very courageous; for the Lord our God is with us, and there is no counsel or might against Him Adieu!