To his Brother Charles
Date: LONDON October 20, 1753.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1753)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR BROTHER, -- I firmly believed that young woman would die in peace; though I did not apprehend it would be so soon. We have had several instances of music heard before or at the death of those that die in the Lord. May we conceive that this is literally the music of angels Can that be heard by ears of flesh and blood [See next letter.]

It was not possible for me to send Jane Bates’s [Mrs. Bate (or Bates), of Wakefield. See Journal, iii. 112, 221-4 (her letter to Wesley); and C. Wesley’s Journal, i. 351, for his conversation with her husband.] letter before my return to London. I sent it last week to Ted Perronet. But whether he be now on earth or in paradise I know not. [Perronet soon recovered, and outlived Wesley. Briggs married his sister Elizabeth in 1749. See Journal viii. 52; and next letter.] He was believed to be dying some days since at Epworth, and vehemently rejoicing in God. William Briggs set out for Epworth last night in order to see him, either alive or dead.

It is much easier for me to hope than to despair of any person or thing. I never did despair of John Hutchinson. For with God no word is impossible. And if he testifies a full and deep sense of his long revolt from God, I shall hope he will either live or die happy. But let me hear the particulars of your Journals, and I may have a stronger hope.

I came back from Bedford [Bedford greatly needed a visit. The Moravians had caused trouble, and ‘the little Society just escaped with the skin of their teeth.’ See Journal, iv. 84-7.] last night. I know not whether it was your will or no (I believe not), but I am sure it was God's will for you to call there. How do you judge whether a thing be God's will or no I hope not by inward impressions. Let us walk warily. I have much constitutional enthusiasm, and you have much more

.

Now I have nether more nor less faith in human testimony than I had ten or fifteen years ago. I could suspect every man that speaks to me to be either a blunderer or a liar But I will not. I dare not till I have proof.

I give you a dilemma. Take one side or the other. Either act really in connection with me, or never pretend to it. Rather disclaim it, and openly avow you do and will not.

By acting in connection with me, I mean take counsel with me once or twice a year as to the places where you will labor. Hear my advice before you fix whether you take it or no.

At present you are so far from this that I do not even know when and where you intend to go; so far are you from following any advice of mine -- nay, even from asking it. And yet I may say without vanity that I am a better judge of this matter than either Lady Huntingdon, Sally, [Charles wrote his wife in the autumn of 1753: ‘The more heavily I labor in the vineyard, the longer I shag continue with you.’ See Telford’s Charles Wesley, pp. 195-6.] Jones [John Jones. See letter of April 16 1748.], or any other -- nay, than your own heart, that is will.

I wish you all peace, zeal, and love.