To Dr. Taylor, of Norwich Editor's Introductory Notes: 1759
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1759)
Author: John Wesley
---
[8] HARTLEPOOL, July 3, 1759.

REVEREND SIR,--I esteem you as a person of uncommon sense and learning, but your doctrine I cannot esteem; and some time since, I believed it my duty to speak my sentiments at large concerning your doctrine of Original Sin. When Mr. Newton of Liverpool [Afterwards the Rev. John Newton of Olney. See letter of April 9, 1765.] mentioned this, and asked whether you designed to answer, you said you thought not, 'for it would only be a personal controversy between John Wesley and John Taylor.' How gladly, if I durst, would I accept of this discharge from so unequal contest! for I am throughly sensible, humanly speaking, it is formica contra leonem. ['An ant against a lion,'] How gladly, were it indeed no other than a personal controversy! But certainly it is not: it is a controversy de re, if ever there was one in this world; indeed, concerning a thing of the highest importance--nay, all the things that concern our eternal peace. It is Christianity or heathenism! for, take away the scriptural doctrine of Redemption or Justification, and that of the New Birth, the beginning of sanctification, or (which amounts to the same) explain them as you do, suitably to your doctrine of Original Sin, and what is Christianity better than heathenism! wherein, save in rectifying some of our notions, has the religion of St. Paul any pre-eminence over that of Socrates or Epictetus!

This is, therefore, to my apprehension, the least a personal controversy of any in the world. Your person and mine are out of the question. The point is, Are those things that have been believed for many ages throughout the Christian world real, solid truths, or monkish dreams and vain imaginations!

But farther: it is certain, between you and me there need be no personal controversy at all; for we may agree to leave each other's person and character absolutely untouched, while we sum up and answer the several arguments advanced as plainly and closely as we can.

Either I or you mistake the whole of Christianity from the beginning to the end! Either my scheme or yours is as contrary to the scriptural as the Koran is. Is it mine, or yours! Yours has gone through all England and made numerous converts. I attack it from end to end. Let all England judge whether it can be defended or not!

Earnestly praying that God may give you and me a right understanding in all things, I am, reverend sir, Your servant for Christ's sake.