To James Huton
Date: BRISTOL, March 21, 1740.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1740)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR JEMMY, -- Where are the books I desired you to send -- Mr. Newman's If they are not sent, I wish you would send with them twenty of the Collection of Prayers [A Collection of Forms of Prayer for Every Day in the Week, 1733. Wesley says: 'In the same year I printed (the first time I ventured to print anything) for the use of my pupils A Collection of forms of Prayer.’ See letter of May 14, 1765.] and twenty (if printed) of the Count's Sermons. [Sixteen Discourses on the Redemption of Man by the Death of Christ. Translated from the High Dutch, 1740.]

After my hearing of what Brother Tltschig [Wesley knew John Tltschig intimately in Savannah, and consulted him as to Miss Hopkey. He went with him to Herrnhut. See Journal, i. 478-9n.] said, I had no time to see him before I left London. Therefore I writ it as soon as I thought of it; so that may pass.

What you say in your last concerning justification I have no exception to. But what plots you speak of I don't understand.

When we can no longer speak freely to one another, I verily think we should not speak at all. But I hope that time will never come.

As to Nowers, I doubt not but, if he is wrong, our Savior will show it to him. But I find no sign of it yet. I see all his behavior, and hear almost all his words; for we are seldom apart, sleeping or waking. And I am apt to think every day will give me fresh occasion to stand amazed at the goodness of God in permitting first G. Whitefield and then the Moravians to reject him, and at length giving him to me. He was the man I wanted. I have not yet personally known any other who had so much gentleness and longsuffering toward them that are out of the way, and so impartial a love to all men. Nay (what you will be least ready to believe), I have not had full proof of any one who appeared to have more of the discernment of spirits, and that sometimes without a word being spoken. One instance of it I saw on Wednesday. Many persons were present with whom he had not talked at all. For one of these he prayed, without her asking him, as full of unbelief. I knew she was before full of faith (according to the first gift), and therefore thought him quite wrong. But soon after she declared her state before us all, and I acknowledged (in my heart) by what spirit he spake.

The short of the case is this: I think him to be full of love and Christ and the Holy Ghost. And I think the Brethren wrong in a few things, not because I believe him, but because I believe the Bible. The chief thing wherein I think them wrong is in mixing human wisdom with divine, in adding worldly to Christian prudence. And hence cannot but proceed closeness, darkness,' reserve, diffusing itself through the whole behavior; which to me appears as contrary to Christianity as blasphemy or adultery. I can find no Christianity in the Bible but what is a plain, artless, blunt thing. A Scripture Christian I take to be simple in quite another sense than you do: to be quite transparent, far from all windings, turnings, and foldings of behavior. This simplicity I want in the Brethren; though I know when it comes they will be persecuted in good earnest. And till they witness a good confession, as upon the house-top, whether men will hear or whether they [will forbear], I can in no wise believe them to be perfect, entire, and wanting nothing. -- Dear Jemmy, my love to all.