To his Mother
Date: CH. CH., OXON, December 18, 1724.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1724)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR MOTHER--I am very glad to hear you are all well at home, as we are here, the small-pox, which raged so much a little while ago, being now almost quite over. [See letter of Sept. 23, 1723.] Only one gentleman of our College had it, who is now recovered, so that the others who feared it are freed at last from their apprehensions.

I have not lately heard from Westminster; but Mr. Sherman, who did, assured me that my brothers and sister there were very well. He has given me one or two books lately, of which one is Godfrey of Bulloigne. [A translation (probably by Edward Fairfax) of Tasso's Jerusalem Delivered, of which an octavo edition was published in 1687.]

We have still very warm weather at Oxford; and a gentleman, now in the room with me, says that several of the flowers in his father's garden, who lives in town, are blown as if it were spring.

The story of which I said something in my last [See letter of Sept. 23, 1723] was, as I believe I told you before, transacted a little before King James's abdication. The Bishop of Raphoe, one of the principal actors in it, was then pretty old, but never reckoned superstitious or easy to be imposed upon. From him it came to Mr. Span, Vicar-General of Ireland, and was by him related to Mr. Harrison, a clergyman, in the hearing of his son, who told it me.

The substance of it was this. It was told to the Bishop that a lad in his diocese frequently bragged that he was carried up into the air by invisible hands; who immediately sent for him to find out the truth. The lad in private, though not without menacing, confessed that he was often carried into the air, by he knew not whom, to a fine palace; where he was made to sit down at table with a great many people, who feasted and made merry; but that he was afraid they would be angry with him for telling it. The Bishop endeavored by many arguments to dissuade him from spreading such stories, which he told him could not be true, and were at best but the effects of a troubled fancy. But the boy persisted in it, and told his lordship that if he would have a little patience he would presently be convinced of the truth of his relation; for by certain symptoms which he said always preceded his transportation, he was sure it was not far off. This was presently confirmed in the Bishop's presence, the boy being hoisted away out of the window, to his no small amazement. The next day about the same time the boy was let down into the same room, but so bruised and dispirited that it was an hard matter to get a word from him. After some time and repeated threats and promises, he told the Bishop that he was carried to the place he had before spoken of, but that instead of sitting down, as he used to do' with the company, one or two were set apart to beat him, while the rest were making merry.

His lordship now believed it was something more than a jest, being convinced that it was the devil, who for some unknown reasons was permitted to exert an extraordinary power over this lad. He nevertheless proceeded to comfort and pray by him; yet even while he was praying the boy was once more taken from him, nor was he restored again till some hours into the same chamber.

He was not then soon prevailed upon to discover anything, but at last confessed that he was beat by the same persons worse than before; that they threatened him with death if he told again; and that as for the Bishop--a person whom they all honored as a king and termed, as he thought, Awly Pawly -- said that he might bluster as he would and build himself houses, but that he should never live to lie in the new one he had built already. The Bishop on this sent for several of his friends, whom he acquainted with the whole matter, and then desired them, that he might prove the devil a liar, to go him immediately to his new house, in which, though not finished, he said he would, God willing, both sup and lie that very night. Accordingly provisions and necessaries were sent thither, which were followed by the Bishop and his friends; but while they were at supper a very large stone was whirled with an incredible force through the window, and passed the sight of the whole company close to the Bishop, to the side of the room. This the Bishop said was in his opinion the work of the devil, who was willing to keep his word, though it pleased God not to suffer him to accomplish his design. However, the Bishop lay there that night; but it was the last which he spent in it, for the wars breaking out immediately after obliged him to fly his country, and the boy, as far as could learn, suffered in the same manner to his death, which soon followed.

This puts me in mind of an odd circumstance, which I know not yet what to make of. I was last week walking two or three mile from Oxford, and seeing a fair house stand by itself which I never observed before, I asked who lived in it of a countryman; who informed me that it had long stood empty, by reason of its being so much haunted that no family could ever stay long in it. I design to go thither the first opportunity, and see if it be true; which I shall hardly believe till I am an eye- or ear-witness of it.

Pray remember my love to all my sisters: I would have writ to one or two of them if I had either room or time; but I am just going to church; for which reason you will excuse me for breaking off so abruptly and writing so bad. I shall therefore conclude with begging yours and my father's blessing on

Your dutiful Son.