To William Wogan
Date: SAVANNAH, March 28, 1737.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1737)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR SIR, -- The more particularly you will at any time express your thoughts, the greater obligation you will lay upon me. I hope no difference of opinion, especially as to smaller points, will ever occasion any coolness between us; I can almost engage it will not cause any on my part, neither do I apprehend it will on yours. I entirely agree with you that religion is love and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost; that as it is the happiest, so it is the cheerfullest, thing in the world; that it is utterly inconsistent with moroseness, sourness, severity, and indeed with whatever is not according to the softness, sweetness, and gentleness of Jesus Christ. I believe it is equally contrary to all preciseness, stiffness, affectation, and unnecessary singularity; and those I call unnecessary which do not either directly or indirectly affect their progress in holiness who use them. I allow, too, that prudence as well as zeal is of the utmost importance in the Christian life; but I do not yet see any possible case wherein trifling conversation can be an instance of it. In the following scriptures I take all such to be flatly forbidden: 'Verily, verily, I say unto you, every idle word (it is , not p, wicked because idle) that men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof at the day of judgment.' 'Neither foolish talking, nor jesting (etapea, literally wit, witty conversation, facetiousness), which are not convenient (or befitting our calling).' ' Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth.' But what conversation is corrupt The opposite will tell us --that which is not ' good to the use of edifying, fit to minister grace to the hearers.' Lastly, ' let your conversation be always in grace (ptte t),' steeped, as it were, therein, thoroughly impregnated thereby, not sprinkled only, but ' seasoned (t) with this salt'; which meat can by no means be said to be, till every particle of it has lost its freshness and contracted this new flavor.

That I shall be laughed at for all this, I know; so was my Master.' But that I shall catch the favor of men I know not. If I do any, it is not my strength or prudence. ' No man cometh to Me, except the Father draw him.' But this I am determined, never to ' catch them with guile' -- an imputation St. Paul expresses a strong abhorrence of, as any one may observe, from the manner wherein he clears himself of that crime, which some, it seems, had accused him of to the Corinthians.

Not that I am for a stern, austere manner of conversing neither. No: let all the cheerfulness of faith be there; all the joyfulness of hope; all the amiable sweetness, the winning easiness, of love. If we must have art, Hic mihi erunt artes: so soon as God shall adorn my soul with them, and without any other than these, with the power of the Holy Ghost preventing, accompanying, and following me, I know that I (that is, the grace of God which is in me) shall save both myself and those that hear me.

Dear sir, continue your prayers for

Your obliged and very affectionate servant in Jesus Christ.