1772



1772 Friends provide Wesley with a carriage.

Apr. 28. Presented with the Freedom of Perth.

Aug. 14. Meets Howell Harris at Trevecca.

Fletcher's Third and Fourth Check to Antinomianism published.

Wesley issues vols. xi.-xvi. of his Works.

Controversial writings of the Hills and Toplady.
Jan. Proposals to John Fletcher.

Mar. Wesley lets Shadford loose on America.

Mar. 14. Replies to Sir Richard Hill's Farrago Double-Distilled.

Dec. Boston Tea Riots.

Vols. xvii.-xxv. of Wesley's Works published.

To Philothea Briggs

LONDON, January 5, 1772.

MY DEAR PHILLY,--It is not always a defect to mind one thing at a time. And an aptness so to do, to employ the whole vigour of the mind on the thing in hand, may answer excellent purposes. Only you have need to be exceeding wary, lest the thing you pursue be wrong. First, be well assured not only that it is good but that it is the best thing for you at that time; and then, whatsoever your hand findeth to do, do it with your might. But you have all things in one, the whole of religion contracted to a point, in that word, 'Walk in love, as Christ also loved us and gave Himself for us.' All is contained in humble, gentle, patient love. Is not this, so to speak, a divine contrivance to assist the narrowness of our minds, the scantiness of our understanding Every right temper, and then all right words and actions, naturally branch out of love. In effect, therefore, you want nothing but this--to be filled with the faith that worketh by love.

You take no liberties that are not agreeable to, my dear Philly,

Yours affectionately.

To James Hutton

LEWISHAM, January 10, 1772.

DEAR JAMES,--Little journeys hither and thither have for these two or three weeks taken up much of my time. You know I am a busy kind of mortal; however, I am always glad to see my old friends. But most of them have taken their flight from hence, and are lodged in Abraham's bosom. I expect to be at West Street Chapel house on Monday, between eleven and twelve. Wishing you every gospel blessing; I remain, dear James,

Yours affectionately.

The Foundery

I had wrote before I received yours.

To Mr. Hutton, At Lindsey House, Chelsea.

To Robert Costerdine

LONDON, January 18, 1772

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I am glad you see the fruit of your labour. As to Bilston, [Costerdine was now Assistant in Staffordshire.] if you can do no good there, you will do well to bestow the time elsewhere. I hope (if God prolong my life and health) to be at Broadmarston [He did not get to Broadmarston till the 14th, and Birmingham on the 16th. See Journal, v. 448.] on Friday, March 13; on Saturday at Birmingham; on Sunday at Wednesbury; on Monday, 16th where you please; on Tuesday, at five or six in the evening, at Wolverhampton; and on Wednesday, the 18th, at Newcastle (noon); Burslem, six in the evening.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Pywell[2]

NEAR LONDON, January 22, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You have given me a clear and satisfactory answer to the questions which I proposed, and I rejoice over you for the grace of God which is in you. May He increase it more and more! How should I rejoice to see you and to talk with you more particularly on these heads! I hope that may be in spring; but before then you can tell me,--Are you always sensible of the presence of God Is not that sense ever interrupted by company or by hurry of business Do you pray without ceasing Is your heart lifted up, whatever your hands are employed in Do you rejoice evermore Are you always happy always more or less enjoying God Do you never fret never so grieve at anything as to interrupt your happiness Do you never find lowness of spirits Are you enabled in everything to give thanks I ask you many questions, because I want you to write freely and particularly to, dear Sally,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Sarah Pywell, At Mr. Wilson's, In Stenton. To be left at the White Lion in Derby.

To John Mason

LONDON, January 26, 1772.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Two old members recovered I make more account of than three new ones. I love to see backsliders return. I was afraid there was no more place for us in Workington.[Mason was now Assistant at Whitehaven, which Circuit included Workington, Cockermouth and Carlisle.] scarce any one came to hear. It is well the people are now of a better mind. You cannot expect to do good at Carlisle till you either procure a more comfortable place or preach in the open air. For many years Cockermouth has been the same, and will be till you can preach abroad.

You will observe the letter which I desired Brother Mather [Alexander Mather was in London. See letter of Feb. 27, 1773.] to write to you concerning the books; and make all the haste which the nature of the thing will admit. I shall endeavour to see you in summer; and am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ann Bolton

LONDON, January 29, 1772.

Nancy, Nancy! What is the matter Not a line yet! Are you trying whether I can be angry at you Or are you fallen into your old temptation, and so care not whether I am pleased or displeased You give me concern. I have many fears concerning you. Tell me without delay how your soul prospers. Adieu!

To Miss Bolton, At Mr. Bolton's, Brewer, In Witney, Oxon.

To the Society Pro Fide et Christianismo

LONDON, January 31, 1772.

GENTLEMEN,--I cannot but praise God for putting it into your hearts boldly to lift up a standard against the iniquity which has overspread the world, even the Christian world, as a flood. This is, indeed, one of the noblest and most important designs which can enter into the soul of man. Meantime permit me to remind you that the difficulties attending it will be in proportion to the importance of it. For the prince of this world will fight with all his power that his kingdom may not be delivered up. But is not He that is with you greater than he that is in the world The Lord of Hosts is with you; the God of Jacob is your refuge.

I return you my sincerest thanks for doing me the honour of admitting me into your number, and shall greatly rejoice if it should ever be in my power any way to forward your excellent design. [See letters of Jan. 30, 1770, and Dec. 23, 1775.] Wishing you all success therein, I remain, gentlemen,

Your unworthy brother and willing servant.

To Mary Stokes

[About January 1772.]

MY DEAR SISTER,--In order to speak for God, you must not confer with flesh and blood, or you will never begin. You should vehemently resist the reasoning devil, who will never want arguments for your silence. Indeed, naturally all the passions justify themselves: so do fear and shame in particular. In this case, therefore, the simple, child-like boldness of faith is peculiarly necessary. And when you have broke through and made the beginning, then prudence has its office--that is, Christian (not worldly) prudence, springing from the unction of the Holy One, and teaching you how far and in what manner to speak, according to a thousand various circumstances.

You do not yet see the day dawn with regard to those who are near and dear to you. But you must not hence infer that it never will. The prayer that goeth not out of feigned lips will not fall to the ground; but 'though it seem to tarry long, true and faithful is His word.'

I am glad Miss Williams comes a little nearer to us. Do the same good office to Molly Jones. [See letter of Dec. 26, 1771, to Miss Stokes.] She professes to love you; if she really does, press on, and you will prevail. Does not Tommy Janes hurt her He is lively and good-natured, but has no liking either to the doctrine or discipline of the Methodists. Such a person is just calculated for weakening all that is right and strengthening all that is wrong in her. If you speak to Mr. Pawson concerning the preaching at the Hall on Sunday evening, I believe it may be continued. Only it could not be by the travelling preachers; they are otherwise engaged.

Yours affectionately.

To Walter Sellon

LONDON, February 1, 1772.

DEAR WALTER,--You do not understand your information right. Observe, 'I am going to America to turn bishop.' [See letter of Aug. 14, 1771, to Philothea Briggs.] You are to understand it in sensu composito. ['In the sense agreed.'] I am not to be a bishop till I am in America. While I am in Europe, therefore, you have nothing to fear. But as soon as ever you hear of my being landed at Philadelphia, it will be time for your apprehensions to revive. It is true some of our preachers would not have me stay so long; but I keep my old rule, Festina lente. ['Make haste slowly.']--I am, dear Walter,

Your affectionate brother.

To Rebecca Yeoman

LONDON, February 5, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--As far as I understand, you are now properly in the wilderness state. I advise you to read over that sermon in the fourth volume, [See Works, vi. 77-91] and examine yourself thereby. If you find out the cause of heaviness or darkness, you are more than half-way to the cure.

If Jenny Johnson [See letter of Aug. 4, 1770.] is throughly sensible of her fault, you may trust her; if not, she should not meet in band. As your mind is tender and easily moved, you may readily fall into inordinate affection; if you do, that will quickly darken your soul. But watch and pray, and you shall not enter into temptation.

If it please God to continue my life and strength, I expect to come through Scotland in April and May, so as to reach Newcastle about the beginning of June [He arrived on May 25.]; but who knows whether we may not before then take a longer journey Our wisdom is to live to-day.--I am, dear Becky,

Your affectionate brother.

To Lady Maxwell

LONDON, February 8, 1772.

MY DEAR LADY,--I commend you for meddling with points of controversy as little as possible. It is abundantly easier to lose our love in that rough field than to find truth. This consideration has made me exceedingly thankful to God for giving me a respite from polemical labours. I am glad He has given to others both the power and the will to answer them that trouble me; so that I may not always be forced to hold my weapons in one hand while I am building with the other. I rejoice likewise not only in the abilities but in the temper of Mr. Fletcher. He writes as he lives. I cannot say that I know such another clergyman in England or Ireland. He is all fire; but it is the fire of love. His writings, like his constant conversation, breathe nothing else to those who read him with an impartial eye. And although Mr. Shirley scruples not to charge him with using subtilty and metaphysical distinctions, yet he abundantly clears himself of this charge in the Second Check to Antinomianism. ['A Second Check to Antinomianism; occasioned by a Late Narrative, in three letters to the Hon. and Rev. Author (Walter Shirley), was published at the end of 1771.] Such the last letters are styled, and with great propriety; for such they have really been. They have given a considerable check to those who were everywhere making void the law through faith; setting 'the righteousness of Christ' in opposition to the law of Christ, and teaching that 'without holiness any man may see the Lord.'

Notwithstanding both outward and inward trials, I trust you are still on the borders of perfect love. For the Lord is nigh!

See the Lord thy Keeper stand

Omnipotently near!

Lo I He holds thee by thy hand,

And banishes thy fear!

You have no need of fear. Hope unto the end! Are not all things possible to him that believeth Dare to believe! Seize a blessing now! The Lord increase your faith! In this prayer I know you join with, my dear Lady,

Your ever affectionate servant.

To Mary Stokes

LONDON, February 11, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I am glad you have had an opportunity of spending a little time with that lovely company. The day I leave Bristol (Monday, March 9) I hope to be at Stroud myself. [See Journal, v. 448.] You are not sent thither for nothing, but in order to do as well as to receive good: and that not to one family only, or to those four of your acquaintance; nay, but you have a message from God (you and Ally Eden [Miss Ally Eden, the daughter of Henry Eden, of Broadmarston. She wrote Wesley about Christian perfection on Aug. 27. John Pawson calls it 'one of the most amiable families I had ever known.' See Journal, v. 251; Wesley's Veterans, iv. 42; and letter of Dec. 12, 1773.] too) to all the women in the Society. Set aside all evil shame, all modesty, falsely so called. Go from house to house; deal faithfully with them all; warn every one; exhort every one. God will everywhere give you a word to speak, and His blessing therewith. Be you herein a follower of Nancy Bolton, as she is of Christ.

In doing and bearing the will of our Lord,

We still are preparing to meet our reward.

I have great hope for Sally James. [See letters of March 17, 1771, and May 1, 1772, to Miss Stokes.] In the company which commonly surrounds her, it is best to use reserve. And this is apt to form an habit, which it is not easy to conquer, even with those she loves well; but I trust she will conquer this and every enemy. Perhaps we shall soon rejoice with her. It is good that you may be emptied, that you may be filled. But how is this that you have never given me an hour's pain since I was first acquainted with you Do you intend to be always going forward, without standing still, or going backward at all The good Lord enable you so to do, and all those that are with you! So fulfil the joy of

Yours affectionately.

To Hannah Ball[3]

LONDON, February 21, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You have indeed reason to be thankful that God has at length turned the captivity of His people; and your preachers [Samuel Wells and William Barker.] have good encouragement to be zealous for God, since they see the fruit of their labours. On Monday se'nnight I expect one of them at least will meet me at Newbury. How happy you are who have none of those dissensions which have torn that poor Society in pieces! Pray that you may all continue of one mind, striving together for the hope of the gospel, and inviting all to press after full salvation.--My dear sister,

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Barton

LONDON, February 21, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I believe you will never willingly give me pain. You will give me pleasure as long as you are pressing on to the mark, ready to do and patient to suffer the whole will of God. You cannot be separated from the people till you are removed into Abraham's bosom. In order to make your continuance with them the easier, I hope Mr. Thompson has now fixed the class as I directed. He is a good preacher and a good man; though liable to mistake, or he would be more than man. [Joseph Thompson was Assistant at Hull.]

Can you still give God your whole heart Is He always present with you Have these trials weakened or strengthened your faith Have you a clear evidence that you are saved from sin See that you strengthen each other's hands and press on to the mark together!--I am, my dear Jenny,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse

LONDON, February 25, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I do not understand how it should be that your Society decreases. If only two or three of you are zealous for God, certainly it will increase. Thomas Rankin and William Ellis go on well. [Then in Cornwall West.] I trust William has recovered his ground.

John Ellis called the family at Worcester to prayer, went up into his chamber, and died. [Ellis was Assistant in Gloucestershire. While reading at Worcester he fell from his chair, 'and expired without the pomp of dying' on Jan. 5, 1772. See Atmore's Memorial,p. 119.] So he has his desire; he was troublesome to no one, and went home in the height of his usefulness. If you should hear that I was gone after him, you would: be enabled to say, 'Good is the will of the Lord!' Press forward to the mark! All things then will 'work together for good.'--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Christopher Hopper

LEWISHAM, February 26, 1772.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--When Mr. Shirley (or rather Lady H.) published that wonderful circular letter, [See Tyerman's Wesley, iii. 93-4. The letter led to Fletcher's Checks.] it was little imagined that it would be the occasion of establishing those very doctrines which it was intended to destroy. So different were God's thoughts from men's thoughts! T. Olivers was more afraid than hurt. [Olivers took a prominent part in the controversy with Toplady and others.] We all agree in this: 'By thy words thou shalt be justified' (in the last day); 'and by thy words' (yea, and works) 'thou shalt be condemned.'

April 6 I hope to be at Manchester; and thence to go by Whitehaven to Glasgow, Perth, and Aberdeen. My Welsh church has a fine air, but no land or money belonging to it. Peace be with you and yours!--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Christopher Hopper, In Bradford, Yorkshire.

To Miss Sparrow[4]

LEWISHAM, February 26, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--From the whole of your account it appears plain beyond all reasonable doubt that you have tasted once and again of the pure love of God. Why, then, did you not abide therein It was your own infirmity. You was moved from your steadfastness by those evil reasonings, which I am of opinion were chiefly diabolical. What you seem to want above all things is simplicity, the spirit of a little child. Look, and take it from Him that knows you! Take this and whatsoever else you stand in need of. Do you say 'you need a guide' Why will you not accept of me Do you know any that loves you better All the advices I would give you now centre in one--Now, to-day, look unto Jesus! Is He not waiting to be gracious Give Him your heart! And if you love me, speak all you think to, my dear sister,

Yours affectionately.

To Samuel Sparrow[5]

LEWISHAM, February 26, 1772.

SIR,--I have read with pleasure your ingenious book, which contains many just and noble sentiments, expressed in easy and proper language. I observe only two points in which we do not quite think alike. One of these is expressly treated of in that tract which reduces us to that clear dilemma, 'Either Jesus Christ was God or He was not an honest man.' The other is largely considered in the book of which I now desire your acceptance. Wishing you all happiness in this life and in a better, I remain, dear sir,

Your affectionate servant.

To Ann Bolton[6]

LONDON, February 29, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--All your letters are exceedingly pleasing to me and give me a peculiar satisfaction; but your last in particular. I know not how to repress the emotion I felt when I read it. I rejoice over others, but over you above all. How unspeakably near are you to me! Since the time that I mourned with you at London and was a partaker of your sorrow, you have given me more and more excuse to rejoice over you; though now and then with a jealous fear lest in anything you should suffer loss or be slackened in running the race set before you.

I shall not ride any long journeys on horseback. [See letter of March 4.] But you must needs meet me either at Stroud or Broadmarston; else I shall almost think you do not love me. On Monday, March 9, I hope to be at Stroud; the Saturday following at Broadmarston. How do you know whether you shall see me any more in the body

My dear Nancy, my friend, adieu!

To Mary Bishop

LONDON, March 1, 1772.

MY DEAR MISS BISHOP,--That your every hour is crowded with employment I account no common blessing. The more employment the better, since you are not doing your own will, but the will of Him that sent you. I cannot see that it is by any means His will for you to quit your present situation. But I observe one sentence in your letter on which you and I may explain a little. On Tuesday morning at ten I am (if God permit) to preach at The Devizes. About two I have appointed T. Lewis from Bristol to meet me at the Pelican in Bath, where I should be glad to see you, were it only for two or three minutes.--I am, my dear Miss Bishop,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mary Bosanquet[7]

BRISTOL, March 4, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I believe my last letter took away a good part of your apprehensions. All the inconvenience I find (from a little bruise) is that I am advised to ride as much in a carriage as I can and as little on horseback. I take your offer exceeding kindly; and am, my dear friend,

Ever yours.

To Miss Bosanquet, At Morley common, Near Leeds.

To Penelope Newman[8]

NEAR BRISTOL, March 6, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You are called to do all you can for God. How little is that all! Therefore by all means meet that other class, and it will be a blessing to your own soul.

When I talked with you last, God had given you to enjoy a clear deliverance from inbred sin. I hope you do not find any return of that dead[ness], though doubtless you will find numberless temptations. Yet beware you cast not away that confidence which hath great recompense of reward. You need never more feel pride, anger, or any other evil temper. The Lord loveth you, and His grace is sufficient for you. Ask, and receive, that your joy may be full.--I am, my dear sister,

Yours affectionately.

To his Brother Charles

BlRMINGHAM, March 17, 1772,

DEAR BROTHER,--The more you are at the Foundery the better. It is a good spirit which rules in that Society. [Charles Wesley came to live in Marylebone in May 1771.]

You have done exactly right with regard to T. Maxfield. For the present my hope of him is lost. [He had had a disappointing interview with Maxfield on Feb. 25.]

I am to-day to meet Mr. Fletcher at Bilbrook.[Wesley writes in the Journal, v. 449: 'Partly in a chaise, partly on horseback, I made a shift to get to Bilbrook; and, after preaching, to Wolverhampton.' Fletcher told the Dublin Society in March that he had sent his Third Check to press. See Wesley's Designated Successor, p. 222.] Part of the Third Check is printing. The rest I have ready. In this he draws the sword and throws away the scabbard. Yet I doubt not they will forgive him all if he will but promise --to write no more.

J. Rouquet helped me at Bristol. [From March 3 to 9 Wesley had spent a 'few comfortable days' in Bristol. Mrs. Jenkins was one of the members there. It was probably Mrs. Reeves's husband, who died on Sept. 21, 1778. See C. Wesley's Journal, ii. 270, 275.] I neither saw nor heard anything of G. Stonehouse. Jane Jenkins is in a right spirit; affliction has done her good. Mrs. Reeves I had no time for.

I feared Sister Marriott would not recover. [Mrs. Marriott was among the first twelve to join the Foundery Society in 1739, and her husband was one of its earliest members.] Mr. Blackwell's heart is truly softened; but why is she afraid to receive the Lord's supper [Wesley visited Mrs. Blackwell at Lewisham on Feb. 26. She died the following month. See letter of April 26.]

If Mr. F-- does come, it will be for good. It does not follow, 'You felt nothing; therefore neither did your hearers.' In haste. Adieu.

To John Mason

LONDON, March 22, 1772.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I hope Mr. Wagner [Wagner writes to him about a packet from Liverpool to Dublin in March 1778, and Wesley seems to have stayed with him at Liverpool in 1786. See Journal, vi. 182, vii. 154d.] and you are upon good terms. He is an amiable man, and would be exceeding useful were it not for ill advisers. When there is occasion, talk to him freely. He has a friendly heart.

It is of great use to meet the leaders of the bands in Liverpool. [Mason had evidently moved from Whitehaven to Liverpool.] This should never be neglected. I am inclined to think the best time for it would be from two to three on Sunday in the afternoon. Then you might set an example to the Society by going to church immediately after. This is of no small importance. For whoever leaves the Church will leave the Methodists.

Everywhere strongly and explicitly preach perfection. Then your word will profit.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Philothea Briggs

LIVERPOOL, March 23, 1772.

If useless words or thoughts spring from evil tempers, they are properly evil, otherwise not; but still they are contrary to the Adamic law: yet not to the law of love; therefore there is no condemnation for them, but they are matter of humiliation before God. So are those (seemingly) unbelieving thoughts; although they are not your own, and you may boldly say, 'Go, go, thou unclean spirit; thou shalt answer for these, and not I.'

To Ann Bolton

CONGLETON, March 25, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--The more I reflect on what you said concerning that emptiness, the more I am inclined to think that lovely woman Betsy Johnson [Elizabeth Johnson. See letter of Dec. 15, 1763.] has met with some of those that are called 'Mystic writers' who abound among the Roman Catholics. These are perpetually talking of 'self-emptiness, self-inanition, self-annihilation,' and the like: all very near akin to 'self-contradiction,' as a good man used to say. Indeed, we allow that one cannot take too much care to hide pride from man. And I am many times ready to tremble lest you should slide into it again, and lest I myself should lead you into it while I tell you (as my manner is) just the thought that rises in my heart.

My Nancy, does not this hurt you Be as artless with me as I am with you. But though we can never be too humble, though we can never abase ourselves too much before the God of love; yet I cannot approve of recommending humanity by the use of these expressions. My first objection to them is that they are unscriptural. Now, you and I are bigots to the Bible. We think the Bible language is like Goliath's sword, that 'there is none like it.' But they are dangerous too: they almost naturally lead us to deny the gifts of God. Nay, and to make a kind of merit of it; to imagine we honour Him by undervaluing what He has done. Let it not be so with you. Acknowledge all His work while you render Him all His glory.

Yours affectionately.

To his Brother Charles

CONGLETON, March 25, 1772.

DEAR BROTHER,--Giles Ball (as Oliver [Oliver Cromwell said on his death-bed, 'I am safe, for I know that I was once in grace.' See Morley's Cromwell, p. 486.] said) was a good man once! I hope we have no more of the sort. There is still a famous one in Bristol. Now I see why he could not join us. Poor Mr. B--.! [See letter of April 26.] I used to conceive better things of him.

I find almost all our preachers in every circuit have done with Christian perfection. They say they believe it; but they never preach it, or not once in a quarter. What is to be done Shall we let it drop, or make a point of it

Oh what a thing it is to have curam animarum! ['The care of souls.'] You and I are called to this; to save souls from death, to watch over them as those that must give account! If our office implied no more than preaching a few times in a week, I could play with it; so might you. But how small a part of our duty (yours as well as mine) is this! God says to you as well as me, 'Do all thou canst, be it more or less, to save the souls for whom My Son has died.' Let this voice be ever sounding in our ears; then shall we give up our account with joy. Eia, age; rumpe moras! [See letter of Feb. 28, 1766, to him.] I am ashamed of my indolence and inactivity. The good Lord help us both! Adieu! 'Errwsqe. ['Farewell.']

To Mrs. Bennis[9]

LIVERPOOL, March 31, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You did well to break through and converse with Mrs. Dawson. There is no doubt but she has living faith; but, not having opportunity to converse with believers, she cannot express herself with that clearness that our friends do: cultivate the acquaintance. Now, lay before her by way of promise the whole Christian salvation; she will quickly see the desirableness of it. You may then lend her the Plain Account of Christian Perfection. She will not be frightened but rather encouraged at hearing it is possible to attain what her heart longs for. While you are thus feeding God's lambs, He will lead you into rich pastures.

I do not wonder you should meet with trials: it is by these your faith is made perfect. You will find many things both in your heart and in your life contrary to the perfection of the Adamic law; but it does not follow that they are contrary to the law of love. Let this fill your heart, and it is enough. Still continue active for God. Remember, a talent is entrusted to you; see that you improve it. He does not like a slothful steward. Your affectionate brother.

To Samuel Bardsley

BOLTON, April 3, 1772.

DEAR SAMMY,--I am glad you are got into your circuit again. [Bardsley was now in the Derbyshire Circuit.] Now put forth all your strength. Never be ashamed of the old Methodist doctrine. Press all believers to go on to perfection. Insist everywhere on the second blessing as receivable in a moment, and receivable now, by simple faith. Read again the Plain Account of Christian Perfection. And strive always to converse in a plain, unaffected manner.-- I am, dear Sammy,

Yours affectionately.

To Philothea Briggs

WHITEHAVEN, April 12, 1772.

Your affections were apt to be too impetuous, and sometimes uneven too; but nature yields to healing grace, which I trust has made you both more calm and more steady. [See letter of Sept. 13, 1771.] And what will it not make you if you persevere All that is amiable, holy and happy! Already He that loves you gives you a taste of what He has prepared for you. Let patience have its perfect work, and you shall be perfect and entire, lacking nothing. See that you make the best of life! The time is short!

To his Brother Charles

PERTH, April 26, 1772.

DEAR BROTHER,--I meant Mr. Buller. [See letter of March 25.] I have not been at Leeds; so I can give you no account of the matter.

I find by long experience it comes exactly to the same point, to tell men they shall be saved from all sin when they die; or to tell them it may be a year hence, or a week hence, or any time but now. Our word does not profit, either as to justification or sanctification, unless we can bring them to expect the blessing while we speak.

I hope Fox [John Fox, of London. See Journal, v. 5.] is in peace. But he had no business there. I suppose the madman was another of the name. I am glad you have done justice to Mrs. Blackwell's [She died on March 27. Charles had written some memorial verses, which are given in his Journal, ii. 383-9.] memory.

I do not believe either Brother Wildman or any other spoke those words. I cannot believe it at all, unless you or Brother Mather heard them. Many tell you tales of that sort which are not true at all.

Your business as well as mine is to save souls. When we took priests' orders, we undertook to make it our one business. I think every day lost which is not (mainly at least) employed in this thing. Sum totus in illo. [Horace's Satires, I. ix. 2 (Totus in illis): 'I am entirely occupied with it.']

I am glad you are to be at Bristol soon. To whom shall I leave my papers and letters [He finally left, by will, Feb. 20, 1789, all his 'MSS. to Thomas Coke, Dr. Whitehead, and Henry Moore, to be burned or published as they see good.'] I am quite at a loss. I think Mr. Fletcher is the best that occurs now. Adieu!

To Mary Stokes

ABERDEEN, May 1, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Sally James [See letters of Feb. 11 and Sept. 20.] is a letter in my debt. I have had but one letter from her since I left Bristol: and that I answered almost as soon as I received it. I a little wondered at not hearing from you; but as I know both the constancy and tenderness of your affection, there was no danger of my imputing it to ingratitude.

I think your present exercise, though it is one of the most trying, is one of the most profitable which a good providence could prepare for you. And it will probably be one means of plucking a brand out of the burning, of saving a soul alive. Oh what would not one do, what would not one suffer, for this glorious end! You certainly have good reason to--hope; for any that feels himself a sinner will hardly perish, more especially if he sees where to look for help and is willing to give up every plea beside.

You are never to put repentance and faith asunder; the knowledge of your emptiness and His fullness.

Naked, and blind, and poor, and bare,

You still your want of all things find.

But at the same instant (such is the mystery of Christian experience) you can say,

Jesus, I all things have in Thee!

Our blessed Lord carries on His work in our souls by giving us either to do or to suffer. Hitherto you are led most in the latter of these ways. I expect, when you have more to do for Him, you shall suffer less. Every morning and frequently in the day you are very near to, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Philothea Briggs

LEITH, NEAR EDINBURGH, May 13, 1772.

MY DEAR PHILLY,--To set the state of perfection too high is the surest way to drive it out of the world. The substance of that test I believe I have seen; and I judge it not consistent with humanity, I mean with the state of an human soul, as long as it is united to a corruptible body. Do not puzzle yourself any more with these nice inquiries; but, in order to resettle your judgement, give another deliberate reading to the Farther Thoughts or the Plain Account of Christian Perfection. He that long ago gave you to taste of His pardoning love gave you afterwards a taste of His pure love. Whereunto you have attained hold fast; never cast it away through a voluntary humility. But see that you do not rest there. Comparatively, forget the things that are behind. Reach forward! This one thing do: press on to the prize of your high calling. I expect to be at Newcastle on the 25th instant, and to stay twenty days in or near it.

I remember Nicholas Sewell well, and have seen many of his poetical compositions. He was bred a Quaker, but when I knew him was stark, staring mad. I wish my brother would print his verses; but he grows more and more backward.

You and I must be content with doing what good we can, and no more. Yet I love you for desiring to do more; only with resignation.--I am, my dear Philly,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Phil. Briggs, At Mr. Barker's, In Sevenoaks, Kent.

To Alexander Clark[10]

EDINBURGH, May 19, 1772.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Brother Kidd is not only an honest, upright man, but I think a diligent one too. I am glad he is willing to share with you the trouble of being Book Steward. It is a good thought. But by all means print catalogues and send them all over the kingdom. I do not see any impropriety in allowing the nine pounds; the Assistant may pay you this out of the weekly subscription. The Rules of Stewards you have in the Plain Account of the People called Methodists. [See letter in Dec. 1748, sect. IX. 3, to Vincent Perronet.] Remember one of them is, 'Expect no thanks from man.' If ever you forget this, you will be apt to grow weary and faint in your mind. Remember likewise that a steward is to tell the preacher of anything he thinks wrong. In my private judgement I think one preacher enough for the New Room and the Gravel Walk too. I should dance and sing if I had no more labour than that. But I have letter upon letter to the contrary. However, let our brethren meet and consult together, and I presume I shall hardly object to whatever they shall agree upon. Whenever the Gravel Walk house is settled like our other houses, I shall be willing that all the weekly subscription be given toward clearing it of debt. Have patience, and all will be well.--I am, dear Alleck,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Alex. Clark, The New Room, Dublin. Per Portpatrick.

To Ann Bolton[11]

LONDONDERRY, May 27, 1772.

Do you find as much inward life as ever as close and steady communion with God Do you rejoice evermore In what sense do you pray without ceasing Is your peace constant and unshaken Does nothing ruffle you Do you feel no anger no pride no will of your own contrary to the will of God Do you feel no bent to backsliding in your heart You may find and indeed expect temptations innumerable, even to seek happiness in this or that creature. But is every fiery dart repelled, so as to have no place in you

With regard to your question, it is only (in other words), Is there any sin in a believer or, Are we not sanctified throughout when we are justified You have a full answer to this question, which has perplexed so many upright souls, in those two sermons wrote expressly on the head, The Repentance of Believers and Sin in Believers. [See Works, v. 144-70.] Read them carefully, and I believe you will want nothing more to confirm you in the truth. Nevertheless you do well in exhorting all that are justified to hold fast all they have received. And it is certain they need never lose either their love or peace or power till they are fully sanctified.

Your affectionate brother.

To Hannah Ball[12]

SUNDERLAND, May 30, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Do you not remember that fine remark in the Christian Instructions, 'Nothing is more profitable to the soul than to be censured for a good action which we have done with a single eye' [Christian Reflections, from the French, in Works (1773 ed.), p. 211, sect. 208. See Green's Bibliography, No. 295.] Mr. H[artly], then, may have profited you more than you thought. Oh, it is a blessed thing to suffer in a good cause! I was never more struck than with a picture of a man lying upon straw with this inscription, 'The true effigy of Francis Xavier, the apostle of the Indies, forsaken of all men, and dying in a cottage.' Here was a martyrdom, I had almost said, more glorious than that of St. Paul or St. Peter! O woman, remember the faith! Happy are you to whom it is given both to do and to suffer the will of God! It is by this means that He will confirm your soul against too great sensibility. It is then only too great when it hurts the body or unfits you for some part of your duty. Otherwise it is a blessed thing to sorrow after a godly sort.

Whatever you read in the Life of Mr. De Renty and Gregory Lopez or the Experience of E. J. is for you. Christ is ready! all is ready! Take it by simple faith!--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Ann Foard

NEWCASTLE, June 7, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Do I flatter myself in judging of you by myself Am I mistaken in thinking we feel alike I believe we do: I believe in this your heart is as mine. But if so, it is not so easy for you to part. Indeed, I judged before, this was only a sudden start, arising from a misapprehension of my meaning. That was really the case. I did not, could not compare one I so tenderly love (with a love of esteem as well as complacence) with him: only with regard to one circumstance. Well, now you have made me amends for the pain you gave me before. And see that you make me farther amends by swiftly advancing in lowliness, in meekness, in gentleness towards all men. So fulfil the joy of, my dear Nancy,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Foard, In Blackman Street, No. 86. Southwark, London.

To Mrs. Bennis[13]

YARM, June 16, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--As often as you can I hope you will converse with Mrs. Dawson, as her heart is much united to you; and when you are at a distance from each other, you may converse by letters. And I believe you are particularly called to be useful to those whom the riches or the grandeur of this world keep at a distance from the pure word of God.

When you are at Waterford, see that you be not idle there. You should gather up and meet a band immediately. If you would meet a class too, it would be so much the better: you know, the more labour the more blessing.

You did well to send me the last enclosure; it is absolutely needful that I should be acquainted with all such matters; the contrary would be false delicacy.

Mr. Goodwin is a valuable young man; he has much grace and a good understanding. I have wrote to Mr. Glassbrook and the leaders, if James Deaves should come to Limerick in the same spirit wherein he has been for some time, to take care that he do no mischief. If he should proceed in that impetuous manner, we shall be obliged to take harsher measures. This I should be sorry for; one would not cut off a limb while there is any hope of recovering it. I expect John Christian will be an useful labourer; he has a zeal according to knowledge.

Nothing is sin, strictly speaking, but a voluntary transgression of a known law of God. Therefore every voluntary breach of the law of love is sin; and nothing else, if we speak properly. To strain the matter farther is only to make way for Calvinism. There may be ten thousand wandering thoughts and forgetful intervals without any breach of love, though not without transgressing the Adamic law. But Calvinists would fain confound these together. Let love fill your heart, and it is enough!--I am, dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mary Stokes

YARM, June 16, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--That remedy mentioned in the Primitive Physick (the manna dissolved in a decoction of senna) hardly ever fails to relieve in the severest bilious colic within twelve or fourteen minutes. Warm lemonade (so stupid are they who forbid acids in these cases) frequently gives ease in half a minute. And I have known this to take place in such inveterate complaints as would yield to no other remedy.

We are sure the means which our blessed Lord uses to conform us to His image are (all circumstances considered) the very best; for He cannot but do all things well: therefore, whenever it pleases Him to send affliction, then affliction is best. Yet we must not imagine He is tied down to this, or that He cannot give any degree of holiness without it. We have reason to believe from the earliest records that St. Paul suffered a thousand times more than St. John. And yet one can hardly doubt but St. John was as holy as he or any of the Apostles. Therefore stand ready for whatsoever our Lord shall send; but do not require Him to send you affliction. Perhaps He will take another way; He will overpower your whole soul with peace and joy and love; and thereby work in you a fuller conformity to Himself than you ever experienced yet. You have; hold fast there.

All's alike to me, so I

In my Lord may live and die.

--I am

Yours affectionately

To Philothea Briggs

WHITBY, Saturday, June 20, 1772.

MY DEAR PHILLY,--About this day se'nnight I expect to be at York; this day fortnight at Keighley, Yorkshire; this day three weeks at Leeds; and the two following Saturdays at Epworth, near Thorne, Yorkshire.

I like you should think as I think, because it is a token that you love me; and every proof of this gives me a very sensible pleasure. Love me, if you can, as long as I live.

It is of admirable use to bear the weaknesses, nay and even faults, of the real children of God. And the temptations to anger which rise herefrom are often more profitable than any other. Yet surely for the present they are not joyous but grievous; afterwards comes the peaceable fruit. You shall have exactly as much pain and as much disappointment as will be most for your profit, and just sufficient to

Keep you dead to all below,

Only Christ resolved to know.

Never make it matter of reasoning that you have not either a larger or a smaller share of suffering. You shall have exactly what is best both as to kind, degree, and time. Oh what a blessing is it to be in His hand who 'doeth all things well'!

Of all gossiping, religious gossiping is the worst; it adds hypocrisy to uncharitableness, and effectually does the work of the devil in the name of the Lord. The leaders in every Society may do much towards driving it out from among the Methodists. Let them in the band or class observe (1) 'Now we are to talk of no absent persons, but simply of God and our own souls'; (2) 'Let the rule of our conversation here be the rule of all our conversation. Let us observe it (unless in some necessarily exempt cases) at all times and in all places.' If this be frequently inculcated, it will have an excellent effect.

Instead of giving a caution once, as to a grown person, you must give it to a child ten times. By this means you may keep a sensible child from an improper familiarity with servants. Cautions should also be given frequently and earnestly to the servants themselves [See letter of Oct. 16, 1771.]; and they will not always be thrown away if they have either grace or sense.

To Thomas Wride[14]

OTLEY, June 30, 1772.

DEAR TOMMY,--How poor John Smith has lost himself and given occasion to the enemy to blaspheme! I do not see that he can any longer remain with us as a travelling preacher. It seems his best way would be quietly to return to his business.

Tho. Dixon or Jo. Wittam may bring over your accounts to the Conference. Be exact in everything!--I am, dear Tommy, Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ann Bolton

OTLEY, July 1, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--At last I have found, what I had almost despaired of, an occasion of blaming you. You simple one! A blister! Why not a red-hot iron It would have taken off your skin sooner. I hope you tried a treacle-plaster first. Otherwise I can only say you are not as wise as Solomon.

I am exceeding jealous over you lest you should go one step too far to the right hand or to the left. You are my glory and joy (though you are nothing), and I want you to be exactly right in all things. I am not content that anything should be wrong about you either in your temper or words or actions. And I bless God I generally have my desire over you: you are in good measure what I would have you to be. I do not observe anything to reprove in the account which you now give me. Go on! Watch in all things! Be zealous for God! Continue instant in prayer! And the God of peace Himself shall sanctify you wholly and preserve you blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ!

I believe you have been in one danger which you was not sensible of. You seemed a little inclined to that new opinion which lately sprung up among you--that we are (properly) sanctified when we are justified. You did not observe that this strikes at the root of perfection; it leaves no room for it at all. If we are never sanctified in any other sense than we are sanctified then, Christian perfection has no being. Consider the sermon on the Repentance of Believers, and you will see this clearly. O may God give you to have a right judgement in all things, and evermore to rejoice in His holy comfort! If you love me, be not slow in writing to, my dear Nancy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss March

OTLEY, July 1, 1772.

It is lost time to consider whether you write well or ill; you speak from the heart, and that is enough. Unbelief is either total, the absence of faith; or partial, the want of more faith. In the latter sense every believer may complain of unbelief, unless when he is filled with faith and the Holy Ghost. Then it is all midday. Yet even then we may pray, 'Lord, increase our faith.'

We learn to think by reading and meditating on what we read, by conversing with sensible people, and by everything that improves the heart. Since purity of heart (as Mr. Norris observes) both clears the medium through which we see and strengthens the faculty, mechanical rules avail little unless one had opportunity of learning the elements of logic; but it is a miserable task to learn them without an instructor.

Entire resignation implies entire love. Give Him your will, and you give Him your heart.

You need not be at all careful in that matter, whether you apply directly to one Person or the other, seeing He and the Father are one. Pray just as you are led, without reasoning, in all simplicity. Be a little child hanging on Him that loves you.

To Samuel Sparrow

NEAR LORDS, July 2, 1772.

DEAR SIR,--I have delayed answering your favour from time to time, hoping for leisure to answer it at large. But when that leisure will come I cannot tell; for in the summer months I am almost continually in motion. So I will delay no longer, but write a little as I can, though not as I would.

I incline to think that when you engaged in business, though you had no leisure for reading polemical writers, you had leisure to converse with those who ridiculed the doctrines which you till then believed, and perhaps of hearing a preacher who disbelieved them, and talked largely against human authority, bodies of divinity, systems of doctrine, and compiling of creeds. These declamations would certainly make an impression upon an unexperienced mind, especially when confirmed by frequent descants upon the errors of translators; although I really believe our English translation, with all its faults, is the best translation of the Bible now in the world. When you had heard a good deal of this kind, then was the time to offer you such arguments as the cause afforded; which, to a mind so prepared, would naturally appear as so many demonstrations. And it is no wonder at all that, by lending you a few books and properly commenting upon them, those new apostles should confirm you in the sentiments which they had so artfully infused.

To the questions which you propose, I answer:--

1. I really think that if an hundred or an hundred thousand sincere, honest (I add humble, modest, self-diffident) men were with attention and care to read over the New Testament, uninfluenced by any but the Holy Spirit, nine in ten of them at least, if not every one, would discover that the Son of God was 'adorable' and one God with the Father; and would be immediately led to 'honour Him, even as they honoured the Father'; which would be gross, undeniable idolatry, unless He and the Father are one.

2. The doctrine of Original Sin is surely more humbling to man than the opposite; and I know not what honour we can pay to God if we think man came out of His hands in the condition wherein he is now. I beg of you, sir, to consider the fact. Give a fair, impartial reading to that account of mankind in their present state which is contained in the book on Original Sin. It is no play of imagination, but plain, clear fact. We see it with our eyes and hear it with our ears daily. Heathens, Turks, Jews, Christians, of every nation, are such men as are there described. Such are the tempers, such the manners, of lords, gentlemen, clergymen, in England, as well as of tradesmen and the low vulgar. No man in his senses can deny it; and none can account for it but upon the supposition of original sin.

O sir, how important a thing is this! Can you refuse to worship Him whom 'all the angels of God worship' But if you do worship one that is not the supreme God, you are an idolater! Commending you and yours to His care, I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate servant.

To Hannah Ball[15]

BRADFORD, July 7. 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--From what has lately occurred you may learn a good lesson--not to build your faith on a single text of Scripture, and much less on a particular sense of it. Whether this text be interpreted in one or the other way, the work of God in your soul is the same. Beware, therefore, of supposing that you are mistaken in the substance of your experience because you may be mistaken with regard to the meaning of a particular scripture. Pray; and observe that God Himself may, and frequently does, apply a scripture to the heart (either in justifying or sanctifying a soul) in what is not its direct meaning. Allowing, then, that the passage mentioned directly refers to heaven, yet this would be no manner of proof that you were deceived as to that work of God which was wrought in your soul when it was applied to you in another meaning.--My dear sister, adieu!

To Miss Ball, At Mr. Ball's, Laceman, In High Wycombe, Bucks.

To John Bredin[16]

DEWSBURY, July 10, 1772.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--If Brother Taylor speaks for you at the Conference, it will be the same as if you was present yourself. If I can I will contrive that you may be in a circuit which will give you convenience for bathing in the sea, though a river is as good.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. T. Taylor, At the Preaching-house, In Manchester.

To his Brother Charles[17]

DEWSBURY, July 10, 1772.

DEAR BROTHER,--If I can meet with Mr. Hill's book at Leeds to-morrow, perhaps I may write a little before the Conference. I am glad Mr. Davis [Charles Wesley wrote from Bristol to Joseph Benson, 'I have lately escaped death or maiming by a fall.... Mr. Davis has been useful here' (Manuscript Life of Benson, i. 281).] has been with you; but he must not assist you for nothing. If he joins heart and hand, he should have seventy pounds a year.

My journeys lie thus, if God permit: Mon. Aug. 10, Sheffield; Tuesd. Burslem; Wedn. Salop; Friday, The Hay; Sat. 15, Brecon; Tues. 18, Haverfordwest; Tues. 25, Swansea; Sat. Aug. 30, Bristol; Mon. Sept. 1, Cullompton; Sat. 13, at Bristol again. I am able to stir a little still. Indeed, I find myself no worse in any respect.

In these fifty years I do not remember to have seen such a change. She is now xaritwn mia, tota merum mel [Probably his wife: 'One full of graces, honey quite unmixed.'] Finding fault with nobody, but well pleased with every person and thing!

I believe, if you had applied warm treacle to the bruised parts, you would have been well in eight-and-forty hours. Let us work to-day! The night cometh!

A little you will pick out of Dr. Boyce's fine music for the use of our plain people.

My sister Kezzy was born about March 1710; therefore you could not be born later than December 1708: consequently, if you live till December 1772, you will enter your sixty-fifth year. ['Or, according to Sister Pat's account, my sixty-second.--C.W,' Sister Pat (Mrs. Hall) was wrong. The real date was December 1707. See Telford's Charles Wesley, pp. 18-20.]

Peace be with you and yours! Adieu!

To Joseph Thompson

EPWORTH, July 18, 1772.

DEAR JOSEPH,--That Michael [Thompson was in Hall. Michael Fenwick was hospitably entertained by a gentleman at Bridlington for 'some years previous to his death' in 1797. See Atmore's Memorial, p. 124.] is not overcharged with wisdom is certain. But I do not know that he is a mischief-maker. It is your part to insist upon his keeping his round; to press the Yearly Collection in every place; and to see that all our rules be observed, whoever praises or blames. You have only to commend yourself to every man's conscience in the sight of God....

Whoever among us undertakes to baptize a child is ipso facto excluded from our Connexion.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Savage

GRIMSBY, July 22, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--It is easy to see the difference between those two things, sinfulness and helplessness. The former you need feel no more; the latter you will feel as long as you live. And, indeed, the nearer you draw to God, the more sensible of it you will be. But beware this does not bring you into the least doubt of what God has done for your soul. And beware it does not make you a jot the less forward to speak of it with all simplicity. Do you still feel an entire deliverance from pride, anger, and every desire that does not centre in God Do you trust Him both with soul and body Have you learned to cast all your care upon Him Are you always happy in Him In what sense do you pray without ceasing Expect all the promises!--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

In about a fortnight I am to be at Mr. Glynne's, Shrewsbury [Edward Glynne's mother was cousin to Lord Hereford, and wrote to him in defence of the Methodists. See Journal, iv. 491; Wesley's Veterans, i. 219-22; W.H.S. iv. 217 - 20.]

To Philothea Briggs

LEWISHAM, July 23, 1772.

At many times our advances in the race that is set before us are clear and perceptible; at other times they are no more perceptible (at least to ourselves) than the growth of a tree. At any time you may pray

Strength and comfort from Thy word

Imperceptibly supply.

And when you perceive nothing, it does not follow that the work of God stands still in your soul; especially while your desire is unto Him, and while you choose Him for your portion. He does not leave you to yourself, though it may seem so to your apprehension.

To Alexander Clark

WAKEFIELD, August I, 1772.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--The five pounds which I am willing to add to poor Grace Ellis's legacy (provided it will do her good) I do not charge to the Conference: I give it her myself. Whatever Brother Hall [William Hall was a trustee of Whitefriar Street Chapel, Dublin. Grace Ellis was probably an in mate of the Widows' Alms Houses there.] advances will be repaid. You may be assured we shall take no money from Ireland. With faith and patience we shall do well!--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Alex. Clark, At the New Room, In Dublin.

To Henry Eames

LEEDS, August 3, 1772.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--It is a great blessing that God has looked upon you in a strange land, [Eames had emigrated to America. see letter of July 15, 1789, to him.] and given you food to eat and raiment to put on, but a still greater that He has given you to eat of that bread which the world knoweth not of. You have likewise the invaluable advantage of companions on the way. I suppose you gladly entered the Society as soon as one was formed, and that you never willingly neglect any opportunity of meeting your brethren. Whatever your hand findeth to do do it with your might. Beware of spiritual sloth; beware of carelessness and listlessness of spirit. 'The kingdom of heaven suffereth violence.' See that you are one of those violent ones that 'take it by force.'--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To John Mason[18]

LEEDS, August 8, 1772.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--A blessing will always attend preaching abroad. In Liverpool Circuit, practice it as much as possible.

Mr. Robertshaw is both a sound and a lively man. Wherever he is, they want to have him stay longer. Be all-alive and all in earnest!--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Jane Salkeld[19]

LEEDS, August 9, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--From the first time I conversed with you I loved you; and you know

Love, like death, makes all distinctions void. [See letter of Feb. 15, 1769.]

I want you to hold fast all that you have already received, and to receive more and more. The lot is fallen upon you in a fair ground. See that you still cleave to Him by simple faith. I hope my dear little maidens Peggy and Sally are not moved from their steadfastness. Exhort all the little ones that believe to make haste and not delay the time of receiving the second blessing; and be not backward to declare what God has done for your soul to any that truly fear Him.

I hope you do not feel any decay; you are to sink deeper into His love, and rise higher into His likeness. And do not use any reserve to, my dear Jenny,

Your affectionate brother.

PS.--You may at any time direct to me in London.

To Alexander Clark[20]

SHEFFIELD, August 10, 1772.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Now the hurry of Conference is over, I get a little time to write. When I chose you to be Steward in Dublin, you both loved and esteemed your preachers; but I find you have now drunk in the whole spirit of Pat. Geoghegan. O beware! You are exceedingly deceived. By this time I should be some judge of man; and if I am, all England and Ireland cannot afford such a body of men, number for number, for sense and true experience both of men and things, as the body of Methodist preachers. Our leaders in London, Bristol, and Dublin are by no means weak men. I would not be ashamed to compare them with a like number of tradesmen in every part of the three kingdoms. But I assure you they are no more than children compared to the preachers in Conference, as you would be throughly convinced could you but have the opportunity of spending one day among them. Mr. Jaco will make a fair trial whether he can supply Dublin alone; if he cannot, he shall have another to help, for he must not kill himself to save charges. But I dare not stint him to 20 a year. He will waste nothing; but he must want nothing. You will make his stay among you in every respect as comfortable as you can.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mary Stokes

SHEFFIELD, August 10, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Having finished for the present my business at Leeds, [Where the Conference met on the 4th.] I am come thus far on my journey to Bristol. But I must take Haverfordwest in the way thither; so that I do not expect to be there till the 30th instant. How many blessings may you receive in the meantime, provided you seek them in the good old way wherein you received the Lord Jesus Christ! So walk in Him still. Beware of striking into new paths! of being wise above that is written! Perhaps we may find sweetness in the beginning; but it would be bitterness in the latter end. O my sister, my friend, I am afraid for you! I doubt you are stepping out of the way. When you enter into your closet and shut the door and pray to your Father who seeth in secret, then is the time to groan to Him who reads the heart the unutterable prayer. But to be silent in the congregation of His people is wholly new, and therefore wholly wrong. A silent meeting was never heard of in the Church of Christ for sixteen hundred years. I entreat you to read over with much prayer that little tract A Letter to a Quaker. [See letters of Feb. 10, 1748, and March 17, 1771 (to her).] I fear you are on the brink of a precipice, and you know it not. The enemy has put on his angel's face, and you take him for a friend. Retire immediately! Go not near the tents of those dead, formal men called Quakers! Keep close to your class, to your band, to your old teachers; they have the words of eternal life! Have any of them offended you Has any stumbling-block been laid in your way Hide nothing from, my dear Molly,

Yours in true affection.

Ten days hence I expect to be at Haverfordwest.

To Mary Bishop

PEMBROKE, August 22, 1772.

DEAR MISS BISHOP,--Such a degree of sickness or pain as does not affect the understanding I have often found to be a great help. It is an admirable help against levity as well as against foolish desires; and nothing more directly tends to teach us that great lesson, to write upon our heart, 'Not as I will, but as Thou wilt.'

Mr. Baxter well observes (or, indeed, Archbishop Usher, to whom he refers, had done before him), 'that whoever attempt to profit children will find need of all the understanding God has given them.' But, indeed, natural understanding will go but a little way. It is a peculiar gift of God. I believe He has given you a measure of it already, and you may ask and expect an increase of it. Our dear sisters at Publow [Mrs. Owen and her daughters. See letter of Nov. 22, 1769.] enjoy it in as high a degree as any young women I know.

It certainly must be an inordinate affection which creates so many jealousies and misunderstandings. I should think it would be absolutely needful, the very next time that you observe anything of that kind, to come to a full explanation with the parties concerned; to tell them calmly and roundly, 'I must and I will choose for myself whom I will converse with, and when and how; and if any one of you take upon you to be offended at me on this account, you will make it necessary for me to be more shy and reserved to you than ever I was before.' If you steadily take up this cross, if you speak thus once or twice in the band or class in a cool but peremptory manner, I am much inclined to think it will save both you and others a good deal of uneasiness.

When you see those ladies (with whom I have no acquaintance), you would do well to speak exceeding plain. I am afraid they are still entire strangers to the religion of the heart.

On Saturday, the 29th instant, I hope to be at Bristol, and on the Wednesday evening following at Bath. Let notice be given of this.--I am, dear Miss Bishop,

Your affectionate brother.

To his Niece Sarah Wesley[21]

CARDIFF, August 28, 1772.

Excuse me, my dear Sally, if I do not stay so long, if I write a line before I come to Bristol, and remember the condition you are in. Write to Nancy Bolton without delay. You gave me much satisfaction when I was with you both yesterday and the day before. And yet I felt a good deal of pain for you, lest you should lose the desires which God has given you, surrounded as you are with those who hardly consider whether there is any God or devil. Oh what a strange, unaccountable creature is man while he is following his own imaginations!

Is this silly, laughing, trifling animal born for eternity Is this he that was made an incorruptible picture of the God of glory he that was born to live with angels and archangels and all the company of heaven And is it thus that he is preparing to meet Him that is coming in the clouds of heaven What a fool, what a blockhead, what a madman is he that forgets the very end of his creation! Look upon such in this and no other view, however lively, good-natured, well-bred, and choose you your better part! Be a reasonable creature! Be a Christian! Be wise now and happy for ever! --My dear Sally, adieu.

To Mrs. Bennis[22]

BRISTOL, August 31, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--MY health is not worse, but rather better. Your account of the Society in Waterford is pleasing. Continue to exercise your talent amongst them, and you will be a gainer by it. You need not dispute or reason about the name which belongs to the state you are in. You know what you have; be thankful for it. You know what you want-- zeal, liveliness, stability, deliverance from wandering imaginations; well, then, ask, and they shall be given. The way into the holiest is open through the blood of Jesus. You have free access through Him.

To Him your every want

In instant prayer display;

Pray always, pray and never faint,

Pray, without ceasing pray!

See, help while yet you ask is given!--I am, dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Philothea Briggs

BRISTOL, August 31, 1772.

MY DEAR PHILLY,--None are or can be saved but those who are by faith made inwardly and outwardly holy. But this holy faith is the gift of God; and He is never straitened for time. He can as easily give this faith in a moment as in a thousand years. He frequently does give it on a death-bed, in answer to the prayer of believers, but rarely if ever to those who had continued unholy upon the presumption that He would save them at last. But if He did, what unspeakable losers must they be! Could grief be in heaven, they would grieve to eternity! seeing every one there must receive his own reward according to his own labour.

And he will perplex you more than enough if you listen to his sallies of imagination: 'Every one has some pursuit; therefore a man cannot be always in communion with God.' I deny the consequence. While Mr. De Renty was serving the poor he was in constant communion with God. So was Gregory Lopez while he was writing books. 'At first, indeed,' as Lopez observed, 'large manifestations from God were apt to suspend the exercise of his senses as well as of his understanding. But after some time they made no difference at all, but left him the full exercise both of his understanding and senses.' I remember a much later instance of the same kind: an old clergyman [Mr. Fraser, Chaplain to St. George's Hospital. Wesley read the Life of Boehm in Georgia, and his Sermons in 1776. See Journal, i. 175d, vi. 98; and letter of Dec. 10, 1777. ] told me, some years since, 'I asked Mr. Boehm (Chaplain to Prince George of Denmark), "Sir, when you are in such an hurry of business, surrounded with a crowd of people, hearing one and dictating to another at the same time, does it not interrupt your mental prayer" He answered immediately, "All that hurry no more hinders my communion with God than if I was all the time sitting alone in my study or kneeling at the altar."' No business, therefore, of any kind, no conversation, need hinder one that is strong in faith from rejoicing evermore, praying without ceasing, and in everything giving thanks. Follow after this, and you will surely attain it.--I am, my dear Philly,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Phil. Briggs, At Miss March's, In Worship Street, Moorfields, London.

To Mrs. Turner[23]

THE DEVIZES, September 18, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You have prevented me. I had designed to write to you if you had not wrote to me. I take knowledge of your spirit. 'Love without dissimulation is easy to be discerned.' I am the more pleased to find this in you, because you are acquainted with many whose love does not abound, who are not so kindly affectioned to those who do not exactly subscribe to their opinions. They do not seem sufficiently to consider that the kingdom of God is not opinions (how right so ever they be), but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. I love you for being of a more excellent spirit. My soul takes acquaintance with you. Shall we for opinions destroy the work of God, or give up love, the very badge of our profession Nay, by this shall men know that we belong to the Lover of Souls, to Him who loved us and gave Himself for us.

Many years ago, when my son (as he styled himself for several years) Mr. Whitefield declared war against me, several asked, and that over and over, 'When will you answer Mr. Whitefield's book' I answered, 'Never. You have heard the cry, Whitefield against Wesley; but you shall never hear, Wesley against Whitefield.' I have been ever since a follower after peace; and when Mr. Hill so violently attacked me in the famous Paris Conversation, [A Conversation between Richard Hill, Esq., the Rev. Mr. Madan, and Father Walsh, Superior of a Convent of Benedictine Monks at Paris, held in the said Convent, July 13, 1771. . . . Relative to some Doctrinal Minutes advanced by the Rev. Mr. John Wesley, &c. 1772. See Green's Anti-Methodist Publications, No. 437.] I was as a man that heard not and in whose mouth were no reproofs. When he fell upon me again in his Five Letters, [Five Letters to Rev. Mr. Fletcher, 1771.] I still made no reply; nay, I chose not to read it, for fear I should be tempted to return evil for evil. When he assaulted me a third time more vehemently than ever in his Review, [Fletcher's Second Check to Antinomianism called forth Hill's A Review of all the doctrines taught by the Rev. Mr. John Wesley, 1772. See Green's Bibliography, No. 283; and letter of July 10 to his brother.] I still determined to answer nothing. But it was not long before one of my friends sent me word that I could no longer be silent and be innocent; it being my bounder duty as a public person not to let the good that was in me be evil spoken of, but, according to the direction of the Apostle, to give a reason of the hope that is in me, only with meekness and fear. I was convinced. I did not dare to be silent any longer, and I have accordingly answered the questions he proposed to me and removed those objections which otherwise would have turned the lame out of the way. [Some Remarks on Mr. Hill's 'Review of all the Doctrines taught by Mr. Wesley,' which is dated Sept. 9, 1772.] I wish I may have done it with the inimitable sweetness and gentleness that Mr. Fletcher has done. His letters (as vilely as they have been misrepresented) breathe the very spirit of the gospel. You might read them, to learn how to return good for evil, to bless them that curse you. O beware that no bitter spirits infuse bitterness into you I Keep all the love that God has given you! and never rest till all your heart is love! Peace be with your spirits!--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Turner, Grocer, In Trowbridge.

To Ann Bolton

BRISTOL, September 20, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You have no time to lose, unless you would throw away your life, which you have no authority to do. You should have had no blister [See letter of July 1 to her.] had I been near you. I judge your case to be chiefly rheumatical. Change of air is likely to do you more good than an hundred medicines. Come away, come away. Set out the very day after you receive this. You may come first to me in the Horsefair; and if need be, I can show you to Sally James. [ See letters of May 1, 1772, and Nov. 29, 1774 (to Sarah James).] I need not tell you how welcome you will be to, my dear Nancy,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Bolton, In Witney, Oxfordshire.

Francis Asbury says in his Journal on October 10, 1772: 'I received a letter from Mr. Wesley, in which he required a strict attention to discipline; and appointed me to act as Assistant.' The letter is not known.

To Philothea Briggs

October 19, 1772.

The difference between temptation and sin is generally plain enough to all that are simple of heart; but in some exempt cases it is not plain: there we want the unction of the Holy One. Voluntary humility, calling every defect a sin, is not well-pleasing to God. Sin, properly speaking, is neither more nor less than 'a voluntary transgression of a known law of God.'

To Penelope Newman

WYCOMBE, October 23, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I am glad to hear that you found benefit by your little journey to Bristol. I did not doubt but the conversation of those experienced Christians would be of service to you, and would enable you to be of more service to the little flock at Cheltenham. In one point only our friends at Bristol have been once and again in some danger. They have been in danger of being a little hurt by reading those that are called Mystic authors. [For Mysticism, see next letter.] These (Madame Guyon in particular) have abundance of excellent sayings. They have many fine and elegant observations; but in the meantime they are immeasurably wise above that is written. They continually refine upon plain Christianity. But to refine religion is to spoil it. It is the most simple thing that can be conceived: it is only humble, gentle, patient love. It is nothing less and nothing more than this; as it is described in the 13th chapter of the [First Epistle to the] Corinthians. O keep to this! Aim at nothing higher, at nothing else! Let your heart continually burn with humble love.

If you have an opportunity to be electrified, that would remove the pain in your eye, should it return. I am glad my dear sisters did not suffer in your absence. This is another token that your journey was pleasing to God. I was much delighted, when I saw you, with your artless, simple love; and love you the more on that account. As freely as you would talk to me if we were together, so freely write to, my dear Penny,

Yours affectionately.

From time to time you should tell me just what God works in you and by you.

To Ann Bolton

October 25, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--The subject on which we were lately talking requires to be a little farther explained. You cannot imagine what trouble I have had for many years to prevent our friends from refining upon religion. Therefore I have industriously guarded them from meddling with the Mystic writers, as they are usually called; because these are the most artful refiners of it that ever appeared in the Christian world, and the most bewitching. There is something like enchantment in them. When you get into them, you know not how to get out. Some of the chief of these, though in different ways, are Jacob Behmen and Madame Guyon. My dear friend, come not into their secret; keep in the plain, open Bible way. Aim at nothing higher, nothing deeper, than the religion described at large in our Lord's Sermon upon the Mount, and briefly summed up by St. Paul in the 13th chapter [of the First Epistle] to the Corinthians. I long to have you more and more deeply penetrated by humble, gentle, patient love. Believe me, you can find nothing higher than this till mortality is swallowed up of life. All the high-sounding or mysterious expressions used by that class of writers either mean no more than this or they mean wrong. O beware of them! Leave them off before they are meddled with.

I had much satisfaction in your company when I saw you last. Be more and more filled with humble love.

Yours most affectionately.

To Mrs. Bennis[24]

COLCHESTER, November 3, 1772.

DEAR SISTER,--Your time was well bestowed at Waterford. Many, I doubt not, will remember it with thankfulness. But why this want of discipline in Limerick Whenever this is dropped, all is confusion: see that it be immediately restored.

I should have been glad if you had prevailed on Captain Webb to pay me a visit in Limerick: he is a man of fire, and the power of God constantly accompanies his word.

Poor Sister Harrison! I did not expect her to die in triumph. But we must leave her to her own Master. It seems to me that Mrs. Dawson gains ground. And I [love] her two lovely children. At every opportunity you would do well to speak a little to all three.

Speak a little to as many as you can; go among them, to their houses; speak in love, and discord will vanish. It is hardly possible for you to comfort or strengthen others without some comfort returning into your own bosom.

It is highly probable I shall visit Ireland in the spring, though I am almost a disabled soldier. I am forbid to ride, and am obliged to travel mostly in a carriage. [See letter of Aug. 31 to her.]

Whom do you think proper to succeed the present preachers at Limerick and Waterford [Wrigley were at Waterford; John 2 Edward Slater was at Limerick. Jonathan Hern from Cork succeeded him. James Glassbrook and Francis Murray and Michael M'Donald followed them.]

You have need to stir up the gift of God that is in you. Light will spring up. Why not now Is not the Lord at hand--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mary Bishop

COLCHESTER, November 4, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I see more and more clearly there is no other way of preserving peace with our contentious brethren but by war--nay, by 'carrying the war into Italy,' into their own quarters. We do nothing, we spend our strength in vain, while we are acting only on the defensive. So long they will never be afraid of us; for they have nothing to lose. But when with gentleness and yet with vigour and firmness we show all the horror of their opinions, while with calmness and yet with all earnestness we paint the whole absurdity and blasphemy of Reprobation, pinning them down, whether they will or no, to that point, they will soon be sick of the war. They will themselves desire peace, and count it a favour when it is granted them. But we must build with one hand while we fight with the other. And this is the great work: not only to bring souls to believe in Christ, but to build them up in our most holy faith. How grievously are they mistaken (as are well-nigh the whole body of modern Calvinists) who imagine that as soon as the children are born they need take no more care of them! We do not find it so. The chief care then begins. And if we see this in a true light, we may well cry out, even the wisest men on earth, 'Who is sufficient for these things' In a thousand circumstances general rules avail little and our natural light is quickly at an end. So that we have nothing to depend upon but the anointing of the Holy One; and this will indeed teach us of all things. The same you need with regard to your little ones, that you may train them up in the way wherein they should go. And herein you have continual need of patience; for you will frequently see little fruit of all your labour. But leave that with Him. The success is His. The work only is yours. Your point is this, --Work your work betimes, and in His time He will give you a full reward.--I am, my dear sister,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Bishop, Near the Cross Bath, In Bath.

To his Brother Charles

COLCHESTER, November 4, 1772.

DEAR BROTHER,--Nay, there was some ground for that report; for I did dream that I was robbed. True, it was twenty years ago; but you know that is all one.

The connexion is well proved in the Fourth Check. [Fletcher's Fourth Check was finished on Nov. 15, 1772, and published that year.] Mr. Knox's Letter is ready for the press. But give your dear friends a little time to chew upon Mr. Fletcher; else you may overload their stomach. There is no danger of my writing anything yet. I have just made my tour through Oxfordshire, Bedfordshire, Northamptonshire, Norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex; but Kent, Sussex, and Hertfordshire still remain to be visited. Only the visitation of the classes (a fortnight's work, which begins on Monday) must come between.

I have an exceeding loving letter from James Rouquet in answer to my plain one. So if it did him no good (but possibly it might), at least it did him no harm. If we duly join faith and works in all our preaching, we shall not fail of a blessing. But of all preaching, what is usually called gospel preaching is the most useless, if not the most mischievous; a dull, yea or lively, harangue on the sufferings of Christ or salvation by faith without strongly inculcating holiness. I see more and more that this naturally tends to drive holiness out of the world.

Peace be with your spirits! Adieu!

To Thomas Wride

COLCHESTER, November 5, 1772.

DEAR TOMMY,--You was in the right. Let the allotment for the wives of the preachers (at least for the present) stand as it did before.

It seems to me that the alteration made in the travelling-plan by Brother M'Nab is wise and well grounded. I advise you to adhere thereto till you see some good reason to the contrary. You are the Assistant, [Wride was at Newry, with John Murray as one of his colleagues. Alexander M'Nab was at Londonderry. See letter of Dec. 16 to Wride.] not Brother Pepper: you need suffer none to ride over your head. Only be mild! I require John Murray to follow the same plan. If he does not, I will let him drop at once.

I suspect the hives to be what we call the nettle rash. I know nothing that helps it but rubbing the part with parsley. --I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Philothea Briggs

LONDON, November 22, 1772

There are a thousand instances wherein it is not possible literally to make restitution. All that we can advise in the case you mention is (1) Let him that stole steal no more, let him be from this hour rigorously just; (2) let him be a faithful steward of the mammon of unrighteousness, restoring all he can to God in the poor.

To Francis Wolfe

LONDON, November, 22, 1772.

DEAR FRANCIS,--At what place are the fifty-four pounds (old debt) due, and at what places the three hundred and sixty-three [Wolfe (who ceased to travel in 1782) was now Assistant in Gloucestershire.]

You should speak plainly and freely to Brother Seed. [See letter of June 23, 1771.] Before his illness I am afraid he had lost much ground. He should receive this stroke as a call from God, and for the time to come live as he did when he travelled first.

Let both of you strongly exhort the believers everywhere to 'go on to perfection'; otherwise they cannot keep what they have.--I am, with love to Sister Wolfe,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Wolfe, at Mr. King's, In Stroud, Gloucestershire.

To Ann Bolton

LONDON, November 28, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I have some business too; but I know not what business would be able to hinder my writing to you. But, whether you think of me or no, I shall hardly be angry at you. Too much attention to business (with the natural consequence of it), too little exercise in the open air, you may expect will always bring back your headache. Therefore you should never intermit your riding. It is not even worldly prudence; for one fit of sickness would take up more time than an hundred little rides. If, therefore, you would preserve yourself fit for business, to waive all other considerations, in every fair day which this season of the year affords you should snatch an hour for riding.

Sammy Wells will always be useful, for he can take advice. But how is it with Billy Brammah [Samuel Wells and William Brammah were the preachers in Oxfordshire. See letter of Feb. 18, 1773.] Does he follow the advice I gave him concerning screaming and the use of spirituous liquors If not, he will grow old before his time, he will both lessen and shorten his own usefulness. Drop a word whenever you find an opportunity. He is upright of heart. He enjoys a good deal of the grace of God, but with a touch of enthusiasm.

Nay, Nancy, I designed to have wrote but one page. But I know not how, when I am talking with you, though only by letter, I can hardly break off. But, indeed, as yet I have not touched on what I Chiefly intended. I see plainly that you are exposed to two dangers of entirely opposite natures. The one is (that which now assaults some of our friends in the West) refining upon religion, [See letters of Oct. 25 and Dec. 5.] aiming at something more sublime than plain, simple love producing lowliness, meekness, and resignation. The other is an abatement of zeal for doing good. I am a little jealous over you in this. Last year I warned you much on this very account. Did you follow that advice to let no fair occasion pass unheeded by [See his brother Samuel's poem 'On the Death of Mr. William Morgan of Christ Church,' in Journal, i. 104; and letter of Jan. 15, 1773, to Miss Bolton.]

If you leaned a little toward an extreme (which I do not know), beware of gradually sliding into the other extreme! The good Lord guide you every moment! Do you find constant power over the old enemy, inordinate affection I pray do not stay another month before you write to, my dear Nancy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss Bolton, In Witney, Oxfordshire.

To--

LONDON, December 1772.

So far God has brought you already. You do believe He is able and willing to save you. You believe He is willing to save you now. The additional faith that He does save you is still wanting, and this is peculiarly His own gift. Expect it every moment, in every ordinance, in prayer, in hearing, in conversation, in the Lord's Supper, in reading, perhaps in reading this letter. Look up! All is ready; why not now Only believe, and yours is heaven. [This letter is at the end of a volume of James Oddie's sermons in MS.]

To Philothea Briggs

LEWISHAM, December 3, 1772.

MY DEAR PHILLY,--You are yourself a living witness of this religion. But it is only in a low degree. I grant you are only just beginning to be a disciple of Jesus Christ. It is an unspeakable blessing that He shows you this in so clear and strong a light. And undoubtedly He is able to make you just as serious as Miss March or Nancy Bolton; and yet this is consistent with much cheerfulness. You shall have more or less of reproach, as He chooses. Your part is to leave all in His hands, who orders all things well. You might very properly have said, 'Sir, I have no connexion with these. They are to answer for themselves.' Read the Short History of Methodism, [See Works, viii. 347-51; Green's Bibliography, No. 229.] and you see it plain. Go straight forward, and you shall be all a Christian! I expect that you will be more and more a comfort to, my dear Philly,

Yours affectionately.

To Ann Bolton

LONDON, December 5, 1772.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I know not that ever you asked me a question which I did not readily answer. I never heard any one mention anything concerning you on that account; but I myself was jealous over you. [See letter of Nov. 28.] Perhaps I shall find faults in you that others do not; for I survey you on every side. I mark your every motion and temper, because I long for you to be without spot or blemish.

What I have seen in London occasioned the first caution I gave you. George Bell, William Green, [See Journal, iii. 265, iv. 94; C. Wesley's Journal, i. 429; and letter of Nov. 26, 1762, sect. I. 6, to Bishop Warburton.] and many others, then full of love, were favoured with extraordinary revelations and manifestations from God. But by this very thing Satan beguiled them from the simplicity that is in Christ. By insensible degrees they were led to value these extraordinary gifts more than the ordinary grace of God; and I could not convince them that a grain of humble love was better than all these gifts put together. This, my dear friend, was what made me fear for you. This makes me remind you again and again. Faith and hope are glorious gifts, and so is every ray of eternity let into the soul. But still these are but means; the end of all, and the greatest of all, is love. May the Lord just now pour it into your heart as He never has done before.

By all means spend an hour every other day in the labour of love, even though you cannot help them as you would. Commending you to Him who is able to make you perfect in every good word and work, I am

Yours affectionately.

To the Editor of 'Lloyd's Evening Post'[25]]

DOVER, December 9, 1772.

SIR,--Many excellent things have been lately published concerning the present scarcity of provisions. And many causes have been assigned for it; but is not something wanting in most of those publications One writer assigns one cause, another one or two more, and strongly insists upon them. But who has assigned all the causes that manifestly concur to produce this melancholy effect at the same time pointing out how each particular cause affects the price of each particular sort of provision

I would willingly offer to candid and benevolent men a few hints on this important subject, proposing a few questions, and adding to each what seems to be the plain and direct answer.

I. 1. I ask first, Why are thousands of people starving, perishing for want, in every part of England The fact I know: I have seen it with my eyes in every corner of the land. I have known those who could only afford to eat a little coarse food every other day. I have known one picking up stinking sprats from a dunghill and carrying them home for herself and her children. I have known another gathering the bones which the dogs had left in the streets and making broth of them to prolong a wretched life. Such is the case at this day of multitudes of people in a land flowing, as it were, with milk and honey, abounding with all the necessaries, the conveniences, the superfluities of life!

Now, why is this Why have all these nothing to eat Because they have nothing to do. They have no meat because they have no work.

2. But why have they no work Why are so many thousand people in London, in Bristol, in Norwich, in every county from one end of England to the other, utterly destitute of employment

Because the persons who used to employ them cannot afford to do it any longer. Many who employed fifty men now scarce employ ten. Those who employed twenty now employ one or none at all. They cannot, as they have no vent for their goods, food now bearing so high a price that the generality of people are hardly able to buy anything else.

3. But to descend from generals to particulars. Why is breadcorn so dear Because such immense quantities of it are continually consumed by distilling. Indeed, an eminent distiller near London hearing this, warmly replied, Nay, my partner and I generally distil but a thousand quarters of corn a week.' Perhaps so. Suppose five-and-twenty distillers in and near the town consume each only the same quantity. Here are five-and-twenty thousand quarters a week --that is, above twelve hundred and fifty thousand quarters a year--consumed in and about London! Add the distillers throughout England, and have we not reason to believe that half of the wheat produced in the kingdom is every year consumed, not by so harmless a way as throwing it into the sea, but by converting it into deadly poison--poison that naturally destroys, not only the strength and life, but also the morals of our countrymen!

Well, but this brings in a large revenue to the King.' Is this an equivalent for the lives of his subjects Would His Majesty sell an hundred thousand of his subjects yearly to Algiers for four hundred thousand pounds Surely no. Will he, then, sell them for that sum to be butchered by their own countrymen But otherwise the swine for the Navy cannot be fed.' Not unless they are fed with human flesh not unless they are fatted with human blood O tell it not in Constantinople that the English raise the royal revenue by selling the blood and flesh of their countrymen!

4. But why are oats so dear Because there are four times the horses kept (to speak within compass), for coaches and chaises in particular, than were some years ago. Unless, therefore, four times the oats grew now as grew then, they cannot be at the same price. If only twice as much is produced (which perhaps is near the truth), the price will naturally be double to what it was.

As the dearness of grain of one kind will naturally raise the price of another, so whatever causes the dearness of wheat and oats must raise the price of barley too. To account, therefore, for the dearness of this we need only remember what has been observed above, although some particular causes may concur in producing the same effect.

5. Why are beef and mutton so dear Because most of the considerable farmers, particularly in the northern counties, who used to breed large numbers of sheep or horned cattle, and frequently both, no longer trouble themselves with either sheep or cows or oxen, as they can turn their land to far better account by breeding horses alone. Such is the demand, not only for coach- and chaise-horses, which are bought and destroyed in incredible numbers; but much more for bred horses, which are yearly exported by hundreds, yea thousands, to France.

6. But why are pork, poultry, and eggs so dear Because of the monopolizing of farms, as mischievous a monopoly as was ever yet introduced into these kingdoms. The land which was formerly divided among ten or twenty little farmers and enabled them comfortably to provide for their families is now generally engrossed by one great farmer. One man farms an estate of a thousand a year, which formerly maintained ten or twenty. Every one of these little farmers kept a few swine, with some quantity of poultry; and, having little money, was glad to send his bacon, or pork, or fowls and eggs, to market continually. Hence the markets were plentifully served, and plenty created cheapness; but at present the great, the gentlemen farmers, are above attending to these little things. They breed no poultry or swine unless for their own use; consequently they send none to market. Hence it is not strange if two or three of these living near a market town occasion such a scarcity of these things by preventing the former supply that the price of them will be double or treble to what it was before. Hence (to instance in a small article) in the same town, where within my memory eggs were sold eight or ten a penny, they are now sold six or eight a groat.

Another cause why beef, mutton, pork, and all kinds of victuals are so dear is luxury. What can stand against this

Will it not waste and destroy all that nature and art can produce If a person of quality will boil down three dozen of neat's tongues to make two or three quarts of soup (and so proportionately in other things), what wonder if provisions fail Only look into the kitchens of the great, the nobility, and gentry, almost without exception (considering withal that the toe of the peasant treads upon the heel of the courtier), and when you have observed the amazing waste which is made there, you will no longer wonder at the scarcity, and consequently dearness, of the things which they use so much art to destroy.

7. But why is land so dear Because on all these accounts gentlemen cannot live as they have been accustomed to do, without increasing their income, which most of them cannot do but by raising their rents. The farmer, paying an higher rent for his land, must have an higher price for the produce of it. This again tends to raise the price of land. And so the wheel goes round.

8. But why is it that not only provisions and land but well-nigh everything else is so dear Because of the enormous taxes which are laid on almost everything that can be named. Not only abundant taxes are raised from earth and fire and water, but in England the ingenious statesmen have found a way to tax the very light! Only one element remains, and surely some man of honour will ere long contrive to tax this also. For how long shall the saucy air blow in the face of a gentleman, nay a lord, without paying for it

9. But why are the taxes so high Because of the national debt. They must be while this continues. I have heard that the national expense in the time of peace was sixty years ago three millions a year. Now the bare interest of the public debt amounts to above four millions. To raise which, with the other expenses of government, those taxes are absolutely necessary.

II. Here is the evil. But where is the remedy Perhaps it exceeds all the wisdom of man to tell. But it may not be amiss to offer a few hints even on this delicate subject.

1. What remedy is there for this sore evil Many thousand poor people are starving. Find them work, and you will find them meat. They will then earn and eat their own bread.

2. But how shall their masters give them work without ruining themselves Procure vent for it, and it will not hurt their masters to give them as much work as they can do; and this will be done by sinking the price of provisions, for then people will have money to buy other things too.

3. But how can the price of wheat be reduced By prohibiting for ever that bane of health, that destroyer of strength, of life, and of virtue, distilling. Perhaps this alone will answer the whole design. If anything more be needful, may not all starch be made of rice, and the importation of this as well as of wheat be encouraged

4. How can the price of oats be reduced By reducing the number of horses. And may not this be effectually done (1) by laying a tax of ten pounds on every horse exported to France, (2) by laying an additional tax on gentlemen's carriages. Not so much for every wheel (barefaced, shameless partiality!), but ten pounds yearly for every horse. And these two taxes alone would nearly supply as much as is now given for leave to poison His Majesty's liege subjects.

5. How can the price of beef and mutton be reduced By increasing the breed of sheep and horned cattle. And this would be increased sevenfold if the price of horses was reduced, which it surely would be half in half by the method above mentioned.

6. How can the price of pork and poultry be reduced First, by letting no farms of above an hundred pounds a year. Secondly, by repressing luxury, either by example, by laws, or both.

7. How may the price of land be reduced By all the methods above named, all which tend to lessen the expense of housekeeping; but especially the last, restraining luxury, which is the grand source of poverty.

8. How may the taxes be reduced By discharging half the national debt, and so saving at least two millions a year.

How this can be done the wisdom of the great council of the land can best determine.--I am, sir,

Your humble servant.