1780

To the Editors of the 'Freeman's Journal' [1]

MANCHESTER, March 23, 1780.

GENTLEMEN,--1. Mr. O'Leary does well to entitle his paper Remarks, as that word may mean anything or nothing; but it is no more an answer to my letter than to the Bull Uni-genitus. He likewise does wisely in prefacing his Remarks with so handsome a compliment. This may naturally incline you to think well of his judgment, which is no small point gained.

2. His manner of writing is easy and pleasant; but might it not as well be more serious The subject we are treating of is not a light one: it moves me to tears rather than to laughter. I plead for the safety of my country-yea, for the children that are yet unborn. ' But cannot your country be safe unless the Roman Catholics are persecuted for their religion' Hold! Religion is out of the question. But I would not have them persecuted at all; I would only have them hindered from doing hurt. I would not put it in their power (and I do not wish that others should) to cut the throats of their quiet neighbours. 'But they will give security for their peaceable behavior.' They cannot while they continue Roman Catholics; they cannot while they are members of that Church which receives the decrees of the Council of Constance, which maintains the spiritual power of the Bishop of Rome or the doctrine of priestly absolution.

3. This I observed in my late letter. Whoever, therefore, would remark upon it to any purpose must prove these three things: (1) that the decree of the Council of Constance, publicly made, has been publicly disclaimed; (2) that the Pope has not power to pardon sins, or to dispense with oaths, vows, and promises; and (3) that no priest has power to pardon sins. But has Mr. O'Leary proved these three points Has he proved any one of them He has, indeed, said something upon the first. He denies such a decree was ever made.

4. I am persuaded Mr. O'Leary is the first man that ever made the important discovery. But, before he is quite sure, let him look again into Father L'Abbe's Concilia Maxima, printed at Paris in the year 1672. The last volume contains a particular account of the Council of Constance; one of whose decrees (page 169) is, ' That heretics ought to be put to death, non obstantibus salvis conductibus Imperatoris, Regum, &c., notwithstanding the public faith engaged to them in the most solemn manner.' Who, then, can affirm that no such doctrine or violation of faith with heretics is authorized by this Council Without putting on spectacles (which, blessed be God, I do not wear) I can read a little Latin still. And while I can I must fix this horrid doctrine on the Council of Constance.

5. But, supposing the Council of Constance had never advanced this doctrine or the Church of Rome had publicly disclaimed it, my conclusion stands good till it is proved (1) that no priest has a power of pardoning sins; and (2) that the Pope has neither a power of pardoning sins, nor of dispensing with oaths, vows, promises, &c.

Mr. O'Leary has proved neither of these. And what has he proved It is hard to say. But if he proves nothing, he either directly or indirectly asserts many things. In particular, he asserts:--

(1) 'Mr. Wesley has arraigned in the jargon of the Schools.' Heigh-day! What has this to do here There is no more of the jargon of the Schools in my letter than there is of Arabic. 'The Catholics all over the world are liars, perjurers, &c.' Nay, I have not arraigned one of them. This is a capital mistake. I arraign the doctrines, not the men. Either defend them or renounce them.

'I do renounce them,' says Mr. O'Leary. Perhaps you do. But the Church of Rome has never renounced them. 'He asperses our communion in a cruel manner.' I do not asperse it at all in saying these are the doctrines of the Church of Rome. Who can prove the contrary

(2) 'Mr. O'Leary did not even attempt to seduce the English soldiery.' I believe it; but does this prove any of these three points ' But Queen Elizabeth and King James roasted heretics in Smithfield ' I In what year I doubt the fact.

(3) 'Mr. Wesley is become an apologist of those who burned the chapel in Edinburgh.' Is not this said purely ad movendam invidiam ' to inflame the minds of the people' For it has no shadow of truth. I never yet wrote nor spoke one word in their defence. 'He urged the rabble to light that fire.' No more than he urged them to dethrone the King.

(4) 'Does Mr. Wesley intend to sound Alecto's [Alecto was one of the Furies, whose head was covered with snakes.] horn or the war-shell of the Mexicans' All this is cruel aspersion indeed, designed merely to inflame! What I intend is neither more nor less than this--to contribute my mite to preserve our constitution both in Church and State.

(5) 'They were the Scotch and English regicides who gave rise to the Irish massacre.' 'The Irish massacre'! Was there ever any such thing Was not the whole account a mere Protestant lie Oh no! it was a melancholy truth, wrote in the blood of many thousands. But the regicides no more gave rise to that massacre than the Hottentots. The whole matter was planned several years, and executed before the King's death was thought of. 'But Mr. Wesley is sowing the seeds of another massacre'! Such another as the massacre of Paris

6. 'Was he the trumpeter of persecution when he was persecuted himself' Just as much as now. Cruel aspersions still! designed and calculated only to inflamed he then abet persecution on the score of conscience No, nor now Conscience is out of the question. 'His letter contains all the horrors invented by blind 'misguided zeal, set forth in the most bitter language.' Is this gentleman in his senses I hope not. Else I know not what excuse to make for him. Not one bitter word is in my letter. I have learned to put away all bitterness, with all malice, But still this is wide of the mark; which of these three points does it prove

7. 'In his second letter he promises to put out the fire which he has already kindled in England.' ' Second letter' What is that I know nothing of it. 'The fire which he has kindled in England'! When Where I have kindled no fire in England any more than in Jamaica. I have done and will do all that is in my power to put out that which others have kindled.

8. 'He strikes out a creed of his own for Roman Catholics. This fictitious creed he forces upon them.' My words are these: ' Suppose every word of Pope Pius's Creed to be true.' I say not a word more of the matter. Now, I appeal to every reasonable man, Is this striking out a creed of my own for Roman Catholics Is this forcing a fictitious creed on them, ' like the Frenchman and the blunderer in the Comedy' What have I to do with one or the other Is not this dull jest quite out of season And is the creed composed by the Council of Trent and the Bull of Pope Pius IV a fictitious one Before Mr. O'Leary asserts this again, let him look into the Concilia Maxima once more, and read there, Bulla Pii Quarti super forma juramenti professionis fidei [The Bull of Pius IV concerning the form of the oath on the profession of Faith]. This forma professionis fidei I call Pope Pius's Creed, If his 'stomach revolts from it,' who can help it

9. Whether the account given by Philip Melanchthon of the words spoken (not in Hebrew, but in Latin) be true or false, it does not at all affect the account of Miss Duchesne, which I gave in her own words [See letter of Jan. 12.]. And I cannot but observe that, after all the witticisms which he has bestowed upon it, Mr. O'Leary does not deny that the priest might have burnt her, 'had it been for the good of the Church.'

10. 'Remark a missionary inflaming the rabble and propagating black slander.' Remark a San Benito cap, painted with devils; but let him put it on whom it fits. It does not fit me: I inflame no rabble; I propagate no slander at all. But Mr. O'Leary does. He propagates an heap of slander in these his Remarks. I say too, 'Let the appeal be made to the public and their impartial reason.' I have nothing to do with the 'jargon or rubbish of the Schools,' lugged in like 'the jargon of the Schools' before. But I would be glad if Mr. O'Leary would tell us what these two pretty phrases mean.

The whole matter is this. I have without the least bitterness advanced three reasons why I conceive it is not safe to tolerate the Roman Catholics. But still, I would not have them persecuted; I wish them to enjoy the same liberty, civil and religious, which they enjoyed in England before the late Act was repealed. Meantime I would not have a sword put into their hands; I would not give them liberty to hurt others. Mr. O'Leary, with much archness and pleasantry, has nibbled at one of these three reasons, leaving the other two untouched. If he chooses to attack them in his next, I will endeavor to give him a calm and serious answer.--I am, gentlemen,

Your obedient servant.

To George Robinson [2]

MANCHESTER, March 25, 1780.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I do not see why Brother Norris should not have a part of what is collected on the account of sickness. I am glad to hear so good an account of poor Robert Empringham. As they desire a supernumerary preacher about Whitby, he may go into that circuit directly. I desire Mr. Peacock to put a final stop to the preaching of women in his circuit. If it were suffered, it would grow, and we know not where it would end. I hope to see you and our brethren at Boston before the summer is over. Peace be with you and yours!--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Robinson, At Langham Row, Near Alford, Lincolnshire.

p class="Section1" style=" text-autospace:none"Your obedient servant./p div align="center" style="text-align:center;text-autospace:none" span class="MsoNormal"span style="MS Mincho"">

To Samuel Bradburn

CHESTER, April 2, 1780.

DEAR SAMMY,--You stand alone. Not only all our friends in England, but all our friends in Ireland too, dissuade me from 'adventuring myself into the theatre' [Acts xix. 29.] during the present tumult. I cannot yet determine. I wait the farther call of Providence; and am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

I doubt whether you had not better be at Liverpool than Bristol, because little children cannot be in Bristol house [See letter of Feb. 26 to him.]. In Liverpool house there is room enough.

To John Valton [3]

PARKGATE, April 21, 1780.

MY DEAR BROTHER,-I send you herewith one of our Lord's jewels, my dear Miss Ritchie; such an one as you have hardly seen before. But, alas! it seems she has but a short time to stay here, unless the journey should remove her consumption. Miss Marshall, her friend, is an Israelite indeed. You will assist them all you can; and so, I doubt not, will Sister Maddern. Indeed, they are worthy.

I hope you are writing for me an extract from your Journal. [See letters of Feb. 9 and Oct. 1 to him.] I wish you would take another burthen upon you. Interleave one of the Primitive Physicks, and insert into it as many cheap and simple medicines as you pIease.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Valton, At the New Room, In Bristol.

e lived and sent him to paradise before his time. I do not know that this is your case. But I tell you whatever rises in my mind. I only want you to attain ia full reward.--I /ialways am, my dear Nancy,/p p class="Section1" style=" text-autospace:none"Yours most affectionately./p div align="center" style="text-align:center; text-autospace:none" span class="MsoNormal"span style="MS Mincho"">

To Mrs. Crosby [4]

NEWCASTLE, May 11, 1780.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Before you mentioned it, that was my purpose, not to let any one know of your writing. Therefore I do transcribe what I choose to keep and burn the originals [His wife's conduct made Wesley anxious to afford no opportunity for misunderstanding.].

Neither must the witness supersede the fruits, nor the fruits the witness of the Spirit. Let other men talk this way or that, the word of the Lord shall stand.

I believe your spending a little time at P--may be of use. Probably it will remove their prejudice against Christian perfection. But if Mr. T[aylor] has a mind to marry our friend, I think neither you nor I shall forward it. She is far happier, since she is free, so to abide.

Do you find any tendency to pride Do you find nothing like anger Is your mind never ruffled, put out of tune Do you never feel any useless desire any desire of pleasure, of ease, of approbation, or increase of fortune Do you find no stubbornness, sloth, or self-will, no unbelief Certainly the more freely you speak to me the better. I found what you said in your last helpful. It is of great use to have our minds stirred up by way of remembrance, even of the things we know already.

I speak of myself very little to any one, were it only for fear of hurting them. I have found exceeding few that could bear it; so I am constrained to repress my natural openness. I find scarce any temptation from any thing in the world; my danger is from persons.

Oh for an heart to praise my God,

An heart from sin set free!

Dear Sally, adieu.

To Thomas Rankin [5]

NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, May 29, 1780.

DEAR TOMMY,--I hope the affair of Brother M'Nab need not be mentioned any more. But I should be sorry if there be any ground for that report that John Bristol is gone to the Calvinists.

Betsy must be a Christian, or be in pain and weakness all her days; our Lord will not let her go. I am endeavoring to shorten all my journeys, that I may have a little time to spend in London before the Conference. My route lies: Mond. June 5, York; Mond. 12, Gainsborough, Lincolnshire; Mond. 19, Louth; Mond. 26, Doncaster, Yorkshire; Mond. July 3, Derby; Frid. 7, London.--I am, with love to Sister Rankin, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Rankin, In Artillery Court, Near Moor fields, London.

To Brian Bury Collins [7]

LONDON, June 14, 1780.

DEAR SIR,--Your coming to town now and then, if it were only for a day, I believe would be much for the advantage of your health, and I doubt not but that God would make it a blessing to the people, many of whom are truly alive to God, and many others are just emerging into light, being deeply sensible of their wants. If you at any time let me know two or three days beforehand, we will give notice to the congregation.

But I am not half pleased with your being so far from me when you are in town. You may almost as well be at Everton as Flower-de-Lute Street; you are almost as much out of my reach, but there is no manner of necessity for it. We have rooms enough and to spare in my house [Flower-de-Lute Court was a turning off Fetter Lane. Wesley had his house by the side of City Road Chapel.] and you may be as private as you please. You need see no human creature but at meals. Besides, I do not think it has a good appearance; for a preacher to lodge anywhere but in my house seems to show some dislike or prejudice. And I am not assured that there is not a little of this in the case. I doubt you have heard strange things of the preachers; and although you could not cordially receive them, yet they made some impression upon you. But come and see, and that impression will vanish away. You will see as quiet a family as any in England, and a family every individual of which fears God and works righteousness.

A few years ago the people at and around Everton were deeply alive to God and as simple as little children. It is well if you find them so now. Perhaps you may by the help of God make them so now. Mr. Hicks [William Hicks, Vicar of Wrestlingworth, four miles from Everton.] in particular was a burning and a shining light, full of love and zeal for God. I hope you will see him as often as you can, and (if need be) lift up the hands that hang down, and encourage him to set out anew in the great work and to spend and be spent therein.

You have seen very little of the choicest part of London society: I mean the poor. Go with me into their cellars and garrets, and then you will taste their spirits.--I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Rev. Mr. Collins, At Everton, Near Biggleswade.

To Ann Bolton

EPWORTH, June 22, 1780.

MY DEAR NANCY,--Your letters are always welcome to me. But none more welcome than your last. It gives me very much pleasure to hear both that God has delivered you from that torturing pain [See letters of Feb. 26, 1780, and Jan. 2, 1781, to her.] and that He has established your soul in His pure love and given you the abiding witness of it. I doubt you have not many in Oxford Circuit whom you can converse with on that subject. I believe the two that have the same deep experience are Hannah Ball (of High Wycombe) and Patty Chapman. I wish you could converse with them, either by writing or speaking; I think each might be profited by the other.

I have been a little uneasy since I saw you for fear you should want anything. If you conceal any difficulty you are under from me, you do not use me as your friend. Would you not give me all the pleasure you can I cannot tell you how unspeakably near you are to, my dear Nancy,

Yours most affectionately.

To Zachariah Yewdall [8]

BRISTOL, July 24, 1780.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Next year you will be in the Glamorganshire Circuit and with a fellow labourer who has the work of God at heart.

If Billy Moore mentions it in time, your temporal wants will easily be supplied. Trials are only blessings in disguise. Whenever anything bears hard upon your mind, you should write freely to

Your affectionate brother.

To Penelope Newman

BRISTOL, July 31, 1780.

MY DEAR SISTER,--A letter directed to me in London will find me at any time. I trust you will never sink into Quietism (or Quakerism, which is only one mode of it). For then you would soon sink into lukewarmness; and what would come next who can tell I have not known ten Quakers in my life whose experience went so far as justification. I never knew one who clearly experienced what we term 'sanctification.' But, indeed, their language is so dark and equivocal that one scarce knows what they do experience and what they do not.

If it may be a probable means of doing good either to others or to your own soul, I think you need not scruple making an excursion of a few days for fear of giving offence. Our Conference this year will last till Friday, the 11th instant. And for the time to come (at least while I live) will always continue ten days. [Conference began in Bristol on Aug. 1. Wesley says that it was resolved to 'allow nine or ten days for each Conference' (Journal, vi. 290).] No less time will suffice for sifting to the bottom the various points of importance that are to be considered.

The hand of the Lord is not shortened either in Great Britain or Ireland. He still carries on His own work and shows Himself mighty to save.--I am, my dear Penny,

Yours affectionately.

To Brian Bury Collins [11]

BRISTOL, August 5, 1780.

DEAR SIR,--It is not at all surprising that the Bishop, though a good man, should scruple to ordain a field-preacher; and I apprehend his brethren will neither endeavor or desire to remove his scruple, unless it should please God to touch some of their hearts and employ them to soften the rest. Perhaps that humane man may aim at a middle way--namely, to ordain you upon conditions. And if such conditions were proposed as would not entangle your conscience, I should have no objection. But in this case you will have need of all the wisdom from above, that you may yield far enough and not too far. I do not think that Presbyterian ordination would add anything to what you have already. And it seems we need not consider the matter farther till we know the Bishop's final determination. This we know already, that He who rules over all will order

all things well. To His wise disposal I commit you; and I am, dear sir,

Your most affectionate brother.

The Rev. Mr. Collins, At Mr. Stevens's,

High Street, Margate, Kent.

To Dr. Lowth, Bishop of London [12]

August 10, 1780.

MY LORD,--Some time since, I received your Lordship's favour; for which I return your Lordship my sincere thanks. Those persons did not apply to the Society (For the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts.). because they had nothing to ask of them. They wanted no salary for their minister; they were themselves able and willing to maintain him. They therefore applied by me to your Lordship, as members of the Church of England, and desirous so to continue, begging the favour of your Lordship, after your Lordship had examined him, to ordain a pious man who might officiate as their minister.

But your Lordship observes, 'There are three ministers in that country already.' True, my Lord; but what are three to watch over all the souls in that extensive country Will your Lordship permit me to speak freely I dare not do otherwise. I am on the verge of the grave, and know not the hour when I shall drop into it. Suppose there were threescore of those missionaries in the country, could I in conscience recommend these souls to their care Do they take any care of their own souls If they do (I speak it with concern!), I fear they are almost the only missionaries in America that do. My Lord, I do not speak rashly: I have been in America; and so have several with whom I have lately conversed. And both I and they know what manner of men the far greater part of these are. They are men who have neither the power of religion nor the form--men that lay no claim to piety nor even decency.

Give me leave, my Lord, to speak more freely still: perhaps it is the last time I shall trouble your Lordship. I know your Lordship's abilities and extensive learning; I believe, what is far more, that your Lordship fears God. I have heard that your Lordship is unfashionably diligent in examining the candidates for Holy Orders--yea, that your Lordship is generally at the pains of examining them yourself. Examining them! In what respects Why, whether they understand a little Latin and Greek and can answer a few trite questions in the science of divinity l Alas, how little does this avail! Does your Lordship examine whether they serve Christ or Belial whether they love God or the world whether they ever had any serious thoughts about heaven or hell whether they have any real desire to save their own souls or the souls of others If not, what have they to do with Holy Orders and what will become of the souls committed to their care

My Lord, I do by no means despise learning; I know the value of it too well. But what is this, particularly in a Christian minister, compared to piety What is it in a man that has no religion ' As a jewel in a swine's snout.'

Some time since, I recommended to your Lordship a plain man, whom I had known above twenty years as a person of deep, genuine piety and of unblameable conversation. But he neither understood Greek nor Latin; and he affirmed in so many words that he believed it was his duty to preach whether he was ordained or no. I believe so too. What became of him since, I know not; but I suppose he received Presbyterian ordination, and I cannot blame him if he did. He might think any ordination better than none.

I do not know that Mr. Hoskins had any favour to ask of the Society. He asked the favour of your Lordship to ordain him that he might minister to a little flock in America. But your Lordship did not see good to ordain him; but your Lordship did see good to ordain and send into America other persons who knew something of Greek and Latin, but who knew no more of saving souls than of catching whales.

In this respect also I mourn for poor America, for the sheep scattered up and down therein. Part of them have no shepherds at all, particularly in the northern colonies; and the case of the rest is little better, for their own shepherds pity them not. They cannot1; for they have no pity on themselves. They take no thought or care about their own souls.

Wishing your Lordship every blessing from the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls, I remain, my Lord,

Your Lordship's dutiful son and servant.

To Thomas Wride () [14]

BRISTOL, September 10, 1780.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--When a preacher travels without his wife, he is exposed to innumerable temptations. And you cannot travel with your wife till she is so changed as to adorn the gospel. It seems, therefore, all you can do at present is to act as a local preacher.

If at any time you have reason to believe that the goods then offered to you are stolen, you cannot buy them with a safe conscience. When you have no particular reason to think so, you may proceed without scruple.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Robert Carr Brackenbury

BRISTOL, September 18, 1780.

DEAR SIR, The Lord knoweth the way wherein you go; and when you have been tried you shah come forth as gold. It is true you have now full exercise for all your faith and patience; but by-and-by you will find good brought out of evil, and will bless God for the severe but wholesome medicine. I had all along a persuasion that God would deliver you, although I could not see which way it would be done (He had been ill and ' under some severe spiritual exercises.' See letter of Oct. 1 to Mr. Carne.); as I knew it was your desire not to do your own will, but the will of Him whose you are and whom you serve. May He still guide you in the way you should go and enable you to give Him your whole heart I You must not set the great blessing afar off because you find much war within. Perhaps tiffs will not abate but rather increase till the moment your heart is set at liberty. The war will not cease before you attain but by your attaining the promise. And if you look for it by naked faith, why may you not receive it now The cheerfulness of faith you should aim at in and above all things. Wishing you a continual supply of righteousness, peace, and joy, I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To William Thom

NEAR BRISTOL, September 30, 1780.

DEAR BILLY,--I think your reasons are good. Therefore I would not have you go to the island [The Isle of Man. Thom was Wesley's Assistant in Whitehaven.]--at least, not till winter is over. Do all the good you can. Be exact in every point of discipline.--I am Your affectionate friend and brother. Mr. William Thom, Whitehaven.

To John Valton [16]

BRISTOL, October 1, 1780,

MY DEAR BROTHER,-I expected the state of Manchester Circuit to be just such as you have found it. But the power of the Lord is able to heal them. I fear Sister Mayer was left unemployed because she loved perfection. If you find a few more of the same spirit, I believe you will find them employment. The accommodations everywhere will mend if the preachers lovingly exert themselves. I am glad you take some pains for the new chapel. Our brother Brocklehurst will do anything that is reasonable.

In one thing only you and I do not agree; but perhaps we shall when we have prayed over it: I mean the giving me an extract of your Life [See letters of April 21 and Dec. 19]. I cannot see the weight of your reasons against it. ' Some are superficial.' What then All are not; Brother Mather's and Haime's in particular. Add one to these; a more weighty one if you can. You know what to omit and what to insert. I really think you owe it (in spite of shame and natural timidity) to God and me and your brethren. Pray for light in this matter.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Valton, At the Preaching-house, In Manchester.

To Mrs. Colbeck [See Note, vol. IV. 161.]

NEAR LONDON, October 12, 1780.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I congratulate you, and all our friends in Keighley Circuit, on having one of the most amiable couples in our Connexion, I mean Mr. Bradburn and his wife, who after many hindrances, are I hope now in England, and will be with you as soon as possible. Perhaps before you receive this. I beg the Stewards will make every thing as convenient as they can. As he is the Assistant he is to have the upper rooms in the Preaching-house, and I am persuaded John Oliver will cordially agree with them.--I am, my dear Sister,

Affectionately yours.

To Mrs. Colbeck,

In Keighley, Yorkshire.

To Samuel Bradburn [19]

LONDON, October 28, 1780.

DEAR SAMMY,--I am glad you are safe landed at Keighley, and trust you will there find

a port of ease

From the rough rage of stormy seas,

There are many amiable and gracious souls in Cork and in Dublin; but there are few in the whole kingdom of Ireland to be named, either for depth of sense or of grace, with many, very many persons in Yorkshire, particularly in the West Riding. Go to Betsy Ritchie at Otley, and then point me out such a young woman as she in Ireland.

I think lemonade would cure any child of the flux.

Now be exact in every branch of discipline; and you will soon find what a people you are among.--I am, with tender love to Betsy, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To William--

LONDON, November 3, 1780.

DEAR BILLY,--Never imagine you can be 'faithful to your trust' without offending anybody. Regard not that; follow your own conscience without fear or favour. Do the best you can, and you do enough! ' Angels can do no more.'--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To his Niece Sarah Wesley [20]

CITY ROAD, November 15, 1780.

MY DEAR SALLY,--Some years ago, while you was at Bristol, you had a clear call from God; and you was not disobedient to the heavenly calling. But in a few months that happy impression died away, I know not how. It seems as if God was now calling you again. But you have many hindrances. This is just the dangerous time of life. If you wish not to be almost but altogether a Christian, you will have need of much courage and much patience. Then you will be able to do all things through Christ strengthening you.

You want exceedingly a pious, sensible female friend. I scarce know any fit for you at your end of the town, unless it were that open, noble-spirited creature, Nancy Sharland, 'in whom is no guile.' For the present your best helps will be prayer and reading; perhaps much in the method laid down in one of the Magazines [The Arminian Magazine.]. But you cannot pursue this without cutting off, as it were, a right hand--giving up trifling company. To give you any assistance that is in my power will always be a pleasure to

Your affectionate Uncle.

To Alexander Knox

LONDON, November 18, 1780.

MY DEAR ALLECK,--My mind is exactly the same towards you as it has been for several years; with this only difference (which is very natural), that the longer I know you the more I love you. I am not soon tired of my friends. My brother laughs at me, and says, ' Nay, it signifies nothing to tell you anything; for whomsoever you once love you will love on through thick and thin.'...

As I have frequently observed to you, I am still persuaded it is chiefly your body which presses down your soul; and if it please God to heal your body, I doubt not your mind will be far easier. I do not at all despair of seeing you an happy man, full of joy and peace in believing. Look up, and expect Him that is mighty to save.--I am, dear Alleck,

Yours most affectionately.

To Mrs. Barton

LONDON, December 9, 1780.

My DEAR SISTER,-God knoweth the way wherein you go; and when you have been tried, you shall come forth as gold. I believe, if you drank nettle-tea (five or six leaves) instead of common tea, it would swiftly restore your strength.

If a proper application be made to the magistrates, undoubtedly they will secure the peace. Persecution is more and more out of fashion since King George came to the throne [See letter of Dec. 20, 1777.]. But in the meantime let prayer be made continually.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mary Bosanquet [23]

LONDON, December 18, 1780.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I am glad to hear that the work of God is going on in your own soul and in those about you. That young woman's dream is very remarkable, and gives us good encouragement to press on to the mark. I believe Mr. D was the better for his journey; but he has very little fellowship with the Methodists.

We have many here who have the same experience with honest George Clark, and far more clear ideas of the life of faith than he has. Such are George Hufflet in the chapel at Spiralfields, Mary Landers in the Tower, Sister Calcut in Bishopsgate Street, Sister Cayley at G. Clark's, Jenny Thornton [See letters of April 14, 1771 (to Miss March), and Feb. 4, 1787.] and some others in the City, Sister Peters in the Curtain, Molly Monk in Moorfields, Sister Garston and Charles Wheeler in Old Street. Joseph Bradford would introduce any one you sent, to these, or to our select society. It will be well to advertise the tracts now. I remember you daily; and am, my dear sister,

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Alexander Knox

LONDON, December 23, 1780.

DEAR ALLECK,--You are very ingenious in finding out arguments against yourself; and if you set your wit to it, they will never be wanting. Besides, there is an old sophister, who has been puzzling causes for these six thousand years, that will always be ready to supply you with reasons for every kind of unbelief. But 'God will not give faith to the double-minded, to him who asks what he does not desire to receive. 'No, not while he is double-minded; but He will first take away your double-mindedness (perhaps while you are reading this!) and then give you the faith to which all things are possible. 'Yes, to-morrow, or at some other time.' No time like the time present! ' To-day, if you will hear His voice,' He says, 'I am thy salvation.' Why not today Is not one day with Him as a thousand years And whatever He could do in a thousand years can He not do in one day That this cannot be done without a miracle is absolutely certain. But why should not you expect that miracle This is no presumption: it is an expectation that the God of truth will not be worse than His word. He will not, Alleck! He will not! Do not imagine He will. He knows your simpleness. All your faults are before Him; and it may be the word is just now gone forth, ' I will heal him, for My own name's sake.' Do not reason, but look up! Let your heart (dull and cold as it is) cry out, ' Be it unto me according to Thy word! '--I am Ever yours.

To John Valton

LONDON, December 31, 1780,

MY DEAR BROTHER,--The third preacher was added for that very purpose, to give you the liberty of spending a little time wherever the work of God should call for it [The appointment in the Minutes is, ‘John Valton, George Snowden’; in 1781 Alexander M’Nab is third preacher.] You have wholly omitted one article in the plan (See letter of Feb. 16,)--the new members: of these, I suppose, you will give me an account by-and-by I doubt not but you will be able to give me a good account of all but--the rich members: perhaps of some of these too; for it is on this occasion particularly that our Lord says, ' With God all things are possible.'--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.