To his Nephew Samuel Wesley
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1784)
Author: John Wesley
---
[TRECWN,] August 19, 1784.

DEAR SAMMY, - As I have had a regard for you ever since you were a little one, I have often thought of writing to you freely. I am persuaded what is spoken in love will be taken in love; and if so, if it does you no good, it will do you no harm.

Many years ago I observed that as it had pleased God to give you a remarkable talent for music, so He had given you a quick apprehension of other things, a capacity for making some progress in learning, and (what is of far greater value) a desire to be a Christian. But meantime I have often been pained for you, fearing you did not set out the right way: I do not mean with regard to this or that set of opinions, Protestant or Romish (all these I trample under-foot); but with regard to those weightier matters, wherein, if they go wrong, either Protestants or Papists will perish everlastingly. I feared you were not born again; and 'except a man be born again,' if we may credit the Son of God, 'he cannot see the kingdom of heaven' except he experience that inward change of the earthly, sensual mind for the mind which was in Christ Jesus.

You might have thoroughly understood the scriptural doctrine of the new birth, yea and experienced it long before now, had you used the many opportunities of improvement which God put into your hand while you believed both your father and me to be teachers sent from God. But, alas! what are you now Whether of this Church or that I care not; you may be saved in either, or damned in either: but I fear you are not born again, and except you be born again you cannot see the kingdom of God. You believe the Church of Rome is right. What then If you are not born of God, you are of no Church. Whether Bellamine or Luther be right, you are certainly wrong, if you are not born of the Spirit, if you are not renewed in the spirit of your mind in the likeness of Him that created you.

I doubt you were never convinced of the necessity of this great change. And there is now greater danger than ever that you never will; that you will be diverted from the thought of it by a train of new notions, new practices, new modes of worship: all of which put together (not to consider whether they are unscriptural, superstitious, and idolatrous, or no) - all, I say, put together, do not amount to one grain of true, vital, spiritual religion.

O Sammy, you are out of your way! You are out of God's way! You have not given Him your heart. You have not found - nay, it is Well if you have so much as sought happiness in God! And poor zealots, while you are in this state of mind, would puzzle you about this or the other Church! O fools and blind! Such guides as these lead men by shoals to the bottomless pit. My dear Sammy, your first point is to repent and believe the Gospel. Know yourself a poor, guilty, helpless sinner! Then know Jesus Christ and Him crucified! Let the Spirit of God bear witness with your spirit that you are a child of God, and let the love of God be shed abroad in your heart by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto you; and then, if you have no better work, I will talk with you of transubstantiation or purgatory.

Meantime I commend you to Him who is able to guide you into all truth; and am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate Uncle.