To Joseph Benson
Date: LONDON, December 3, 1769,
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1769)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR JOSEPH,--You must not expect that I should answer particularly a letter of a sheet long. I have only time to take notice briefly of two or three of the mistakes it contains. [See letter of Nov. 19.]

1. I have been told an hundred times, 'You love those that flatter you, and hate all that deal plainly and honestly with you.' [See letters of March 25, 1764, and Sept. 12, 1766.] For J. Oliver told Jo. Hilton, who (with many others) cordially believed it. But nothing under heaven can be more false. What man did I ever love like T. Walsh What woman do I now regard like Miss Bosanquet And what human creatures have dealt so plainly and honestly with me What preacher now deals so plainly with me as John Fenwick and whom do I love and trust more

2. The first spring of the reproach cast on Kingswood School was not any mismanagement there. It was the hatred of good which is in the devil and his children. Therefore even Mr. Parkinson never did or could escape it. Therefore a fresh flood of it has been poured out even since you was there.

3. This you had reason to expect, and therefore ought not to have been surprised, much less discouraged at it. For this I gently reproved you in my first letter. That reproof you took heinously ill, and reproached me for unmercifulness and want of sympathy. This I should think was extremely wrong.

4. 'Is this all the thanks I receive for serving you' Nay, I think the thanks are due to me. When I first sent you to Kingswood, it was to serve you at least as much as myself. Nay, it was not to serve myself at all. For what is the school to me It has been and may be of use to many. But it is no more to me than to you or Lady Huntingdon.

There are other mistakes in your letter (which is all wrote in a spirit of discontent), but I have no time to point them out. You told me you would stay at the school till March. Till then you should be as much at Kingswood as you can.-- I am

Your affectionate brother.