To Miss March
Date: CARMARTHEN, August 12, 1769.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1769)
Author: John Wesley
---
At some times it is needful to say, 'I will pray with the Spirit and with the understanding also.' At other times the understanding has little to do, while the soul is poured forth in passive prayer. I believe we found the answer to many prayers at the Conference, particularly on the last two days. At the conclusion all the preachers were melted down while they were singing those lines for me,--

Thou who so long hast saved me here,

A little longer save;

Till, freed from sin and freed from fear,

I sink into a grave.

Till glad I lay my body down,

Thy servant's steps attend;

And, oh, my life of mercies crown

With a triumphant end!

Various scriptures show that we may pray with resignation for the life or ease of a friend: it is enough that every petition be closed with, 'Not as I will, but as Thou wilt.' It is true that a believer knows the devices of Satan to be many and various. But the Apostle means more than this--namely, that those who have the unction of the Holy One are thereby enabled to discern his devices whenever they occur, and to distinguish them from the influences of the good Spirit, how finely soever they are disguised. To answer for ourselves is often a cross; and we had much rather let people think and talk as they please: but it is a cross we must often take up; otherwise we 'walk not charitably ' if we do not 'reprove our brother '; if we 'suffer sin upon him ' we 'hate our brother in our heart.'

If Miss Thornton be arrived at London, I wish you would take the first opportunity of conversing with her. She will have more need of a faithful friend now than ever she had in her life. I expect she will hear reasons upon reasons why she ought as a point of duty to conform a little to the world, to have a few trifling acquaintance, and not to be so particular in her dress. Now, as you have heard all these things before, and have been enabled by the grace of God to discover Satan even with his angel's face, and to stand firm against all his assaults, you will be better able to assist and confirm her if you seek her before she is much shaken.

It has a little surprised me that several who are, I believe, filled with love, yet do not desire to die. It seems as if God generally does not give this desire till the time of death approaches. Perhaps in many it would be of little use. First let them learn to live.

Doubtless that rest was given 'to support you under your sickness.' Yet that is no reason why it should be ever taken away: it was certainly a degree of that rest which remaineth for the people of God. But it may be called by this or any other name; names are of little consequence: the thing you need never let go. You may live in and to Jesus; yea, and that continually, by simple faith and holy, humble love.

Let Mary Thornton [Miss Thornton was now living with Miss March. See Methodist Magazine, 1805, p 37; and letter in May 1769, also July 6, 1770.] be as sensible as ever she will or can be of her own helplessness and poverty. But let her not cast away that confidence which hath great recompense of reward. She did experience the pure love of God; let none take advantage from her being tried by fire (if it should be so) to reason her out of it. That general promise, 'In blessing I will bless thee,' certainly contains all the promises, whether relating to this life or the next; and all are yours! Peace be multiplied upon you!