To Benjamin Ingram and James Hutton
Date: LINCOLN COLLEGE, November 16, 1738.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1738)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BRETHERN INGHAM AND HUTON, -- Be ye strong in the Lord and in the power of His might! There begins to be a little revival of His power here also. The few gownsmen who meet love one another and press forward toward the prize of our high calling. But I fear they do not all build on the true foundation; for some seem still to be establishing their own righteousness, as the joint cause (at least) with that of our Lord, of their acceptance with God. Charles Kinchin stands clear of this charge, and is full of love for souls and of prayer. But neither (I fear) does he speak the truth as it is in Jesus. For he (as our brother Hutchings) mightily insists, both in conversation and preaching, that no one can be justified without knowing it, and that none is born again or has saving faith till he has the full assurance of faith, continual joy in the Holy Ghost, and the immediate witness of the Spirit with his spirit. Oh when will our Lord give us to be of one mind and one soul, to speak and think the same thing!

This evening I begin reading to a little company in St. Clements, and on Tuesday evening (if God will) to one in St. Giles. But what meant Mr. Fox [Mr. Fox had been in the city prison, and went with Wesley and Kinchin to Manchester in March 1738. It was at the Society in Fox's house (April I) that Wesley could not confine himself to forms of prayer. Mrs. Fox's experience is referred to in Journal, i. 457. Richard Morgan (ibid. viii. 264) read the Bishop of Man's Catechism to two inquirers every other day at their house in 1735. Mr. and Mrs. Fox wished to go to Georgia. Morgan says: ' Mr. Fox and his wife, especially the former, are most zealous Christians.... I read every Sunday night to a cheerful number of Christians at Mr. Fox's.' Charles Wesley writes on Aug. 28, 1738: ' Rejoiced at Mr. Fox's, with Mr. Kin-chin, Hutchtrigs, and other Christian friends.' See letter of Nov. 24 to Fox.] by talking of leaving Oxford Ye have need to send ten men full of faith to us rather than to take one from us. Besides, Mrs. Fox is the very life and spirit (under God) of all the women here that seek our Lord. And if the adversary designed to blast at once all hopes of an harvest for God among them, he could not take a more probable way than now at this critical time to remove her from them. 'But he can't live at Oxford.' No, nor anywhere else, as he is now burdened with debt. But let his debts be paid, and then see what he can do. If that be not enough, we will pay his house-rent for a year or two. But at all hazards let them not go hence while our Lord's work in this place so loudly calls upon them to stay. Speak, my brethren, of this immediately.

I have four- or five-and-thirty other letters to write, [The great correspondence of a lifetime was already in full flow.] so can say no more. Send us word how our Master works in London. I am dead and cold. O pray much for

Your affectionate, heavy brother in Christ.

Hymn-books (bound and unbound) and Prayers should be sent immediately, and two Intercessional Offices. [See letter of Dec. 1. Evidently needed for their Society meetings.]