To Thomas Stedman
Date: BRISTOL, August 13, 1774.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1774)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR SIR,--When I returned to Bristol a few days since, I found your letter of March 26 with those useful discourses of Mr. Orton to the aged, for which I sincerely thank you. I have myself a large collection of letters, chiefly written within these fifty years: but some of them were written much more early, by my father and mother; and one, in the year 1619, I suppose, by my grandmother's father to her mother not long before their marriage. My mother was Dr. Annesley's youngest daughter.

For near fifty years I have been called to go through evil report and good report; and, indeed, the latter without the former would be 'a test for human frailty too severe.' But when one balances the other all is well. The north wind prevents the ill effect of the sunshine, and the providence of God has in this respect been highly remarkable. Reproach came first from men of no character, either for learning or religion; next from men who had no pretence to religion, though they had sense and learning; and afterwards from men that were eminent for religion and learning too. But then we were old weather-beaten soldiers, so that a storm of that kind did not affright us; neither did it surprise us at all, as we had long weighed that word, which we know must be fulfilled--'If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of his household.'

The Journals will conclude the Works. But some have pressed me vehemently to leave out all that relates to the Moravians and all the accounts of demoniacs and apparitions. I cannot yet see it proper to leave out the latter, for the reason given in the last Journal, prefatory to that remarkable account of the young woman at Sunderland. And as to the former, as I never wrote one fine in haste, neither in anger or prejudice, but from my cool and deliberate judgement that it was absolutely necessary to guard the simple from a most specious delusion, I know not but the same cautions may be of use to others when I am no more seen.--I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate brother.