1782



To John Bredin [1]

BIRMINGHAM, July 9, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Your letter reached me this morning. I know not whether it would not be best for you to spend the ensuing year in London. There you might have the best medical advice, and might preach more or less as your strength allowed. [See letters of Oct. 19, 1781, and Aug. 4, 1782, to him.]

Adam Clarke may easily get over to Liverpool or Chester; but ships sometimes go from Newry to Bristol, and very frequently from Dublin, especially at this time of the year. My kind love to Alleck Knox. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. John Bredin, At Mr. McKear’s,

In Londonderry.

To Mrs. Fletcher

BIRMINGHAM, July 12, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I was much pleased with the thought of meeting Mr. Fletcher and you here. But the will of the Lord be done!

It gives me satisfaction to hear that the work of our Lord prospers in your hands. [Mrs. Fletcher had written Wesley on July 7, describing the work in Madeley.] That weak young man {whether with design or without) had damped it sufficiently. I trust the flame will now revive and increase on every side.

It seems to have been the will of God for many years that I should have none to share my proper labor. My brother never did. Thomas Walsh began to do it; so did John Jones. But one died and one hinted. Dr. Coke promises fair; at present I have none like-minded.

When a lot is cast, I have no more to say. Peace be with your spirits! -- I am, my dear sister,

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Ann Loxdale

BIRMINGHAM, July 12, 1782.

MY DEAR MISS LOXDALE,--It raised some wonder in me that I had not a line from you in so long a time. I began to be almost afraid that your love was growing cold. And it would not be at all strange if it did: it is more strange if it does not, especially while you have an affair in hand that naturally tends to engross the whole thought. Whoever follows the few plain directions which are given in the sermon on Enthusiasm [See Works, v. 467-78.] will easily and distinctly see what is the will of God concerning any point in question -- that is, provided the eye be single, provided we have one design and one desire. But it is a just observation, ‘As a very little dust will disorder the motion of a clock, and as a very little sand will hinder the sight of the eye, so a very little desire or selfish design will greatly hinder the eye of the soul.’ By experience, the strongest of all arguments, you have been once and again convinced that salvation from inbred sin is received by simple faith, and by plain consequence in a moment; although it is certain there is a gradual work both preceding and following.

Is it not, then, your wisdom not willingly to converse with any that oppose this great and important truth and studiously to avoid any books that reason plausibly against it If you play with fire, will you not be burnt sooner or later nay, have you not been burnt already A thought comes into my mind which I will simply tell you: it is not the will of God that you should on any account whatever contract a near union [See letter of July 24.] with any person tinged with Mysticism. I believe you will take this kindly from, my dear Nancy,

Yours affectionately.

To Penelope Newman

July 12, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I do not yet see any reason why Jonathan Coussins should not labor next year in the Gloucester-shire Circuit. [He was then in the Sarum Circuit, and in August was duly appointed to Gloucester.] But I do not use to determine things of this kind absolutely before the Conference.

Afflictions, you know, are only blessings in disguise. ‘He prepares occasions of fighting that thou mayest conquer.’ Whenever you have an opportunity of making a little excursion it will be for good. -- I am, dear Penny,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss P. Newman, In Cheltenham,

Gloucestershire.

To Ellen Gretton [2]

LONDON, July 23, 1782.

MY DEAR MISS GRETTON, -- We are frequently called to give up our own will, not only when it is contrary to the will of God, but when it seems to us we desire to do this or that purely to promote His glory. And in cases of this kind we are required (in a sense) to give up our understanding as well as our will. By making this sacrifice we profit much; we die to ourselves and advance in the life of God.

But I do not apprehend you are at all obliged to make a sacrifice of all your religious friends, all the opportunities of doing good, and all the means of grace which you now enjoy, if there be any possibility of avoiding it. You have undoubtedly returned your thankful acknowledgments both to your father and your brother for their kind offer. But I should think it was your best way neither to accept nor refuse it for the present.

I commend you to His care who loves you; and am, dear Nelly,

Yours affectionately.

I know not but I may find a way for your coming to Conference. [It met in London at the beginning of August. See W.H.S. xiv. 2-3.]

To Ann Loxdale

LONDON, July 24, 1782.

MY DEAR MISS LOXDALE, -- Two or three years ago, when the Frenchmen expected to land, I made an offer to the Government. It was not accepted; so I thought of it no more. But some months since, Captain Webb renewed it to Colonel Barr I knew nothing of the matter. But I would not oppose it, as neither did I forward it. I barely gave him leave to inquire what number of the Methodists were willing to embark with him. But I suppose the whole is now at an end, as Colonel Barr is out of place. [See letters of May 25 (to Captain Webb) and Aug. 3 (to Joseph Benson).]

I wish you to retain a close acquaintance with Mr. -----. He is an upright man. And I am in hopes we may now set his head right [See letters of July 12, 1782, and Nov. 21, 1783, to her.]; as he that confounded his interests is gone to another world.

There is no danger of your taking any step that is materially wrong if you continue instant in prayer. But I know so little of the thing you refer to that I can say little about it. Only do not expect that any creature will increase your happiness any farther than it increases your knowledge and love of God. -- I am, my dear Nancy,

Yours affectionately.

To Thomas Rutherford [3]

LONDON, July 29, 1782.

DEAR TOMMY, -- I doubt not but the work of God will revive in Dublin; for Brother Blair and you will not only preach the full Methodist doctrine, but enforce our discipline in every point and preach abroad at every opportunity.

Pray tell Richard Calent I thank him for his letter. I have a letter likewise from George Pellet, of Eyre Court, and am glad to hear his daughter is so well married.

Now I speak a word to you in your ear. Thomas Bethell [See letter of Oct. 19.] has been basely used. James Deaves is deeply prejudiced against him, and has prejudiced many others. Do all you can by little and little to remove that prejudice. He is a downright honest man, and ‘a troublesome man’ only to mongrel Methodists. I thank nobody for hindering his prayer-meeting, which was a direct affront to me. Give him the note which I have enclosed. -- I am, with love to Sister Rutherford, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Nuttal

LONDON, July 31, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- You judge right that preaching abroad [See letter of May 7.] is an admirable means of increasing the work of God, as many will then have an opportunity of learning the truth that otherwise would never have heard it. Rather let all who wish religion to flourish exhort and encourage them to it. You would do well during this fine season to make every opportunity of learning the good word, otherwise there will be a danger that your desire of being altogether a Christian should faint and die away. And, indeed, the staying always at home may gradually impair your bodily health, For exercise in the open air is absolutely necessary to this. Therefore on a very fine day, if you cannot go far, then you should walk half an hour or an hour in your garden. For the meantime let it be your great desire and care to exercise yourself unto godliness. Be a Christian indeed! Be alive to God; and you will give more and more satisfaction to

Yours very affectionately.

To Kitty Warren

LONDON, July 31, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- It pleases God to give me much better health in general than I had at five-and-twenty. For many years also I was frequently weary; but I know not now what weariness means. I have just strength enough for what I am called to do; and at the end of my work I feel just the Same as at the beginning.
Till very lately I had hopes of paying you a short visit after the Conference. But I find it cannot be. I must see them in the West of Cornwall, where there is a great revival of the work of God. And before I can return thence there will hardly so much time remain as will be due to the Bristol Circuit. [He finished the Conference in London on Aug. 13, and set out by coach the same afternoon for the West of England.] T. Tennant [The preachers at Pembroke were Samuel Randall, Thomas Tennant, and James Hall. Tennant stayed another year.] writes to me and desires he may not continue any longer in Pembrokeshire. However, I will tell him the desire of his friends in Wales, and then leave him to his choice. Mr. Randall has been there two years already. So it is time for him to remove. You are exactly in your place. If you desire it, you shall have more employment [See letters of Oct. 19, 1779, and June 8, 1786.]; but you would be a loser if you had less. Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am, my dear Kitty,

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Miss Warren, In Haverfordwest.

To Joseph Benson

NEAR LONDON, August 3, 1782.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- Do not you know that all the preachers cannot leave a circuit at once Therefore, if you left it, Brother Hopper could not. Perhaps, likewise, I can depend upon your judgment more than that of another man.

Two or three years ago, when the kingdom was in imminent danger, I made an offer to the Government of raising some men. The Secretary of War (by the King's order) wrote me word that ‘it was not necessary; but if it ever should be necessary, His Majesty would let me know.’ I never renewed the offer, and never intended it. But Captain Webb, without my knowing anything of the matter, went to Colonel Barr, the new Secretary of War, and renewed that offer. [Colonel Barr became Paymaster of the Forces in July. See letter of July 24.] The Colonel (I verily believe, to avoid his importunity) asked him how many men we could raise. But the Colonel is out of place. So the thing is at an end.

I read over both the sermons; but I did not see anything materially wrong in either. -- I am, with love to Sister Benson,

Your affectionate brother.

We will consider what you propose.

To Ann Bolton

NEAR LONDON, August 3, 1782.

MY DEAR NANCY, -- I thought you had known the truth of the old saying, ‘A Friend is made for adversity.’ Very probably you have suffered more by keeping your sufferings to yourself. But still we know the Lord is King and ruleth all things both in heaven and earth. I am glad your brother's distresses are a little relieved. I shall not be sorry when he is entirely quit of Finstock. I never expected great things from it; but I thought he knew better than me. [See letters of Sept. 9, 1781, and Jan. 5, 1783.]

I believe, if you feed the poor man three or four weeks with absolutely nothing but bread and milk, it will totally restore his senses. I have known it tried here, and the patient recovered entirely.

Miss Ritchie is just alive; she is still hovering between life and death.

I have divided Nottingham Circuit into two, and stationed Brother Warwick [Thomas Warwick (1778-1809), who appears in the Minutes for Leicestershire, was a laborious and successful preacher. See letter of March 6, 1788.] in the Derby part of it.

Do not, my dear Nancy, again delay so long writing to

Yours most affectionately.

To Miss Bolton, In Witney,

Oxfordshire.

To Hannah Ball

LONDON, August 4, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I almost wondered that I did not receive a line from you for so long a season. I could not easily believe that your love was grown cold; and I am glad to hear it is not. But it is a discouragement to see one month pass after another without any perceptible fruit of our labor, without any discernible outpouring of the Spirit, either in His convincing or converting influences. But beware you do not cast away hope! ‘He will come, and will not tarry.’ You know not how soon He may send on all around you

A kindly gracious shower

Of heart-reviving love!

Look for it, my dear Hannah! Pray for it! Expect it soon! And you will not be disappointed. Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am, my sister and friend,

Your affectionate brother.

To John Bredin

LONDON. August 4, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- In your present state you must not attempt to travel. It is as much as your life is worth. [See letters of July 9 and Nov. 30 to him.] You may be a supernumerary in whatever place you judge most advisable; and the little salary, the 12, we will allow from hence.

I do not understand what is the accusation against Hugh Moore. [Moore moved from Londonderry to Aberdeen, See letter of April 10.] Simply administering an oath is a folly; but I know not that it is contrary to any law. If he is afraid of staying at Coleraine (although I know not why), let him change with a Sligo or Castlebar preacher. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Francis Wolfe [4]

LONDON. August 6, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Necessity has no law. Till your strength is restored do all the good you can as a local preacher.

According to my last regulations pray inform the preachers and Captain Williams my plan is this, -- Taunton, Thursday, Aug. 15; Exeter, Friday, Aug. 16; Plymouth, Monday, Aug. 19; St. Austell, Wednesday, Aug. 21; Helstone, Thursday, Aug. 22; Penzance, Friday and Saturday, Aug. 23 and 24; St. Just, Sunday, Aug. 25: and in the West, -- St. Ives, Thursday, Aug. 29; Redruth, Saturday, Aug. 31; St. Anne's, Redruth, Gwennap, Sept. 1. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Jasper Winscom

LONDON, August 10, 1782.

DEAR JASPER, -- That the work of God has not prospered in the Salisbury Circuit for several years is none of your fault. I am persuaded you have His work at heart and will do all that is in your power to promote it. So will Mr. Mason [John Mason had just been appointed Assistant at Sarum.]; so will the other preachers. Look for happy days! -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To William Sagar

LONDON, August 11, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Certainly nothing can more effectually stop the work of God than the breaking in of Calvinism upon you. I hope your three preachers will calmly and diligently oppose it, although not so much by preaching as by visiting the people from house to house, dispersing the little tracts as it were with both hands.

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Cooper

LONDON, August 12, 1782.

MY DEAR HARRIETT, -- Take place on the coach, and I will pay the expense. Make no delay, but come away immediately to

Yours affectionately.

Come straight to my house in the City Road, near Moorfields.

To Mrs. Harriet Cooper, Liverpool.

To Robert Hopkins

LONDON, August 13, 1782.

DEAR ROBERT, -- I am very well satisfied with your letter. I could take your word in a greater matter than this. The whole seems to have arisen from a misapprehension of your words; so the matter is at an end. [He was now at Norwich, where there were special difficulties, and evidently some unhappy reports.] -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Davenport [5]

BRISTOL, August 14, 1782.

DEAR SIR, -- It would have given me a good deal of satisfaction to have had a little conversation with you. But I do not stay long in one place. I have no resting-place on earth:

A poor wayfaring man,

I dwell awhile in tents below,

Or gladly wander to and fro,

Till I my Canaan gain.

You would have been very welcome at our Conference. Mr. Pugh and Mr. Dodwell were present at it; and I believe are more determined than ever to spend their whole strength in saving their own souls and them that hear them.

I believe one of our preachers that are stationed in the Leicester Circuit will call upon you at Allexton; and I make no doubt but some of the seed which you have been long sowing will then grow up. No one should wish or pray for persecution. On the contrary, we are to avoid it to the uttermost of our power. ‘When they persecute you in one city, flee unto another.’ Yet, when it does come, notwithstanding all our care to avoid it, God will extract good out of evil.

To-morrow I am to set out for Cornwall. In about three weeks I expect to be here again. In the beginning of October I generally move towards London, in the neighborhood of which I usually spend the winter. -- I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ellen Gretton

BRISTOL, September 7, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- It pleases God to lead you in a rough path for the present; but it is enough that all will end well. I never knew any disorder in the bowels which might not be speedily cured by drinking plentifully of lemonade; unless in a few peculiar constitutions, which could not bear lemons. And the drinking nettle-tea (instead of common tea) will commonly perfect the cure.

If occasion require, she should certainly return to some place where she is not known. And I hope God will incline his heart to allow her what is necessary.

The fearing lest we should be called hence before we are perfected in love is one species of taking thought for the morrow. You have nothing to do with this. Live to-day I And

Be now willing to receive

What His goodness waits to give.

-- I am, my dear Nelly,

Yours affectionately.

To Richard Rodda [6]

BRISTOL, September 9, 1782.

DEAR RICHARD, -- You should take particular care that your circuit be never without an assortment of all the valuable books, especially the Appeals, the Sermons, Kempis, and the Primitive Physick, which no family should be without. Send for these, and, according to the rule of Conference, take them into your own keeping. You are found to be remarkably diligent in spreading the books: let none rob you of this glory. If you can spread the Magazine, it will do good: the letters therein contain the marrow of Christianity.

Your affectionate friend and brother.

It is very remarkable that you should have a prospect of doing good at Oxford I And it is certainly a token for good that you should find a magistrate willing to do you justice.

To Joseph Taylor [7]

BRISTOL, September 9, 1782.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- You will now have full scope for the exercise of every talent that God has given you; and you have fellow laborers after your own heart. See that no strangeness creep in between you! If you continue instant in prayer, I trust there will be such a work in Cornwall as never was yet.

You remember the rule of Conference that every Assistant should take my books in his own hands, [See previous letter and that of Sept. 24.] as having better opportunities of dispersing them than any private person can possibly have. I desire you would do this without delay. The Primitive Physick should be in every family. So should the Christian Pattern if possible. Of the Magazines I need say nothing. Herein I am persuaded you will tread in James Rogers's steps, and go beyond him as far as you can. The children will require much attention; and the bands too, or they will molder away. -- I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Joseph Taylor, At the Preaching-

house, In Redruth, Cornwall.

To a Quaker [8]

FROME, September 12, 1782.

I have lately heard, to my no small surprise, that a person professing himself a Quaker, and supposed to be a man of some character, has confidently reported that he has been at Sunderland himself and inquired into the case of Elizabeth Hobson, that she was a woman of a very indifferent character, that the story she told was purely her own invention, and that John Wesley himself was now fully convinced that there was no truth in it.

From what motive a man should invent and publish all over England (for I have heard this in various places) an whole train of absolute, notorious falsehoods, I cannot at all imagine. On the contrary, I declare to all the world, (1) that Elizabeth Hobson was an eminently pious woman, that she lived and died without the least blemish of any kind, without the least stain upon her character; (2) that the relation could not possibly have been her own invention, as there were many witnesses to several parts of it, as Mr. Parker, the two attorneys whom she employed, Miss Hesmer, and many others; and (3) that I myself am fully persuaded that every circumstance of it is literally and punctually true.

I know that those who fashionably deny the existence of spirits are hugely disgusted at accounts of this kind. I know that they incessantly labor to spread this disgust among those that are of a better mind, because if one of these accounts be admitted their whole system falls to the ground. But whoever is pleased or displeased, I must testify what I believe to be the truth. Indeed, I never myself saw the appearance of an unbodied spirit; and I never saw the commission of a murder. Yet upon the testimony of unexceptionable witnesses, I can firmly believe both one and the other.

To William Robarts [9]

FROME, September 12, 1782.

I was much concerned when I saw you last; and as ‘life for delays no time will give,’ especially my life, which is far spent, I take the first opportunity of speaking once for all. You are in a large way of business, wherein I suppose you dear one (if not two or three) hundred a year. Over and above that you have an estate which, if you gave above thirty years' purchase, is an hundred a year. You have neither son nor daughter; and yet you cannot afford sixpence a month for the Magazine! Nay, you could not afford to give a guinea in a pressing case, viz. at the instance of an old tried friend!

Are you, then, in more debt than you can pay Or is your trade gone, so that it will no more than keep your house Do you clear nothing in the year If so, you may still lay up the annual income of your estate. (What you could sell it for is nothing to the purpose; you do not need to sell it.) Are you not, then, ‘laying up treasures upon earth’ And how is this consistent with Scripture Surely no more than living in adultery or habitual drunkenness.

Those words of St. Paul have for some time past been much impressed on my mind, ‘If any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, with such an one, no not to eat.’ Now, I cannot dear you of covetousness, deep, uncommon covetousness, such as I very rarely meet with. I do not know that in forty years I have asked a guinea of any other man that has denied me! So I have done! I give you up to God. I do not know that you will any more be troubled with

Your former Friend.

[Wesley was mistaken in his judgment, as the following reply from Robarts on September 16 shows. He was evidently using all possible economy that he might escape failure in business.]

VERY DEAR SIR, -- You sat in judgment on me as long ago as Mr. Hindmarsh [James Hindmarsh was Assistant of the Devon Circuit in 1775.] was here and condemned me unheard; and though I then was, and yet am, conscious of my innocence in that respect, you still hold me guilty, and now incline to treat, at least to esteem, as an heathen man or a publican. Had you admitted me to answer in person, I could have given you satisfaction; but shall not commit it to paper, which may perhaps come to other hands before yours. But that I am not ‘laying up treasures upon earth,’ that I am not convinced of ‘deep, uncommon covetousness,’ that I am convinced you have wronged me and are severe and uncharitable in your censure, I do and must inform you; for the truth of which I appeal to that righteous God who is both yours and mine. Where, then, is that charity that thinketh no evil I am really grieved, and not without cause. Four or five if not seven years you have thus treated your honest and generous but injured son in the gospel,

To Ann Bolton [10]

BATH, September 15, 1782.

MY DEAR NANCY, -- Be so kind as to inform Brother Rodda that if God prolong my life and strength, I shall be at Walling-ford on Monday, October 16; at Oxford on Tuesday, 17; at Witney, Wednesday; and at High Wycombe on Thursday. As I hope to see you in a short time, I do not now inquire into the particulars of your afflictions, although it is pity but you had used the privilege of a friend and told me them all just as they occurred. But it is enough that God drew good out of evil and commanded all things to work together for good. He has proved you in the furnace of affliction; and when you have been tried, you shall come forth as gold.

In many parts of the kingdom there has been a considerable increase of the work of God. And why should there not be the same with you also It will if our brethren be instant in prayer. One effect of your trials is to unite me more closely to you as ‘pity melts the mind to love.’ Indeed, you long have been exceedingly near to, my dear Nancy,

Yours most affectionately.

To William Robarts

BRISTOL, September 19, 1782.

Strange! Have you not an estate Does it bring you in nothing Have you not a large trade Do you gain nothing thereby Then how can you avoid ‘laying up treasures on earth’ I want to know: I desire to justify you.

To this Robarts replies:

REVERAND SIR, -- In this respect I know nobody but you that condemns me; my heart, my God does not. I therefore need no justification.

I have already spoke and wrote, but to no avail; therefore desire to be silent till you can cast one glance of charity, at least of candor, though I am not worthy of your address or subscription. I hope you will for this once admit the name of your once esteemed

W. R. [See letter of Aug. 3, 1783.]

To Joseph Taylor

BRISTOL, September 24, 1752.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- Joseph Andrew writes to me about his keeping the books still. I answer, ‘It was determined at the Conference that the books all over England should be kept by the Assistant in each circuit.’ [See letters of Sept. 9.] I believe he has discharged this office well; but I believe you will discharge it better. You do not expect to do your duty without giving offence Recommend the Magazines, Kempis, and the Primitive Physick in earnest. And take care of the bands and the children. -- I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Joseph Taylor, At the Preaching-

house, In St. Ives, Cornwall.

To Penelope Newman

BRISTOL, October 1, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I have often been concerned at your being cooped up in a corner; now you are likely to have a wider field of action. Only the danger will be lest, when you have more opportunity, you should have less desire of doing good. This is the case of many pious persons when they marry, and I do not wonder at it. I should rather wonder it is not the case of all. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Hester Ann Roe [11]

BRISTOL, October 1, 1782.

MY DEAR HETTY, -- I received yours two days after date, and read it yesterday to Miss Stockdale, [Miss Stockdale had stayed with her nephew Robert Roe at Macelesfield in July (Account, p. 61).] and poor Peggy Roe, who is still strangely detained in life. But she is permitted to stay in the body a little longer that she may be more ready for the Bridegroom.

You did exceedingly well to send me so circumstantial an account of Robert Roe’s last illness and happy death. It may incite many to run the race that is set before them with more courage and patience.

That our dear Miss Ritchie should come to Macclesfield just at this time was an excellent instance of Divine Providence. She could never have come in a fitter season. Only let her not do more than consists with her health.

The removal of so useful an instrument as your late cousin, in the midst, or rather in the dawn, of his usefulness (especially while the harvest is so great and the faithful laborers so few), is an instance of the divine economy which leaves our reason behind; our little narrow minds cannot comprehend it. We can only wonder and adore. How is your health I sometimes fear lest you also (as those I tenderly love generally have been) should be snatched away. But let us live to-day. -- I always am

Affectionately yours.

To Thomas Rutherford [12]
LONDON, October 19, 1782.

DEAR TOMMY, -- I allow you to give any books you please to any preacher to the value of forty shillings. I have hope for T. Bethell. Watch over him, and he will reward your labor. [See letter of July 29.] I think you have determined fight concerning Waterford and concerning Brother Christie. Send me the substance of the quarterly plans. Cannot you find an easier circuit for John Crook We cannot receive John McBurney. I like your prayer-meetings well. If you judge it right, let there be one on Thursday too. But I hope you do not discontinue morning preaching.

There is something very awful in the sudden removal of that good man Richard Boardman. But what can be done to supply his place Cork is of very great importance. Can anything better be done (at least for the present) than to cut off your own right hand, to send Andrew Blair thither, and to keep John Mayly in Dublin -- I am, with kind love to Sister Rutherford, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Joseph Taylor

LONDON, October 19, 1782.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- Those tracts that are in any degree damaged you will do well to sell at half price. [See letter of Sept. 9.] And those of them that are greatly damaged you may give away as you see proper. But I apprehend it would be best, when a proper occasion is, to send the Magazines by sea to Bristol or London.

Where they have preaching only one night in a week, you may meet the bands and the Society by turns. -- I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Joseph Taylor, At the Preaching-

house, In Redruth, Cornwall.

To Zachariah Yemdall

SEVENOAKS, October 21, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Undoubtedly you are to act as Assistant; and if you carefully read the great Minutes of the Conference and keep close to them in every point, assuredly you will see the fruit of your labor. But whom can you get to help you I know none, unless you can persuade Brother Rutherford to spare you Andrew Blair, and to take a poor invalid, John Mayly (who is now at Dublin), in his stead. [See letters of Oct. 19 (to Thomas Rutherford) and Nov.] You know, we have no preachers to spare; every one is employed: and we can neither make preachers nor purchase them. God alone can thrust them out into His harvest. All you can do until H. Grave comes is to divide yourself between Cork and Bandon. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Zachariah Yewdall, At the

New Room, In Cork.

To Duncan McAllum [13]

NEAR LONDON, October 24, 1782.

DEAR DUNCAN, -- Epworth, I believe, is not supplied. I think it will be a comfortable place for Peter Mill; and I trust he will be more useful than ever. Yet I was afraid he would be straitened for money, so I have drawn a little note on Mr. Prickard in his favor, who keeps the money of the Contingent Fund in Dr. Coke’s absence. If he wants anything, he shall have it. -- I am, dear Duncan,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Bradburn [14]

YARMOUTH, October 30, 1782.

MY DEAR BETSY, -- My disorders are seldom of long continuance; they pass off in a few days, and usually leave me considerably better than I was before. We are always safe while we are either doing or suffering the will of Him that orders all things well.

I do not doubt but you will find both profit and pleasure in the conversation of my dear Miss Ritchie. I had marked her out for your acquaintance, or rather friendship, before you set out for England. You are two kindred souls, and I almost, wonder how you could be so long kept apart from each other. Her conversation, I doubt not, will quicken your desires of being all renewed in the image of Him that created you. But let those desires rise ever so high, they need not lessen your thankfulness -- nay, the strongest hunger and thirst after righteousness are found in those that in everything give thanks.

I am glad to hear the little jars that were in Bradford are at end. Let them all die and be forgotten. But let brotherly love continue. Peace be with both your spirits! -- I am, my dear Betsy,

Yours most affectionately.

To Samuel Bradburn [15]

LONDON, November 9, 1782.

DEAR SAMMY, -- I abhor the thought of giving to twenty men the power to place or displace the preachers in their congregations. How would he then dare to speak an unpleasing truth And if he did, what would become of him This must never be the case while I live among the Methodists. And Birstall is a leading case; the first of an avowed violation of our plan. Therefore the point must be carried for the Methodist preachers now or never: and I alone can carry it; which I will, God being my helper.

You are not a match for the silver tongue, nor Brother Hopper. But do not, to please any of your new friends, forsake

Your true old friend.

To Zachariah Yewdall [16]

LONDON, November 12, 1782,

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Before this time I suppose you have my last. I have wrote to T. Rutherford to send Andrew Blair. The leaders, I find, were unwilling to part with him; but I think he will be guided by me rather than by them. Till I have done meeting the classes, I shall have little leisure to write either prose or verse, being fully taken up from morning to night. After this I may get a little time. O let us work while the day is l The night cometh, wherein no man can work. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Zachariah Yewdall [17]

LONDON, November 21, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I believe you need not be ashamed to inscribe the lines above on R. Boardman’s tombstone. I doubt you do not find any account of himself among his papers. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Joseph Benson [18]

LONDON, November 29, 1782.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- I am well pleased that it is you who give me an opportunity of considering this important question, because you are able to bring the whole strength of the cause; so that in answering you I may answer all. I will first endeavor to state the case, and then argue a little upon it.

When our Lord preached on the mountain or St. Paul by the river-side, there was no such thing as patronage. But as soon as Christians grew rich some of them built preaching-houses (afterwards called churches); and those who built were called patrons, and appointed whom they pleased to preach in them. When revenues were annexed to these houses,-they disposed of houses and revenues together. Indeed, the patrons generally gave the lands from which the revenues arose. At the Reformation many rich men built new churches, and still claimed to dispose of them; and many Presbyterians and Independents built preaching-houses at their own expense, and placed in them whom they pleased. But others entrusted their powers with a few friends whom they could confide in.

I built the first preaching-house which was built for the people called Methodists -- namely, at Bristol in the year 1739. And, knowing no better, I suffered the first deed of trust to be drawn in the Presbyterian form. But Mr. Whitefield, hearing of this, wrote me a warm letter asking, Do you consider what you do If you let the trustees name the preachers, they may exclude you and all your brethren from preaching in the houses you have built. Pray let the deed be immediately canceled; to which the trustees immediately agreed.

Afterwards I built the preaching-houses in Kingswood and at Newcastle-upon-Tyne. But I took care that none but myself should have any right to name preachers for them. About this time a preaching-house was built at Birstall by contributions and collections. But John Nelson, knowing no better, suffered a deed to be drawn without my consent or knowledge giving twelve or thirteen persons a power not only of placing but even of displacing the preachers at their pleasure. Had I then known of this I should have insisted on having it altered as that at Bristol. Soon after this I was informed that the houses at Bristol, Kingswood, and Newcastle were my property, and as such liable to descend to my heirs. I immediately procured a form to be drawn up by three of the most eminent counselors in London, whereby not only these houses but all hereafter to be built might be settled on such a plan as would infallibly secure them from the heirs of the proprietor for the purpose originally intended.

In process of time, Birstall being too small for the congregation, it was moved to build a new one; and a deed was prepared which (like the old) gave a few people the power both to place and displace preachers at pleasure. When I heard this, I vehemently objected to it, and positively refused to sign it. But in the evening several came and strongly urged me to sign, averring that the old deed could not be altered; on which consideration I at length unwillingly complied. This was mentioned at the ensuing Conference [See Works, viii. 329-32.]; and it was asked What can be done with regard to the preaching-house at Birstall ‘The answer was, If the trustees still refuse to settle it on the Methodist plan, (1) let a plain state of the case be drawn up; (2) let a collection be made throughout all England in order to purchase ground and to build another preaching-house as near the present as may be.

But why should not all our houses be settled like that at Birstall Because, if the trustees have a power to place and displace preachers, then (1) Itinerant preaching is at an end. When the trustees in any place have fixed a preacher they like, the rotation of preachers there is at an end--at least, till they pick a quarrel with him and turn him out. (2) While he stays, how he will be gagged, since if he displeases the trustees he will lose his bread! and how will he dare to put a trustee out of the Society (3) If any beside the Conference name the preachers, surely it should not be twenty or thirty men, but all the Society unless you would say all the congregation.

(4) The power of these trustees is greater than that of any noble-man-yea, or of the King himself. He can put in a preacher where he is patron; but he cannot put him out. ‘But since this power will not commence till after your death, why should you oppose it’ Because none else can oppose it so effectually. I have more influence than any other person is likely to have after me. And every one sees I am not pleading my own cause (as they would say the other preachers were); I am pleading not for myself, but for every preacher who desires to act on the old Methodist plan. I am pleading for Mr. Hopper, Mr. Bradburn, Mr. Benson, that you may not be liable to be turned out of all or any of our houses without any reason given at the pleasure of twenty or thirty men. I say ‘or any’; for I see no sufficient reason for giving up any house in England. And if one were given up, more would follow; it would be as the letting out of water. ‘But you did consent to it with regard to this house.’ Yes, I was worked into an unwilling consent [] and even this was grounded on the positive assertion that the deed could not be altered. Whereas it was actually altered in the second deed, not in one but in twenty places.

The plain conclusion is, if the trustees will not alter the deed, they must keep their house, and we must bu'11d another. ‘But then you occasion endless strife, animosity, confusion, and destroy the work of God.’ No, not I: it is these trustees that cause all the strife, animosity, and confusion. I go on in the old way. It is they that, by going out of it, hinder, yea destroy, the work of God. I sit down with the loss; leave them the house, and go on as if they were not in the world. It is they who do the wrong, who bawl with all their might and pour out bitter words. But let them take care; for God heareth, and He will arise and maintain His own cause. -- I am Your affectionate brother.

To John Bredin

NEAR LONDON, November 30, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Medicines, I think, will be of no service to you, unless it were a course of tar-water. But very probably change of air might be of service. [See letters of Aug. 4, 1782, and Nov. 16, 1785, to him.] It might be of service to spend, suppose, a week or two at Liverpool, afterwards a week or two at Chester or Parkgate and perhaps at Manchester. Your diet in the meantime should be chiefly milk and vegetables; of which I judge turnips, potatoes, and apples to be the best. Preach as much as you can preach, and no more.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Bredin, At the Preaching-house,

In Whitehaven.

To the Commanding Officer in Lowestoft

LONDON, November 30, 1782.

SIR, -- I am informed by some of my friends in Lowestoft that they have been frequently disturbed at their public worship by some officers quartered in the town. Before I use any other method, I beg of you, sir, who can do it with a word, to prevent our being thus insulted any more. We are men; we are Englishmen: as such we have a natural and a legal right to liberty of conscience. -- I am, sir,

Your obedient servant.

To the Earl of Shelburne [19]

LONDON, December 1782.

MY LORD, -- If I wrong your Lordship, I am sorry for it; but I really believe your Lordship fears God: and I hope your Lordship has no unfavorable opinion of the Christian revelation. This encourages me to trouble your Lordship with a few lines, which otherwise I should not take upon me to do.

Above thirty years ago a motion was made in Parliament for raising and embodying the militia, and for exercising them (to save time) on Sunday. When the motion was like to pass, an old gentleman stood up and said, ‘Mr. Speaker, I have one objection to this: I believe an old book called the Bible.’ The members looked at one another, and the motion was dropped.

Must not all others who believe the Bible have the very same objection And from what I have seen, I cannot but think these are still three-fourths of the nation. Now, setting religion out of the question, is it expedient to give such a shock to so many millions of people at once And certainly it would shock them extremely, it would wound them in a very tender part. For would not they, would not all England, would not all Europe, consider this as a virtual repeal of the Bible And would not all serious persons say, ‘We have little religion in the land now; but by this step we shall have less still. For, wherever this pretty show is to be seen, the people will flock together, and will lounge away so much time before and after it that the churches will be emptier than they are at present!’

My Lord, I am concerned for this on a double account. First, because I have personal obligations to your Lordship, and would fain, even for this reason, recommend your Lordship to the love and esteem of all over whom I have any influence. Secondly, because I now reverence your Lordship for your office’ sake, and believe it to be my bounden duty to do all that is in my little power to advance your Lordship's influence and reputation.

Will your Lordship permit me to add a word in my old-fashioned way I pray Him that has all power in heaven and earth to prosper all your endeavors for the public good; and am, my Lord,

Your Lordship’s willing servant.

To Hannah Ball

LONDON, December 1, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- It is hard if we cannot trust the invisible God farther than we can see Him! We do not yet see the fruit of our labors; but we can trust Him that hath promised. ‘He will fulfill the desire of them that fear Him.’ He hath already done great things; but He will do greater things than these. Only 'hold fast the beginning of your confidence steadfast unto the end.’

You do well, whenever opportunity offers, to step over to Watlington. It will be a means of increasing life both in them and yourself. I only wish you could see our friends at Oxford too, that iron might sharpen iron.

I hope you do not drop the select society. If Mr. Rhodda [Then in the circuit.] strongly and explicitly preaches perfection, he will see more and more fruit of his labor. -- I am, with love to my dear Ann,

Your affectionate brother.

To John Valton [20]

St. NEOTS, December 3, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You are thoroughly satisfied that there is nothing wherein conscience is not concerned which I would not do for your sake. But here conscience is very deeply concerned. What I do I do unto the Lord. The question is in the last resort, Methodism or no Methodism I A blow is struck at the very roots of our whole discipline, as appears by the short state of the ‘case’ which I have sent to Joseph Benson. And if this work is not obviated while I live, probably it never will be. None can stem the tide when I am gone; therefore I must now do what I can, God being my helper. And I know the fierceness of man shall turn to His praise. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Zachariah Yewdall

LONDON, December 7, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I do not see that you can fix upon a more proper person than either George Howe or Laren Wright. [Howe was one of the most devoted Methodists in Cork. He led the party of thirty horsemen who met Wesley as he was coming to the city in May 1785. See Journal, vii. 74-5n.] You should endorse it on the back of the deed, only taking care to have fresh stamps.

Those who will not meet in class cannot stay with us. Read the Thoughts upon a Single Life, and weigh them well. You will then feel the wisdom of St. Paul’s advice (especially to a preacher, and to a Methodist preacher above all), ‘If thou mayest be free, use it rather.’ [See letter of May 26, 1781, to him.]

I hope Andrew Blair is now with you. Brother Swindells is dead, and John Trembath is alive again. [For Robert Swindells, see letter of Feb. 28, 1748; and for Trembath, Sept. 21, 1755.] -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Davenport

LONDON, December 23 [1782].

DEAR SIR, -- I believe Mr. Perronet labored about thirty years in the parish of Shoreham, and that with all his might, before there appeared the least fruit of his labor. He then broke through, and in spite of reproach accepted the assistance of the poor Methodists. Immediately the seed which he had been so long sowing began to grow up; and for several years the largest and most lively Society in all the circuit is that of Shoreham. I should not wonder if it should be the same case at Allexton. God is able out of the stones to raise up children unto Abraham there also. But I do not know which of our circuits borders upon it, otherwise I would write to the Assistant of that circuit to pay you a visit at the first opportunity.

Our little Society [‘A Plan of the Society, instituted in January 1782, to distribute Religious Tracts among the Poor.’ See Tyerman's Wesley, iii. 369.] for dispersing religious books among the poor has now spread them through all England. Two of the books which they disperse are Alleyne’s Alarm and Baxter’s Call to the Unconverted. Any person that subscribes half a guinea or a guinea yearly will have four times as many books sent down as he could otherwise purchase with that sum. It seems this is one of the most excellent charities that we can be concerned in.

One of our Society here went to rest on Tuesday last, and another on Wednesday. They had both walked in heaviness for many years; but God did not forsake them at the last. The sting of death was taken away, and they calmly fell asleep.

But there is not any need for you to stay so long before your spirit rejoices in God your Savior. He is not far from you now! All things are ready.

Lo! on the wings of love He flies,

And brings redemption near!

--I am, dear sir,

Your very affectionate brother.

To the Rev. Mr. Davenport, At Allexton,

Near Uppingham.

To Mr. -----

LONDON, December 23, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Many years since, when I read those words in the Lesson for the day, ‘Son of man, I take from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke,’ I was so affected that it was not without difficulty I could speak a word more. [See Journal, i. 325-6; and letter of Oct. 7, 1749, where the same words are used about Grace Murray. Compare letter of Feb. 14, 1786.] But it was not long before He enabled me to say, 'Good, is the will of the Lord.' I trust He has taught you that great lesson, which reason alone cannot teach. He has always one end, whether in His pleasing or painful dispensations, to wean us from all things here below and to unite us to Himself. You see the present dispensation of His providence in a true light. He is vindicating His right to your whole heart and claiming you for His own. And He can make you large amends for all He has taken away by giving you Himself.

Let not this medicine be without its full effect. ‘It is a great loss to lose an affliction.’ Now is the time that you are loudly called to give up yourself wholly to God. It would be your wisest way to select two or three for your intimate acquaintances who are deeply alive to God; and to have no farther intercourse with those who know not God than necessary business requires. If you form this resolution and keep steadily to it, you will meet our dear friend again in a little time. May God enable you so to do! His grace is sufficient for you. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Matthiss Joyce [21]

DEAR BROTHER, -- Not only Mr. Smith but several others gave a satisfactory account of you at the Conference. Mr. Watkinson [Richard Watkinson was the Assistant at Limerick, and Robert Blake his colleague. See letter of Dec. 31.] writes me word that, as Robert Blake has left him, he is in great want of help. I have no objections, if your wife is willing, for you to go upon trial to Limerick.

To Robert Hall, Jun.

LONDON, December 29, 1782.

The Conference gives nothing towards building houses. But they may give you more circuits to beg in; and if you had Joseph Bradford to beg for you, you would succeed well. The Londoners are a princely people. They are never weary of well doing.... [Wesley dined with Hall at Nottingham on July 8, 1786 (Journal, vii. 186d). Joseph Bradford was Assistant in Leicestershire.]

To Ellen Gretton

LONDON, December 31, 1782.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- You do not consider the slowness of the by-posts. A letter could not be wrote on the receipt of yours so as to reach Skillington by Wednesday, January the 1st.

The thing seems to be altogether providential; it was no way of your own contriving. There is not only a fair prospect of a sufficient provision for yourself (which a Christian should not despise), but of being an instrument of good to others, which is highly desirable.

One that fears God and is waiting for His salvation is not such an unbeliever as St. Paul there speaks of. Proceed with much prayer, and your way will be made plain. [See letter of Feb. 16, 1783.] -- I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss Gretton, At Mr, Derry’s,

Shoemaker, In Grantham, Lincs.

To Zachariah Yewdall [22]

LONDON, December 31, 1782.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You fear when no fear is. I have appointed Mr. Blair to labor with you at Cork and Bandon, and shall not alter that appointment without stronger reasons than I am likely to see. If I live, I shall probably see Ireland in summer; if I do not, I expect Dr. Coke will.

Robert Blake may go just where he will; I have nothing to do with him. Three times he left his circuit without the consent of his Assistant. [Blake was a young Englishman who became an itinerant in 1778. He was now at Athione. See letter of Feb. 9, 1783.] He has stupidly and saucily affronted almost all the leaders. His high spirit, I fear, will destroy him. Till he is deeply humbled, I disclaim all fellowship with him. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.