To King George II
Date: March 5, 1744.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1744)
Author: John Wesley
---
To THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.

The humble Address of the Societies in England and Wales, in derision called Methodists.

MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN, -- So inconsiderable as we are, ‘a people scattered and peeled, and trodden under-foot, from the beginning hitherto,’ we should in no wise have presumed even on this great occasion to open our lips to your Majesty, had we not been induced, indeed constrained, so to do by two considerations: the one, that, in spite of all our remonstrances on that head, we are continually represented as a peculiar sect of men, separating ourselves from the Established Church; the other, that we are still traduced as inclined to Popery, and consequently disaffected to your Majesty.

Upon these considerations we think it incumbent upon us, if we must stand as a distinct body from our brethren, to tender for ourselves our most dutiful regards to your sacred Majesty; and to declare, in the presence of Him we serve, the King of kings and Lord of lords, that we are a part (however mean) of that Protestant Church established in these kingdoms; that we unite together for this and no other end -- to promote, so far as we may be capable, justice, mercy, and truth, the glory of God, and peace and goodwill among men; that we detest and abhor the fundamental doctrines of the Church of Rome, and are steadily attached to your Majesty’s royal person and illustrious house.

We cannot, indeed, say or do either more or less than we apprehend consistent with the written Word of God; but we are ready to obey your Majesty to the uttermost in all things which we conceive to be agreeable thereto. And we earnestly exhort all with whom we converse, as they fear God, to honor the King. We of the clergy in particular put all men in mind to revere the higher powers as of God; and continually declare, ‘Ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience’ sake.’

Silver and gold (most of us must own) we have none; but such as we have we humbly beg your Majesty to accept together with our hearts and prayers. May He who hath bought us with His blood, the Prince of all the kings of the earth, fight against all the enemies of your Majesty with the two-edged sword that cometh out of His mouth! And when He calleth your Majesty from this throne, full of years and victories, may it be with that voice, ‘Come, receive the kingdom prepared for thee from the beginning of the world!’

These are the continual prayers of your Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects,

JOHN WESLEY, &c.