1784

To Alexander Barry () [1]

EPWORTH July 3, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - We purpose to consider fully at the Conference the state of our brethren in America, and to send them all the help we can both in Nova Scotia and in other parts. But whoever goes over must voluntarily offer himself for that great work. I not only do not require but do not so much as advise any one to go. His service will do no good there unless it be a free-will offering.

I am glad our preachers at Portsmouth do not coop themselves up in the preaching-houses. The work of God can never make any considerable progress but by field-preaching. We do not now make any yearly collection for the payment of debts. All our public debts would have been paid long before now had the Methodists been merciful after their power. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To James Barry [2]

EPWORTH, July 3, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I. know your brother well, and was at his house the last time I was at Portsmouth, as probably I shall be again in autumn before I return to London. The work of God among the blacks in your neighborhood is a wonderful instance of the power of God; and the little town they have built is, I suppose, the only town of negroes which has been built in America - nay, perhaps in any part of the world, except only in Africa. I doubt not but some of them can read. When, therefore, we send a preacher or two to Nova Scotia, we will send some books to be distributed among them; and they never need want books while I live. It will be well to give them all the assistance you can in every possible way.

We purpose to consider fully at the Conference what we can do to help our brethren abroad; not only those that are settled in the southern provinces of America, but those that are in Nova Scotia and Newfoundland. Indeed, it is an invariable rule with me not to require any one to go over to America-nay, I scruple even to advise them to it. I shall only propose it at the Conference; and then, of those that freely offer themselves, we shall select such as we believe will most adorn the gospel.

In teaching school you have an opportunity of doing much good, if you consider that you are called of God to teach those you are entrusted with not only to read and write, but to fear and serve God. Indeed, in order to this you will have need of much courage as well as much prudence and patience. And it may be long before you see the fruit of your labor. But in due time you shall reap if you faint not.

I wish you would from time to time send an account of the progress of the work of God among you, and of anything remarkable that occurs, to

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Barry, Shelburne,

Nova Scotia.

To Arthur Keene

NEAR LEEDS, July 23, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - It is strange! Two or three weeks ago I was observing,' I have exactly the same strength and more health at eighty-one than I had at twenty-one.' This hath God wrought.

The Irish preachers have shown both their understanding and their uprightness. I am glad they and you are satisfied with the Declaration, and. see Mr. Hampson's wonderful Appeal [John Hampson, sen., issued a printed Appeal against the Deed of Declaration which Wesley had executed on Feb. 28 giving a legal constitution to the Conference.] in its true light. Humanly speaking it must do abundance of mischief. But God is over all. I am in great hopes Mr. Rogers will be useful. He is an Israelite indeed.

I think a cupboard, secured as you intend, will do full as well as an iron chest.

Now, Arthur, I will try if you do love me. If you do, serve my friend, poor Sister Hyden. ['Hide' in letter of Feb. 17, 1785; probably ' Hyde.'] Exert yourself to procure employment for her son, who is capable of almost anything. Send me word 'it is done.'-I am, with kind love to Sister Keene, dear Arthur

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Arthur Keene,

Near Dublin.

To Frances Godfrey

LEEDS, July 31, 1784.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I thank you for giving me so full an account of that extraordinary deliverance. [Miss Godfrey lived at Gainsborough. See letter of Aug. 5 1788.] I doubt not but those that were called epileptic fits were owing to a messenger of Satan whom God permitted to buffet you. Therefore all human helps were vain. Nothing but the power of God could deliver you. And if you continue to walk humbly and closely with God, He will continue to bruise Satan under your feet, and will add bodily health to the spirit of an healthful mind. Do all you can for so good a Master! And see that you go on to perfection, till you know all that love of God that passeth knowledge. - I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To John White [3]

[July 1784.]

John White, whoever is wrong, you are not right.

To Mary Bishop [4]

HAVERFORDWEST, August 18, 1784.

MY DEAR MISS BISHOP, - From the time I heard you were rejected by Lady Huntingdon, I have had a tender regard for you, and a strong hope that, without regard to the wisdom or spirit or customs of the world, you would (as those at Publow did once)

Square your useful life below

By reason and by grace.

Hitherto you have not at all deceived my hope, and I am persuaded you never will. In some of the young ones you will undoubtedly find your labor has not been in vain. What they will be one cannot judge yet; therefore Solomon's advice is good, - 'In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand; for thou knowest not which shall prosper.'

It seems God Himself has already decided the question concerning dancing. He hath shown His approbation of your conduct by sending those children to you again. If dancing be not evil in itself, yet it leads young women to numberless evils. And the hazard of these on the one side seems far to overbalance the little inconveniences on the other. Therefore thus much may certainly be said, You have chosen the more excellent way.

I would recommend very few novels to young persons, for fear they should be too desirous of more. Mr. Brooke wrote one more (besides the Earl of Moreland), The History of the Human Heart. I think it is well worth reading; though it is not equal to his former production. The want of novels may be supplied by well-chosen histories; such as, The Concise History of England, The Concise History of the Church, Rollin's Ancient History, Hooke's Roman History (the only impartial one extant), and a few more. For the elder and more sensible children, Malebranche's Search after Truth is an excellent French book. Perhaps you might add Locke's Essay on the Human Understanding, with the Remarks in the Arminian Magazine. I had forgotten that beautiful book The Travels of Cyrus, whether in French or English.

On the 28th instant I hope to be at Bristol, and not long after at Keynsham. - I always am, my dear Miss Bishop,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Miss Bishop, In Keynsham, Somersetshire.

To Elizabeth Ritchie [5]

TRACWN, PEMBROKESHIRE, August 19, 1784.

MY DEAR BETSY, - I was a little surprised at a letter from Sister D----, in which she seems to approve of all that Mrs. Crosby has done; and speaks as if it were just and right and done in obedience to the order of Providence ! I could not help saying, 'There is but one advice which I can give her upon the present occasion: "Remember from whence thou art fallen. Repent, and do thy first works."'

Some years ago I committed a little company of lovely children to the care of one of our sisters at Haverford. [To Miss Warren in 1781. See letter of Oct. 19, 1779.] I was concerned yesterday to find she was weary of well-doing and had totally given up her charge. I hope, my dear Betsy, this will never be your case! You will never leave off your labor of love; though you should not always (not immediately at least) see the fruit of your labors. You may not immediately see Mrs. H - so established in grace as you desire and hope. But in this, as well as many other instances, in due time you shall reap if you faint not.

I have been often musing upon this, - why the generality of Christians, even those that really are such, are less zealous and less active for God When they are middle-aged than they were when they were young. May we not draw an answer to this question from that declaration of our Lord (no less than eight times repeated by the Evangelists), 'To him that hath,' uses what he hath, 'shall be given; but from him that hath not shall be taken away that he hath' A measure of zeal and activity is given to every one when he finds peace with God. If he earnestly and diligently uses this talent, it will surely be increased. But if he ceases, yea or intermits, to do good, he insensibly loses both the will and the power. So there is no possible way to retain those talents but to use them to the uttermost. Let this never be the case of my dear friend! Never abate anything of your diligence in doing good. Sometimes, indeed, the feeble body sinks under you; but when you do all you can, you do enough.

Remember in all your prayers,

Yours most affectionately.

To his Nephew Samuel Wesley [6]

[TRECWN,] August 19, 1784.

DEAR SAMMY, - As I have had a regard for you ever since you were a little one, I have often thought of writing to you freely. I am persuaded what is spoken in love will be taken in love; and if so, if it does you no good, it will do you no harm.

Many years ago I observed that as it had pleased God to give you a remarkable talent for music, so He had given you a quick apprehension of other things, a capacity for making some progress in learning, and (what is of far greater value) a desire to be a Christian. But meantime I have often been pained for you, fearing you did not set out the right way: I do not mean with regard to this or that set of opinions, Protestant or Romish (all these I trample under-foot); but with regard to those weightier matters, wherein, if they go wrong, either Protestants or Papists will perish everlastingly. I feared you were not born again; and 'except a man be born again,' if we may credit the Son of God, 'he cannot see the kingdom of heaven' except he experience that inward change of the earthly, sensual mind for the mind which was in Christ Jesus.

You might have thoroughly understood the scriptural doctrine of the new birth, yea and experienced it long before now, had you used the many opportunities of improvement which God put into your hand while you believed both your father and me to be teachers sent from God. But, alas! what are you now Whether of this Church or that I care not; you may be saved in either, or damned in either: but I fear you are not born again, and except you be born again you cannot see the kingdom of God. You believe the Church of Rome is right. What then If you are not born of God, you are of no Church. Whether Bellamine or Luther be right, you are certainly wrong, if you are not born of the Spirit, if you are not renewed in the spirit of your mind in the likeness of Him that created you.

I doubt you were never convinced of the necessity of this great change. And there is now greater danger than ever that you never will; that you will be diverted from the thought of it by a train of new notions, new practices, new modes of worship: all of which put together (not to consider whether they are unscriptural, superstitious, and idolatrous, or no) - all, I say, put together, do not amount to one grain of true, vital, spiritual religion.

O Sammy, you are out of your way! You are out of God's way! You have not given Him your heart. You have not found - nay, it is Well if you have so much as sought happiness in God! And poor zealots, while you are in this state of mind, would puzzle you about this or the other Church! O fools and blind! Such guides as these lead men by shoals to the bottomless pit. My dear Sammy, your first point is to repent and believe the Gospel. Know yourself a poor, guilty, helpless sinner! Then know Jesus Christ and Him crucified! Let the Spirit of God bear witness with your spirit that you are a child of God, and let the love of God be shed abroad in your heart by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto you; and then, if you have no better work, I will talk with you of transubstantiation or purgatory.

Meantime I commend you to Him who is able to guide you into all truth; and am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate Uncle.

To Robert Jones, of Fenmen Castle [7]

CARDIFF, August 27, 1784.

DEAR SIR, - If you go abroad, I would by no means advise you to go to France. That is no place to save expense; but it is the only place to make your sons coxcombs and your daughters coquettes. I cannot but think there is no country in Europe which would answer your design so well as Holland; and no place in Holland so well as Utrecht. It is within a day's journey of Helvoetsluys, whence you go directly by the packet for England. It is an healthful and a pleasant city, and less expensive than almost any city in France. You may have more or less company as you please. There are schools for your children; and if you should choose it, an university for your sons: and I could recommend you to some valuable acquaintance. I speak freely, because I have your interest at heart. Think of it, and send your thoughts to, dear sir,

Your affectionate servant.

To Joseph Taylor

BRISTOL, August 30, 1784.

DEAR JOSEPH, - On no account whatever can I excuse any preacher in the Connection from using his utmost endeavors for the preachers going to America. [Taylor was at Gloucester. Richard Whatcoat and Thomas Vasey were going to America, and needed help for their passage.] What is the furnishing a room or two in comparison of this especially for one who is well able to do it for herself! I wonder she should desire it or indeed accept of it 1 However, if this be done, the other must not be left undone. - I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ann Bolton

BRISTOL., August 31, 1784.

MY DEAR SISTER, - Many years ago Mr. Hall, then strong in faith, believed God called him to marry my youngest sister. [Kezia Wesley. See letter of Dec. 22, 1747.] He told her so. She fully believed him, and none could convince one or the other to the contrary. I talked with her about it; but she had 'so often made it matter of prayer that she could not be deceived.' In a week he dropped her, courted her elder sister, and as soon as was convenient married her. The disappointed one then found exactly the same temptations that you do now. But neither did she keep the devil's counsel. She told me all that was in her heart; and the consequence was that by the grace of God she gained a complete victory. So will you. And you will be the better enabled by your own experience to guard all, especially young persons, from laying stress upon anything but the written Word of God. Guard them against reasoning in that dangerous manner, 'If I was deceived in this, then I was deceived in thinking myself justified.' Not at all; although nature, or Satan in the latter case, admirably well mimicked the works of God. By mighty prayer repel all those suggestions, and afterwards your faith will be so much the more strengthened, and you will be more than conqueror through Him that loveth you. Whenever you find yourself pressed above measure, you must make another little excursion. While you help others, God will help you. This may be one end of this uncommon dispensation. You must not bury your talent in the earth. Wishing you more and more of that ' lovely, lasting peace of mind,' - I am

Yours most affectionately.

To Christopher Hopper [8]

BRISTOL, August 31, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - It was your part to write to me of the behavior of William Eels, particularly at Warrington, without waiting till I heard of it from so many other persons. Seeing I find I cannot overcome him by love, I am at length constrained to let him drop. Pray inform him he is no longer in the number of our itinerant preachers. I shall to-day send another preacher to supply his place in the Bolton Circuit. I have done all I could to save him; but it is. in vain; so I must at length give him up. - I am

Your affectionate brother and friend.

To William Pitt, First Lord of the Treasury [9]

BATH, September 6, 1784.

SIR, - Your former goodness, shown to one of my relations Mr. Thomas Ellison, [For John Ellison, see letter of Sept. 7, 1777; and for Captain Webb, May 25, 1782.] emboldens me to take the liberty of recommending to your notice an old friend, Lieutenant Webb.

On my mentioning formerly some of his services to Lord North, his lordship was pleased to order him 100 a year. But as it has since been reduced, it is hardly a maintenance for himself and his family. If you would be so good as to remember him in this or any other way, I should esteem it a particular favor.

Will you excuse me, sir, for going out of my province by hinting a few things which have been long upon my mind If those hints do not deserve any further notice, they may be forgiven and forgotten.

New taxes must undoubtedly be imposed; but may not more money be produced by the old ones For instance:

1. When the land tax is four shillings in the pound, I know some towns which pay regularly seven- or fivepence. Nay, I know one town where they pay one penny in the pound. Is there no help for this

2. As to window tax: I know a gentleman who has near a hundred windows in his house; he told me he paid for twenty.

3. The same gentleman told me, 'We have above an hundred men servants in this town, but not above ten are paid for.'

4. I firmly believe that' in Cornwall alone the King is defrauded of half a million yearly in customs. What does this amount to in all Great Britain Surely not so little as five millions. Is there no way of extirpating those smuggling villains, notwithstanding their Honorable or Right Honorable abettors

5. Servants of distillers inform me that their masters do not pay for a fortieth part of what they distil. And this duty last year (if I am rightly informed) amounted only to 20,000. But have not the spirits distilled this year cost 20,000 lives of His Majesty's liege subjects Is not, then, the blood of these men vilely bartered for 20,000 not to say anything of the enormous wickedness which has been occasioned thereby; and not to suppose that these poor wretches have any souls! But (to consider money alone), is the King a gainer or an immense loser To say nothing of many millions of quarters of corn destroyed, which if exported would have added more than 20,000 to the revenue, be it considered, 'Dead men pay no taxes.' So that by the death of 20,000 persons yearly (and this computation is far under the mark), the revenue loses far more than it gains.

But I may urge another consideration to you. You are a man. You have not lost human feelings. You do not love to drink human blood. You are a son of Lord Chatham. Nay, if I mistake not, you are a Christian. Dare you, then, sustain a sinking nation Is the God whom you serve able to deliver from ten thousand enemies I believe He is; nay, and you believe it. 0 may you fear nothing but displeasing Him!

May I add a word on another head How would your benevolent heart rejoice if a stop could be put to that scandal of the English nation, suicide!

The present laws against it avail nothing; for every such murderer is brought in non compos. If he was a poor man, the jurors forswear themselves from pity. If he was rich, they hope to be well paid for it. So no ignominy pursues either the living or the dead, and self-murder increases daily. But what help

I conceive this horrid crime might be totally prevented, and that without doing the least hurt to either the living or the dead. Do you not remember, sir, how the rage for self-murder among the Spartan matrons was stopped at once By ordering that the body of every woman that killed herself should be dragged naked through the streets of the city. Would it not have the same effect in England if an Act of Parliament were passed repealing all other acts and appointing that every self-murderer should be hanged in chains

Suppose your influence could prevent suicide by this means, and distilling by making it felony, you would do more service to your country than any Prime Minister has done these hundred years. Your name would be precious to all true Englishmen as long as England continued a nation. And, what is infinitely more, a greater Monarch than King George would say to you, 'Well done, good and faithful servant.'

I earnestly commit you to His care, and am, sir, your willing servant.

To his Niece Sarah Wesley [10]

BRISTOL, September 8, 1784.

DEAR SALLY, - You do well to let me know when there is anything wherein it is my power to serve you. But I find you are not much acquainted with poor folks. You must make a little money go a great way among them unless you had a thousand a year. In common I myself gave but sixpence or a shilling to one person (nay, and a nobleman generally does no more). The case must be very peculiar; otherwise I do not rise so high as half a crown, else my stock would soon be exhausted.

'Why is that agreeable young woman,' one asks me, 'so pale and sickly' Why, she eats trash; and while she does this, she can't have health. Is it not your case Do you eat trash - novels, romances, and the like How can you then expect spiritual health And I doubt you eat (that is - read) too much. - I am, dear Sally, Yours very affectionately.

To Mrs. Johnson [11]

BRISTOL., September 9, 1784.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I sincerely congratulate my good old friend John Johnson and you on your happy union; I am clearly persuaded that it is of God, and cannot doubt but it was His will, and gracious providence, which pointed out to you both the time and the persons. May you be a lasting blessing to each other!

But one thing has been much upon my mind. Both Brother Johnson and you love the work of God, and would not easily be induced to take any step that would hinder it; but if so, I advise you by no means to think of leaving Dublin. In the city, indeed, he cannot have health; but you may have an healthy abode in the skirts of it. Pray give my kind love to my dear Sister Freeman. Peace be with your spirits! - I am, my dear sister,

Your invariable friend.

To 'Our Brethren in America' [12]

BRISTOL, September 10, 1784.

1. By a very uncommon train of providences many of the' Provinces of North America are totally disjoined from their Mother Country and erected into independent States. The English Government has no authority over them, either civil or ecclesiastical, any more than over the States of Holland. A civil authority is exercised over them, partly by the Congress, partly by the Provincial Assemblies. But no one either exercises or claims any ecclesiastical authority at all. In this peculiar situation some thousands of the inhabitants of these States desire my advice; and in compliance with their desire I have drawn up a little sketch.

2. Lord King's Account of the Primitive Church [See heading to letter of Dec. 30, 1745, to Westley Hall.] convinced me many years ago that bishops and presbyters are the same order, and consequently have the same right to ordain. For many years I have been importuned from time to time to exercise this right by ordaining part of our traveling preachers. But I have still refused, not only for peace' sake, but because I was determined as little as possible to violate the established order of the National Church to which I belonged.

3. But the case is widely different between England and North America. Here there are bishops who have a legal jurisdiction: in America there are none, neither any parish ministers. So that for some hundred miles together there is none either to baptize or to administer the Lord's supper. Here, therefore, my scruples are at an end; and I conceive myself at full liberty, as I violate no order and invade no man's right by appointing and sending laborers into the harvest.

4. I have accordingly appointed Dr. Coke and Mr. Francis Asbury to be Joint Superintendents over our brethren in North America; as also Richard Whatcoat and Thomas Vasey to act as elders among them, by baptizing and administering the Lord's Supper. And I have prepared a Liturgy little differing from that of the Church of England (I think, the best constituted National Church in the world), which I advise all the traveling preachers to use on the Lord's Day in all the congregations, reading the Litany only on Wednesdays and Fridays and praying extempore on all other days. I also advise the elders to administer the Supper of the Lord on every Lord's Day.

5. If any one will point out a more rational and scriptural way of feeding and guiding those poor sheep in the wilderness, I will gladly embrace it. At present I cannot see any better method than that I have taken.

6. It has, indeed, been proposed to desire the English bishops to ordain part of our preachers for America. But to this I object; (1) I desired the Bishop of London to ordain only one, but could not prevail. [See letter of Aug. 10, 1780.] (2) If they consented, we know the slowness of their proceedings; but the matter admits of no delay. (3) If they would ordain them now, they would likewise expect to govern them. And how grievously would this entangle us! (4) As our American brethren are now totally disentangled both from the State and from the English hierarchy, we dare not entangle them again either with the one or the other. They are now at full liberty simply to follow the Scriptures and the Primitive Church. And we judge it best that they should stand fast in that liberty wherewith God has so strangely made them free.

To Christopher Hopper [13]

BRISTOL, September 11, 1784.

The information I received was not from - but from the body of leaders at Warrington and at Liverpool.... If Brother Eels behaves well now, I shall think no more of past things.

O exhort the believers to go on to perfection! Perhaps you have been sometimes a little wanting in this. - I am, dear Christopher,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To John Valton

BRISTOL, September 13, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - My last letters from Bolton gave me reason to hope that William Eels is greatly changed, and has for some time past given no offence, but quietly and carefully attended his circuit. [See previous letter. William Butterfield was born near Halifax, and became a preacher in 1784. He died in 1794.] Dr. Coke, on receipt of this information, wrote immediately to Macclesfield that Brother Butterfield might be sent forward, as we have great need of other preachers in the West.

You must sacredly abstain from holding watch-nights and from continuing any service above an hour at a time. It is not so much preaching and praying as preaching or praying long that hurts you. [See letter of Oct. 13 to him.]

Strongly advise Mr. Crosse [John Crosse had become vicar this year.] not to continue that wretched curate or lecturer at Bradford. Mr. Webster, a pious and learned man near Derby, wrote me just now to offer me his service. I could not receive, because my little salary would not keep a married man. I wish Mr. Crosse would take him. It might be good for both of them. - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

The Assistant [Samuel Bradburn. They went on the 18th.] here has given Dr. Coke the money. They expect to sail to-morrow.

To John Johnson [14]

BRISTOL, September 26, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - There may be a deeper design of Divine Providence in Sister Johnson's removal to Lisburn than at first appeared. Probably God is about to revive His work there; and being freed from the encumbrance of worldly business, she may be more at leisure to attend it. The more she exerts herself therein the more she will increase both in spiritual and bodily strength. See that you do not cramp but give her full scope for the exertion of all the talents which God hath given her.

Pray tell Sister Gayer [See letter of May 27, 1776.] I send her such a sister as she never had before. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Johnson

BRISTOL, September 26, 1784.

MY DEAR SISTER, - How wise are all the ways of God! Just before His providence called you to leave Dublin He sent Sister Rogers thither, in the same spirit of faith and love, to step into your place and prevent that scattering of the little flock which might otherwise have ensued; and if He sees it best, after you have finished the work He is preparing for you to do in Lisburn, you will see Dublin again. Meanwhile redeem the time, catch the golden moments as they fly, and continue to love and pray for, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Alexander Surer [15]

BRISTOL, October 3, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - Others consider the state of one or two circuits only; but I see and consider the state of the whole kingdom, and consequently can more easily judge in what circuit each preacher is likely to be useful. And I doubt not you will be useful in Dundee Circuit, provided you (1) strive to strike out into new places (and you know we may preach anywhere in Scotland without any danger of riots), and (2) constantly visit all the Society in course from house to house. To do this exactly will be a cross; but it will be worth your while to bear it.

The house at Arbroath should be settled as near the Conference plan as possible. The way of doing this in Scotland you may learn either from Mr. Smith in Aberdeen or Mr. Grant in Edinburgh. If Joseph Sanderson, Brother Bartholomew, and you act in concert, as was agreed when I was in Dundee, much good will be done; especially if you take care in spite of flesh and blood to keep up the morning meetings.

Mr. Watkinson at Edinburgh has now the charge of the books in Scotland, and will provide you with any that you want. He is the General Assistant for Scotland this year.

You should send me a full and particular account of that poor man at Inverness. I am to set out for London to-morrow. I hope Dr. Coke and his companions are now near half-way over the Atlantic. Although I dreamed last night (indeed at two o'clock this morning) that he came to me with a calm and placid countenance, but exceeding pale and his hair all wet. - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Richard Rodda

LONDON, October 13, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I have no objection to your having a third preacher in the circuit. [Birmingham had three preachers next Conference.] But what to say of John Oliver I know not. [Oliver married Elizabeth Booth. See Journal, iv. 70-1; and letter of Oct. 25, 1780.] He has been greatly to blame. But who can tell whether he be inwardly changed or not

Your proposal of building a new preaching-house I like well, provided it can be done without bringing any burthen upon the Conference. Complaint is made to me that the preaching is taken from Stourshead. If so, I am sorry for it. Peace be with you and yours! - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Rodda, At the Preaching-house,

In Birmingham

To John Valton [16]

LONDON, October 13, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - Dr. Davison's advice was good. I desire you would not offer to preach within these four weeks. I was suspended for near four months; but good is the will of the Lord. I suppose nettle tea is the best bracer in the world; and next that, elixir of vitriol (ten drops in a glass of water at ten or eleven in the morning). I am inclined to think that temptation is purely preternatural. I was strongly assaulted by it toward the close of my fever, when I could hardly set a foot to the ground. Many years ago I told you the case of Mr. Colley, who was just in your case. He married and died. And do we not know

All the promises are sure

To persevering prayer

I am ever yours.

To William Black

LONDON, October 15, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--A letter of yours some time ago gave me hopes of meeting you in England, as you seemed desirous of spending some time here in order to improve yourself in learning. [See letter of July 13, 1783.] But as you have now entered into a different state, [His marriage. See letter of May 11.] I do not expect we shall meet in this world. But you have a large field of action where you are without wandering into Europe. Your present parish is wide enough - namely, Nova Scotia and Newfoundland. I do not advise you to go any further. In the other Provinces [The United States.] there are abundance of preachers. They can spare four preachers to you better than you can spare one to them. [Freeborn Garrettson and James O. Cromwell were appointed to Nova Scotia at the end of the year. See letter of June 26, 1785 (to Garrettson).] If I am rightly informed, they have already sent you one or two; and they may afford you one or two more, if it please God to give a prosperous passage to Dr. Coke and his fellow laborers. Does there not want a closer and more direct connection between you of the North and the Societies under Francis Asbury Is it not more advisable that you should have a constant correspondence with each other and act by united counsels Perhaps it is for want of this that so many have drawn back. I want a more particular account of the Societies in Nova Scotia and Newfoundland. And I wish you would give me a full account of the manner wherein God hath dealt with you from the beginning. I am not at all glad of Mr. Scurr's intention to remove from Nova Scotia to the South. That is going from a place where he is much wanted to a place where he is not wanted. [Mr. Scurr, one of the Methodists in whose house Black preached, bought an estate near Norfolk in Virginia; but almost all his family fell victims to the diseases incident to the climate. He repented too late that he had not taken Wesley's advice. See Richey's Memoir, pp. 48, 128.] I think if he got 10,000 thereby, it would be but a poor bargain; that is upon the supposition, which you and I make, that souls are of more value than gold. Peace be with all your spirits! - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Sarah Baker [17]

NEAR NORWICH, October 27, 1784.

MY DEAR SALLY, - ...This will not and cannot be hindered long by the noise made by the beasts of the people. A person of Mr. Gwinnett's rank and influence is quite an overmatch for twenty petty rioters; even if they are encouraged underhand (as probably they are) by some wretched gentlemen, so called by the courtesy of England.

Throughout England, Wales, and Ireland each of our traveling preachers has three pounds a quarter....

To Mrs. Johnson

NORWICH, October 27, 1784.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I am now in great hopes that the work of God in Dublin will not much suffer by your removal, seeing He just at the time prepared Sister Rogers, who is both able and willing to tread in your steps.

You are now happily delivered from worldly cares; but it is to that end that your soul may be vacant for thoughts and cares of a nobler kind, how you may promote the work of God upon earth; your calling is not only to do good, but to do all the good which you possibly can. I doubt not but you will be of use to my friend Sister Gayer [See letter of Sept. 26.] in particular; she has much zeal, and 'let knowledge guide, not cool its fires.'

I hope Brother Johnson or you will send me an account of what occurs in Lisburn. - I am, my dear sister,

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Mr. Stonehouse [18]

Norwich, October 31, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I had some doubt concerning another person; but I have none at all concerning Dr. Bayley. I believe his eye is single, and that he has no other view than that of promoting the glory of God. If, therefore, the steward and trustees, and upon mature consideration, judge it expedient to invite Dr. Bayley to officiate every Sunday in the new chapel, I have no objection. It seems to me it might be productive of much good. - I am

Your very affectionate brother.

To Martha Chapman

NEAR LONDON, November 3, 1784.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I was a little disappointed at your not seeing me at Wallingford, as you used to do, before I went away. [He preached at Wallingford on Oct. 18, and left next morning at 7.30.] But I took it for granted there was some circumstance which I did not know; so I did not blame you, as I am not ready to condemn those I love.

I am glad you do not let go your confidence or lose the witness of your sanctification. Take care that you lose not any of the things that you have gained, but that you receive a full reward. Certainly it is a most uncomfortable thing to lose any part of what God hath wrought in us. I wonder how any that have lost the love of God can find any rest in their souls till they have regained it.

It was well for you that God did not suffer you to find rest in any creature. He had better things in store for you. One more degree of His love makes you large amends even in the present world for every other loss. - I am, dear Patty,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss Chapman, At Wailington,

Near Tetsworth, Oxfordshire.

To John Mason

NEAR LONDON, November 3, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - You judge fight. If the people were more alive to God, they would be more liberal. There is money enough, and particularly in Somersetshire; but they are straitened in their own bowels. When I complied with the desire of many and divided the. circuit into two, we were not a jot better. [Mason was in Devon, from which Somerset seems to have been divided in 1777.] You have one thing to point at-the revival and increase of the work of God. Get as many as possible to meet in band. Be exact in every part of discipline, and give no ticket to any that does not meet his class weekly. - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Henry Moore [19]

LONDON, November 4, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER,-I am glad you spoke freely to Mr. Collins. He is a good man, but not very advisable. [Brian Bury Collins. Edward Smyth was about to enter on his work at Bethesda Chapel, Dublin] If he should declare open war in England, he will do little or no harm. Mr. Smyth will not be fond of him if he preaches at Plunkett Street. There will not soon be a coalition between Arminianism and Calvinism. This we found even in Holland.

If James Rogers and you keep to the Church still, a few, I doubt not, will follow your example. We made just allowance enough for leaving the Church at the last Conference. - I am, with kind love to Nancy,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Crosby

LONDON, November 7, 1784.

MY DEAR SISTER,-To those who know the world, hardly anything that is wrong or foolish in it appears strange. Otherwise we should have thought it strange that so good a woman should take such a step. One would not have expected her to marry at all - at least, none but an eminent Christian. I am more and more inclined to think that there are none living so established in grace but that they may possibly fall.

The case of Hetty Rogers was widely different. [Miss Roe had married James Rogers. See letter of May 5, 1784.] I know more of it, beginning, middle, and ending, than most people in England. And I am clear that, first to last, she acted in all good conscience toward God and man. As things stood, it was not a sin for her to marry, but a duty; and to marry when she did. And never was any one woman so owned of God in Dublin as she has been already.

T. Brisco, I am persuaded, will do some good. [Thomas Briscoe was stationed in Leeds.] But his wife will do much more if you encourage her and strengthen her hands. Peace be with all your spirits! - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To John Valton

LONDON, November 13, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - Before I read your letter my first thought was, 'He will not recover with spring'; but a second immediately followed, 'Yes, at or before Candlemas.' And I trust so it will be. But in the meantime you ought undoubtedly to follow the directions of your physician. [See letters of Oct. 13 and Dee. 24 (to Thomas Taylor).] Only I wish you to add daily riding and the daily use of decoction of nettles, which is a nobler restorative than all the quinquiza in Peru, though in many cases that is an excellent medicine. I was confined from the 28th of November [1753.] till the end of February; the Hot Well water completed the cure.

You are now God's prisoner, and are learning that deep lesson, 'Be content to do nothing.' That God may teach you this and all things is the prayer of

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Jonathan Hern

LONDON, December 11, 1784.

DEAR JONATHAN, - I am heartily glad that our brethren have come to that noble resolution of enlarging the chapel, and also that by removing those pews they will make more room for the poor. I am persuaded this will be greatly for the advancement of the work of God.

But when they are about it let it be done thoroughly, in such a manner as will be a credit to them. - I am, with love to Sister Hem,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

I hope to see you in spring if I live.

To Mr. Hem, At the Preaching-house,

In Liverpool.

To Robert Blake () [20]

LONDON, December 24, 1784.

DEAR ROBERT, - You have reason to praise God, who has once more lifted up your head above the enemies of your soul. You never need be overcome again by the sin which did so easily beset you. Watch and pray, and you will no more enter into temptation.

You may show this to Mr. Myles, and he will give you a guinea on my account. - I am Your affectionate brother.

To Jeremiah Brettell [21]

LONDON, December 24, 1784.

DEAR JERRY,-If I live till the Conference, I shall have no objection to your begging in the Newcastle and Sunderland Circuits. But let them not build a scarecrow of an house like most of those in the North. Copy after that at Newcastle or Yarm, which is one of the prettiest in England. Look at the Minutes of the Conference with regard to the building of preaching-houses, and follow those advices. - I am, dear Jerry,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Brettell, At the Orphan House,

Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

To Thomas Taylor [22]

LONDON, December 24, 1784.

DEAR TOMMY, - In fifty years I have not met with six mothers who did not suffer their children to cry aloud - no, nor seriously endeavored it. So that I see no manner of need to caution them against that extreme.

To speak without reserve, I believe John Valton to be a better Assistant than either you or me. I believe he has more of the Spirit of God resting upon him and is more deeply devoted to God than almost any man or woman I know. And I do not think myself a jot better than him because I was born forty years before him. But I earnestly desire he would go to Bristol, and that you would supply his place as Assistant I am of opinion this is the only possible means of restoring his strength. - I am, with kind love to Sister Taylor, dear Tommy,

Yours affectionately.

I corrected the last part of the new Hymn-Book this morning. [A Collection of Pslams and Hymns for the Lord's Day. See Green's Bibliography, No. 378.]