To Mrs. Gallatin
Date: DUBLIN, July 19, 1750.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1750)
Author: John Wesley
---
MADAM, -- I did not receive your favor of June 24 before last night. By what means it was delayed I know not.

The reason why we refused for several years to license any of the places wherein we preached was this. [Wesley was reluctant to license his meeting-places; but the action of his opponents compelled such a course in many cases. See Journal vii. 339; Large Minutes 1770 Works, viii. 331.] We supposed it could not be done without styling ourselves Dissenters. But the Recorder of Chester showed us this was a mistake and procured a license for Thomas Sidebotham’s house in that county, although he (then as well as at all other times) professes himself a member of the Established Church. Since then we have licensed the house at Leeds and some others. The manner of doing it is this. At the Quarter Sessions a note with these or the like words is presented to the Justices: ‘A. B. desires his house in C. D. may be licensed for public worship.’ By order of the Bench this is registered, and sixpence paid to the clerk.

I cannot doubt but a blessing has attended Mr. Whitefield's ministry in Manchester. [Whitefield wrote from Manchester on June 8 to Lady Gertrude Hotham: ‘Thousands and thousands for some time past have flocked to hear the Word every day, and the power of God has attended it in a glorious manner.’] It is necessary for me to visit the Societies in the West of England, unless my brother can exchange with me. He proposed going into the North himself. If he visits Cornwall, I can go northward; and if I do, I shall certainly do myself the pleasure to wait upon Mr. Gallatin and you.

I expected Mr. Hopper here on Tuesday night. [Christopher Hopper went with Wesley to Ireland on April 6, 1750. He arrived in Dublin soon after this letter was written, spent a few days there, and sailed with Wesley for England on June 22. He reached Bristol on the 25th, and went thence to Newcastle. See Wesley’s Veterans i. 135; and letter of Feb. 6.] If he had come, we might have embarked together for Bristol, and he would have gone by Manchester to Newcastle. I do not know but he may do so still. I trust you will never be ashamed of the gospel of Christ, but that He who has supported you hitherto will do it to the end. - I am, madam,

Your most obedient servant.