To the Earl of Dartmouth LAMPETER, July 26, 1764.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1764)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY LORD,--Upon an attentive consideration, it will appear to every impartial person that the uniting of the serious clergy in the manner I proposed in a former letter [See letter of April 19.] is not a matter of indifferency, but what none can reject unless at the peril of his own soul. For every article therein mentioned is undeniably contained in the royal law, the law of love; and consequently the observance thereof is bound upon every man as indispensably necessary to salvation. It will appear, farther, that every single person may observe it, whether the other will or no. For many years I, for instance, have observed this rule in every article. I labour to do so now; and will by God's help, whatever others do, observe it to the end.

I rejoice that your Lordship so heartily concurs in doing what is in your power to promote a general observance of it. Certainly this is not possible to be effected by merely human means; but it seems your Lordship has taken one good step towards it by communicating it to several. I am persuaded, at the same time, your Lordship's wish is that it might take place everywhere. The same step I purpose to take, by sending to each of those gentlemen the substance of what I wrote to your Lordship, and desiring them to tell me freely whatever objections they have against such an union. As many of those as are grounded on reason, I doubt not will be easily answered. Those only which spring from some wrong temper must remain till that temper is subdued. For instance: First, 'We cannot unite,' says one, 'because we cannot trust one another.' I answer to your reason or understanding, No matter whether we can or no. Thus far we must unite, trust or not; otherwise we sin against God. Secondly, I can trust you; why cannot you trust me I can have no private end herein. I have neither personal hopes nor fears from you. I want nothing which you can give me; and I am not afraid of your doing me any hurt, though you may hurt yourself and the cause of God. But I cannot answer your envy, jealousy, pride, or credulity. As long as those remain, objections, however cut off, will spring up again like Hydra's heads.

If your Lordship has heard any objections, I should be glad to know them. May I be permitted to ask, Have not the objections you have heard made some impression upon your Lordship Have they not occasioned (if I may speak freely) your Lordship's standing aloof from me Have they not set your Lordship farther and farther off, ever since I waited upon you at [Blackheath] Why do I ask Indeed, not upon my own account. Quid mea Ego in portu navigo. [Terence's Andria, 111. i. 22. 'But now all is at your peril. I ride safe in the harbour.' Wesley adds Quid mea] I can truly say, I neither fear nor desire anything from your Lordship. To speak a rough truth, I do not desire any intercourse with any persons of quality in England. I mean for my own sake. They do me no good; and I fear I can do none to them. If it be desired, I will readily leave all those to the care of my fellow labourers. I will article with them so to do rather than this shall be any bone of contention.

Were I not afraid of giving your Lordship pain, I would speak yet still farther. Methinks you desire I should--that is, to tell you once for all every thought that rises in my heart. I will then. At present I do not want you, but I really think you want me. For have you a person in all England who speaks to your Lordship so plain and downright as I do who considers not the peer, but the man not the earl, but the immortal spirit who rarely commends, but often blames, and perhaps would do it oftener if you desired it who is jealous over you with a godly jealousy, lest you should be less a Christian by being a nobleman lest, after having made a fair advance towards heaven, you should Measure back your steps to earth again O my Lord, is not such a person as this needful for you in the highest degree If you have any such, I have no more to say, but that I pray God to bless him to your soul. If you have not, despise not even the assistance which it may please God to give you by, my Lord, Your Lordship's ready servant.