1773



To Mary Bishop

LONDON, January 12, 1773.

DEAR MISS BISHOP--I agree with you in your judgement of poor Nancy Dodd. But I would give her (as we say) a chance for life. Captain Webb is not sent to you as to the unawakened world. And perhaps he may do good to Rowland Hill by being abundantly more popular than him.

The Fourth Check has done abundance of good. It has confirmed many in the truth. It has settled many that were wavering, and convinced not a few who were just fallen into the strong delusion. But you must not think anything will convince a warm Calvinist--no, not an angel coming down from heaven.

In two or three hours I could teach you so much of grammar that you might go on without difficulty. ‘ True simplicity,’ Fenelon says, ‘ is that grace whereby the soul is delivered from all unprofitable reflections upon itself.’ I add, ‘ and upon all other persons and things.’ This is an unspeakable blessing; and it is the mere gift of God, not naturally annexed either to greatness or littleness of understanding. A single eye is a great help to this. Seek one thing, and you will be far less troubled with unprofitable reasonings.--My dear Miss Bishop, Your affectionate brother.

To Alexander Clark

LONDON, January 12, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--You see I was not mistaken. I told you Mr. Jaco would suit the people of Dublin [See letter of Aug. 10, 1772, to Clark]. But yet you do not take the matter quite. He is the right man, and he came in the right time. If he had come when I did, he could have done nothing; for the leaders were then out of their senses. And their distractions finished the life of Samuel Levick, one of the most sensible and amiable men breathing. But we recovered when Mr. Jaco came; so all things concurred for the recovery of the Society.

The sale of books depends upon the preachers. Unless they make a point of it, nothing is done.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Alex. Clark, At the New Room,

In Dublin.

To John Murray[1]

LONDON, January 15, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Now that you labor in Dublin, the conversation and advice of Mr. Jaco may be of great service to you. And it will be your wisdom to pick out the most serious and solid persons in the Society for your acquaintance. Now give yourself to prayer and reading and meditation, that your profiting may appear to all men.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Ann Bolton

LONDON, January 15, 1775.

Let me know, not more seldom than once a month (unless something extraordinary prevent), how you are yourself both as to your bodily health and with regard to your better part; and how the work of God goes on among your neighbors, particularly in any remarkable instance. Consider I am not likely to trouble you long: my day is far spent. I am therefore the more desirous to help you forward who are in the morning of life. Happy

if foreboding here your little stay,

You make your morning bear the heat of day.

[See Journal, i. 103; and letter of Nov.28, 1772.]

Do you find as near and as constant a communion with God as when I saw you last Are you now continually sensible of His loving presence and continually happy in Him Do you enjoy an uninterrupted spirit of prayer and a power in everything to give thanks Does not company or hurry of business ever hinder your attention to the presence of God Are you ‘ never hindered by any person or thing’ from running your course with even joy

Your affectionate brother.

To John Fletcher [2]

SHOREHAM, January, [15], 1773.

DEAR SIR,--What an amazing work has God wrought in these kingdoms in less than forty years! And it not only continues but increases throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland; nay, it has lately spread into New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, Maryland, and Carolina. But the wise men of the world say, ‘ When Mr. Wesley drops, then all this is at an end!’ And so it surely will unless, before God calls him hence, one is found to stand in his place. For * [Homer’s Iliad, ii. 204: ‘ The rule of many is not good; let there be one ruler.’]. I see more and more, unless there be one * [leader], the work can never be carried on. The body of the preachers are not united; nor will any part of them submit to the rest: so that either there must be one to preside over all or the work will indeed come to an end.

But who is sufficient for these things qualified to preside both over the preachers and people He must be a man of faith and love and one that has a single eye to the advancement of the kingdom of God. He must have a dear understanding; a knowledge of men and things, particularly of the Methodist doctrine and discipline; a ready utterance; diligence and activity, with a tolerable share of health. There must be added to these, favor with the people, with the Methodists in general. For unless God turn their eyes and their hearts towards him, he will be quite incapable of the work. He must likewise have some degree of learning; because there are many adversaries, learned as well as unearned, whose mouths must be stopped. But this cannot be done unless he be able to meet them on their own ground.

But has God provided one so qualified Who is he Thou art the man! God has given you a measure of loving faith and a single eye to His glory. He has given you some knowledge of men and things, particularly of the whole plan of Methodism. You are blessed with some health, activity, and diligence, together with a degree of learning. And to all these He has lately added, by a way none could have foreseen, favor both with the preachers and the whole people.

Come out in the name of God! Come to the help of the Lord against the mighty! Come while I am alive and capable of labor!

Dum superest Lachesi quod torqueat, et pedibus me



Porto meis, nullo dextram subeunte bacillo.

[Juvenal’s Satires, iii. 27-8: ‘ While Lachesis has some thread of life to spin, And I walk on my own feet, without the help of a staff’].

Come while I am able, God assisting to build you up in faith, to ripen your gifts, and to introduce you to the people. Nil tanti. What possible employment can you have which is of so great importance

But you will naturally say, ‘ I am not equal to the task; I have neither grace nor gifts for such an employment.’ You say true; it is certain you have not. And who has But do you not know Him who is able to give them perhaps not at once, but rather day by day: as each is, so shall your strength be.

‘But this implies,’ you may say, ‘ a thousand crosses, such as I feel I am not able to bear.’ You are not able to bear them now; and they are not now come. Whenever they do come, will He not send them in due number, weight, and measure And will they not all be for your profit, that you may be a partaker of His holiness

Without conferring, therefore, with flesh and blood, come and strengthen the hands, comfort the heart, and share the labor of Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Martha Chapman

LEWISHAM, January 19, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER, --If nothing unforeseen prevent, I shall be at Newbury on Monday, March 8. You should not be content with coming yourself, but bring Mr. and Mrs. Jacques with you.

I doubt not but you will see a still greater increase of the work of God at Watlington: only lose no time! Be instant in season, out of season! In due time you will reap if you faint not.

God gives the full assurance of hope sooner or later as it seemeth Him good. But the main point is, let your heart be whole with Him.

Let no false rival claim a part,

Nor sin disseize Him of His own!

--I am, dear Patty, Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Barton, Beverley [3]

LEWISHAM, January 21, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Consult with some experienced and sensible person upon every step you take. Concerning removing to Hull, you would do well to consult Thomas Snowden, or someone that lives there. It would be expedient, too, to take good advice before you enter upon any new business. Everything now is full of uncertainty and danger, during the amazing dearness of provisions. Hence most people have just money to buy food, and have nothing more to lay out. Yet the promise stands sure, ‘ Seek the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and these things shall be added unto you.’ Yea, surely the Lord will sooner make windows in heaven than suffer His truth to fail. Peace be with your spirits!--I am, my dear Jenny,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Pywell () [4]

LONDON, January 26, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--When the providence of God sent you to Salisbury, I was in hopes it would be of use to that poor widower. But let him now remember he cannot serve God by halves. Let him not think of being almost a Christian. If he would do anything to purpose, let him instantly throw off every weight and uniformly and steadily run the race that is set before him. Now let him be thoroughly obedient to the heavenly calling. Probably he will not have another call.

Your own soul will be quickened if you earnestly exhort believers without fear or shame to press after full salvation as receivable now, and that by simple faith. At all opportunities encourage Mr. Asbury to do this with all plainness Then the Lord will be with him wherever he goes, and he will see the fruit of his labor. I hope he gives you employment, that you have a band or two, if not a class also. A few hours you may likewise employ very profitably in visiting the sick. Redeem the time, be zealous! be active, and you will be more and more near to, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Samuel Bardsley

LONDON, January 29, 1773.

DEAR SAMMY,--If David Evans [The preacher at Macclesfield] is satisfied, all is well. You will not want work, nor a blessing upon it, if you are zealous and active. John Hallam is a good man, though a queer one; I am in hopes he will do good. There is a surprising willingness in almost every one that has answered the Circular Letter [See letters of Dec. 12, 1772, and Feb. 6, 1773.], which I hope is a token for good. Some of our preachers have asked ‘ Why will you refuse the help of the poorer members ‘ I answer, I do not refuse; though neither do I require it, for fear of distressing any. The little draft on the other side is for your mother [His mother was dependent on him. Wesley’s care for his preachers was unceasing. See letter of Aug. 5, 1771].--I am, dear Sammy, Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Bardsley, Mr. Toon’s, Hatter, Loughborough.

To Ann Bolton

LONDON, January 29, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--In obedience to that direction, ‘ In wickedness be ye children, but in understanding be ye men,’ I would in every respect both act and speak in the most accurate manner I could. And in speaking for God, particularly in public, we have a farther direction, ‘ If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God.’ Now, in the oracles of God there is no improper expression. Every word is the very fittest that can be. If, therefore, when I am speaking in pubic or private you should observe me drop any improper expression, or if you see any such in my writing (for I often write in hast), I shall be obliged to you for telling me of it. And this I should look upon as an additional proof of your real affection for me. ‘ I would fain cure my friend,’ says that excellent man Dr. Hammond [Dr. John Hammond (died 1617), physician to James I], ‘ not only of the plague, but even of warts.’ So I would do to you. I would fain remove the Last blemish which I may at any time observe either in your temper or words or actions. Deal you so with me and with all that you love. This is not wordly but heavenly wisdom.

I do not advise either Sammy Wells [Samuel Wells, then Assistant in Oxfordshire, and her brother Edward] or Neddy Bolton to use any harder words than are found in St. John’s First Epistle. But I advise both them and you to improve your understanding by every possible means. It is certain knowledge is an excellent gift of God when under the guidance of love.

I thank you and our other friends for your kind assistance. As soon as it is convenient you will answer my questions. Indeed, you leave nothing undone to oblige, my dear Nancy,

Yours most affectionately.

To Miss Bolton, In Witney,

Oxfordshire.

To Mrs. Savage

LONDON, January 30, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I rejoice to hear that the work of God does not decrease among you and that you find an increase of it in your own soul. Perhaps the best way to examine your own growth is, first, to consider whether your faith remains unshaken. Do you continually see Him that is invisible Have you as clear an evidence of the spiritual as of the invisible world Are you always conscious of the presence of God and of His love to your soul In what sense do you pray without ceasing Are you never in an hurry, so as to dim the eye of your soul or make you inattentive to the voice of God Next, consider your hope. Do you thereby taste of the powers of the world to come Do you sit in heavenly places with Christ Jesus Do you never shrink at death Do you steadily desire to depart and to be with Christ Do you always feel that this is far better Can you in pain and trouble rejoice in hope of the glory of God You may answer me at your leisure. I hope to see you in March [He was at Worcester on Tuesday, the 16th]; and am, dear Molly,

Yours affectionately.

To Christopher Hopper

LONDON, February 6, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I agreed last year (though contrary to my judgement that we would have no more weekly subscriptions. I purposed likewise in my own mind to concern myself with the debt no more. But upon reflection it seemed to me there was one way still -- namely, not to apply to the poor at all (though I would not reject any that offered), but to take the burthen on myself and try my personal interest with the rich. I began at London, where about five hundred pounds are subscribed. Afterwards I wrote to many in the country. Liverpool Circuit has subscribed about an hundred pounds; Bradford Circuit an hundred and thirty. It must be now or never. I do not know that I shall concern myself with this matter any more.

Till now we have never had a rational prospect of clearing the whole debt in one year [See letter of Jan. 29 to Samuel Bardsley]. Now it may be done. It certainly will if our brethren in other circuits do as those above mentioned have done. What I desire of you is to second the letters I have wrote, encouraging each man of property in your circuit to exert himself--at least, to send me an answer; this, you know, is but common civility. Now do what you can; and show that you, my old friend are not last and least in love towards

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Bennis [5]

LOND0N, February 12, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--When we draw near to God in His appointed ways, He will surely draw near to us. Pray remind Mr. Glassbrook of using the same means; then he and you will find the same blessing. Write to Waterford to Brother Slater, and encourage him to do there as he did at Limerick.

I can observe, by Mrs. Dawson’s manner of writing, a very considerable change in her spirit, more acquaintance with God, more humility, and more artless, simple love. I am much pleased that you visit so frequently. Continue to lead the simple, and God will give you more wisdom.

As long as you trust not in yourself, but in Him that has all power in heaven and in earth, you will find His grace sufficient for you and His strength made perfect in your weakness. Look to Him continually, and trust in Him, that you may increase with all the increase of God.--I am, my dear sister, Your ever affectionate brother.

To Ann Boron

LONDON, February 18, 1773. MY DEAR SISTER,--

In doing and bearing

The will of our Lord,

We still are preparing

To meet our reward.

It is very possible you may be ‘as sorrowful yet always rejoicing’; you may ‘suffer with Him,’ and yet in everything give thanks. You will as long as your whole heart and your whole life are devoted to God.

I am concerned on account of poor William Brammah [See letter of Nov. 28, 1772]. He cannot, he will not take advice. Spirituous liquors in all dropsical disorders are deadly poison. Indeed, they give a little present ease; but they lay the foundations for ten times more pain than that which they remove. I say once more (1) let him wholly abstain from these; (2) let him never scream, or preach too long; (3) let him eat early and light suppers; (4) let him never sit up till ten: and he will be as well able to preach in the morning as I am.

On Monday, March 8, I hope to be at Newbury; on Monday, 15th, at Stroud; on Tuesday, the 16th, at Worcester. You will contrive to be with me where you can.

I do not find any fault with you at present; only I am afraid you are not careful enough of your health. Otherwise I rejoice that I have confidence in you in all things.--I am, my dear Nancy,

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Philothea Briggs

LONDON February 20, 1773.

I often heard my own mother make the same complaint with you. She did not feel for others near so much as my father did; but she did ten times more than he did. You must labor to do so much the more, and pray that God may supply whatever is wanting. One degree of forgiveness is due to every one, though impenitent; still I love him as I love all men. But the other degree, whereby I should again receive him as a friend, is only due to one who says, ‘ I repent ‘--that is, convinces me that he does really repent and is entirely changed.

It is certain God has given you a talent, and I still think it ought to be used. I grant, indeed, to be hid and to be still is more agreeable to flesh and blood; but is it more agreeable to Him ‘ who hath left us an example that we might tread in His steps’ Yours affectionately.

To John Valton [6]

LONDON, February 23, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--In all stations you can have but one rule, your own conscience directed by the Word of God. Two or three dozen of the Instructions for Children (better than any spelling-book) and of the Tokens for Children you are welcome to. It would be extremely proper to receive a little of your patients toward the support of the school. If the chalk-workers do not come to hear, I advise you to suspend preaching among them for a month or two (possibly it may have a good effect). Do this the rather that you may have that time for yourself. Let it be sacred! Employ no part of it but in private exercises. Keep steadily to the, beginning from this time, and your soul will revive.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To John Valton, At Purfleet.

To Thomas Ball and Alexander Mather [7]

LEWISHAM, February 27, 1773.

The thing which I desire you to do is this, to see that an exact account be kept of all the books in Great Britain and Ireland printed and sold on my account. You comprehend how many particulars are contained under this general. To do this accurately will require much thought. But you will bear that burthen for God's sake and for the sake of

Your affectionate brother.

To Joseph Benson [8]

LONDON, March 2, 1773.

DEAR JOSEPH,--Certainly you cannot stir unless you are clearly satisfied of your call from God. An impression on the mind of another man is no rule of action to you. The reasons you give on the other side are weighty, and will not early be answered. At present you do seem to be in your place, and your labor will not be in vain. If you could transfer a night in a week from Newcastle to some new place, I think it might do well.--I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Moon

LONDON, March 2, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--He that governs all things wen for His own glory and for the good of them that love Him sees that it is best for you to be led in a strait and thorny way, and therefore permits it by His adorable providence. And you experimentally find that all these things are for your profit, that you may be a partaker of His holiness. Now, if hereby you attain but one degree more of the mind which was in Christ Jesus, what an immense gainer will you be in that day when the secrets of all hearts shall be revealed! Beside that, there is a reward for bearing as well as for doing His will; so that these light afflictions, which are but for a moment, work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. I hope you have not lost any of the little number that used to meet with you; and that the select society meets still and encourage one another to hold fast their confidence. Look up, and receive a fresh supply of grace!--I am, my dear sister, Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Emma Moon, At Mr. George

Merryweather’s, In Yarm, Yorkshire.

To Isaac Twycross

LONDON, March 6, 1773.

DEAR ISAAC,--If you are sober-minded and watch unto prayer, you may recover all you have lost. And you may likewise lay in a stock of learning which may be of use to you all your life. You have now greater need than ever to redeem the time. Drop a word in season whenever occasion offers, and it will not always fall to the ground.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Christopher Hopper [9]

LIVERPOOL, March 21, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--You have saved us an hundred pounds with regard to the house at Bradford. An hundred pounds less shall serve there, which may be applied to better purposes. So you may use your free thoughts on any other head (directing to Dublin) when you please. It is certain there has been little management at the Orphan House, or you would not have been a penny in debt. However, do all you can in your own way toward discharging the General Debt. I do not know where Peggy Dale could have made a better choice [She was married March 4 to Edward Avison. See heading to letter of June 1, 1765]. Peace be with your spirits!--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Barton, Hull

LIVERPOOL, March 22, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I am glad you are removed to Hull [See letter of Jan. 21.]. Probably Brother Barton and you will have an advantage with regard to business. Certainly you have the advantage of such fellow travelers in the way to heaven as you could not find at Beverley. Yet I do not doubt a few names are left there that will not easily be moved from their steadfastness. And when two or three such are gathered together, we know our Lord is in the midst of them.

Now make full use of the advantages you enjoy. And expect all the residue of the promises He has given you to taste of His pure love. What remains but that you should be filled therewith--I am, with love to Brother Barton, dear Jenny, Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Jane Barton, In Hembrough Square,

Silver Street, Hull.

To George Shadford [10]

[End of March] 1773.

DEAR GEORGE,--The time is arrived for you to embark for America. You must go down to Bristol, where you will meet with Thomas Rankin, Captain Webb, and his wife.

I let you choose, George, on the great continent of America. Publish your message in the open face of the sun, and do all the good you can.--I am, dear George,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Bennis

DUBLIN, April 1, 1773.

I fear you are too idle: this will certainly bring condemnation. Up, and be doing! Do not loiter. See that your talent rust not: rather let it gain ten more; and it will, if you use it [On March 16 she had written of herself as ‘the same poor, tottering, feeble creature’]. You are permitted to be in heaviness to humble and prove you yet more. Then you shall come forth as gold. If you love me, you will both write and speak freely to, my dear sister,

Your affectionate.

To Mrs. Woodhouse

DUBLIN, April 1, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--In such a case as you describe I do not see how you could well leave your brother. Where there is sickness, and especially an apprehension of death, we do not know how to break away from a friend.

If the house is not built at Misterton [Six miles south of Epworth, and frequently visited by Wesley] as I directed, the people there must not expect to see me any more. I shall take it as both an instance of injustice and of personal disrespect to myself. Mr. Fletcher [See letter of July 30], of Gainsborough (if I understand the thing), refused to receive our preachers any longer. If so, they were not to blame in quitting the place; for they could do no otherwise. I believe my wife is still at Bristol, where I left her when I set out for Ireland.

The preaching-house at Bradford in Yorkshire brings in, one way or other, near fifty pounds a year. The debt upon it is not much above five hundred pounds; so that in a few years it may clear its own debt [See letter of March 21]. But I know of no such other instance in England. I know not of one house beside that can even clear its own current expenses, much less yield an overplus to pay debt. If any preacher talks thus, he is either a fool or a knave: he has lost either his wits or his honesty. Besides, what must such an one think of me Does he think I am such a blockhead as to take all these pains for nothing to pay debts which would shortly pay themselves And how came any single preacher to know the state of all the houses in Great Britain so much better than I do I hope John Peacock [Peacock, the second preacher in Lincolnshire West, became an itinerant in 1767; after a useful and diligent ministry, he retired in 1796, and died at Burlington (Bridlington) in 1803] does not talk after this rate. Mr. Lee has raised near an hundred pounds in Leeds Circuit. He has common sense, and feels the burthen of

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse, Owston Ferry.

To Philothea Briggs

April 8, 1773.

One cannot be saved from evil tempers without being all devoted to God; neither can a soul be all devoted to God without being saved from sin: but it is often exceeding hard to judge of others, whether they are saved from all evil tempers, and whether they are all devoted to God or not; yea, it is hard to judge of ourselves--nay, we cannot do it without the anointing of the Holy One given for that very purpose. Out of darkness God will command light to shine. Be plain and open to all; then, whether they are sincere or insincere, you will have a conscience void of offence. You find all things work together for good. They must while the hairs of your head are all numbered.

Yours affectionately.

To Thomas Wride

TULLAMORE, April 15, 1773.

DEAR TOMMY,--Six pounds lie in John Johnson’s hands. Let it be paid into the hands of Ezekiel Saunderson and Jas. Stewart. Let the forms and desk at Belfast be finished immediately. Out of what remains you may pay Brother Stewart what is due to him from the Society--I suppose about thirty shillings.--I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ann Boron [11]

CORK, May 2, 1773.

I have, indeed, often grieved on your account, but it was for your sufferings. And yet I constantly saw the wise end of your sufferings, that you might be more largely a partaker of His holiness. Indeed, you have reason to be satisfied with our Lord’s disposal of you, and to praise Him for all His dispensations. Even those circumstances which are not joyous but grievous yet work together for good. At first this does not always appear; but in a little while light springs out of darkness. It is no wonder you should many times be at a loss how to express what you feel. The language of men is too weak to describe the deep things of God. But sometimes one word may express much. One of our preachers that sometime since labored in this town, though full of faith and love, could find no utterance till he just said ‘Peace! Peace!’ and died [This may have been John Dillon, who labored at Cork in 1786 and died in 1770].

You make me amends for not answering me before on that head by doing it so distinctly now. That is the danger, lest on such an occasion we should not be so fully recollected. But in this and all things His grace is sufficient for us--sufficient to make us more than conquerors, especially when we give ourselves to prayer for this very thing before the trial comes.

In most parts of this kingdom there is such a thirst after holiness as I scarce ever knew before. Several here in particular who enjoy it themselves are continually encouraging others to press after it. And two of our traveling preachers who for some years disbelieved it are now happy witnesses of if. I hope you do not forget poor Ally Eden. She has need of comfort; so we will not reprove her.
Yours most affectionately.

To Mary Bishop

LIMERICK, May 9, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--So he [‘Mr. Hadden’; in pencil, in another hand] is in peace. It has in all ages been allowed that the communion of saints extends to those in paradise as well as those upon earth as they are all one body united under one Head. And

Can death’s interposing tide

Spirits one in Christ divide

But it is difficult to say either what kind or what degree of union may be between them. It is not improbable their fellowship with us is far more sensible than ours with them. Suppose any of them are present, they are hid from our eyes, but we are not hid from their sight. They no doubt clearly discern all our words and actions, if not all our thoughts too; for it is hard to think these walls of flesh and blood can intercept the view of an angelic being. But we have in general only a faint and indistinct perception of their presence, unless in some peculiar instances, where it may answer some gracious ends of Divine Providence. Then it may please God to permit that they should be perceptible, either by some of our outward senses or by an internal sense for which human language has not any name. But I suppose this is not a common blessing. I have known but few instances of it. To keep up constant and close communion with God is the most likely means to obtain this also.

Whatever deigns a man has, whatever he is proposing to do, either for himself or his friends, when his spirit goes hence all are at an end. And it is in this sense only that ‘ all our thoughts perish.’ Otherwise all our thoughts and designs, though not carried into execution, are noted in His Book who accepts us according to our willing mind and rewards intentions as well as actions. By aiming at Him in all things, by studying to please Him in all your thoughts and words and actions, you are continually sowing to the Spirit; and of the Spirit you will reap life everlasting.--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Philothea Briggs

SLIGO, May 20 1773.

With regard to you, I see an adorable providence You will reap huge profit from this affliction. True, at present it is not joyous but grievous; but it will bring forth glorious fruit. Your part is to be still. Know that the Lord reigneth, that all is under His wise disposal. Without His leave none can speak and none can hear. Trust Him farther than you can see Him. The waves cannot come an hair’s breadth farther than His sovereign wisdom wills. Keep one point in view, to do and suffer His will; then nothing can hurt you.

To Hannah Ball [12]

NEAR ENNISKILLEN, May 23, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I thank you for your comfortable letter. Right ' precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.' Where there is any eminent instance of mercy in this kind, it is almost always a means of convincing and converting others. It is a season one would wish to improve to the uttermost; for then the windows of heaven are open.

It cannot be doubted but your heaviness was owing in part to diabolical agency. Nay, and Satan sometimes by God’s permission weakens the body. Nevertheless we are even in that weakness to use natural means just as if it was owing to natural causes. I believe it would be of use if you took a cupful of the decoction of burdock (sweetened or unsweetened) both morning and evening. I never remember its having any ill effect on any person whatsoever.

Our point is to improve by everything that occurs--by good or ill success so called, by sickness or health, by ease or pain; and this we can do through Christ strengthening us. We know chance is an empty sound: the Lord sitteth on His throne, and ruleth all things well. Love Him; trust Him; praise Him.--My dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To James Creighton [13]

ENNISKILLEN, May 24, 1773.

REVEREND SIR,--Your important questions deserve a father answer than I have now leisure to give. I therefore beg your acceptance of two or three little tracts [I could not here procure ant other Copy of the Appeal than this dirty one] wherein they are answered at large.

(1), (2), (3) The Methodists, so called, observe more of the Article, Rubrics, and Canons of the Church than any other people in the three kingdoms. They vary from none of them willingly, although the English Canons were never established by law. (4) They maintain that no man can be saved by a faith which is without works: that (5) faith does not necessarily produce good works; (6) neither universally and instantaneously: (7) that no man can be saved without his own endeavors: (8) that a man is not entirely passive in the business of salvation. (9) Revelation is complete: yet we cannot be saved unless Christ be revealed in our hearts; (10) neither unless God cleanse the thought of our hearts by the inspiration of His Holy Spirit.

May God enable you perfectly to love Him and worthily magnify His holy name.--I am, reverend sir,

Your brother and servant for Christ sake.

To Richard Locke

LONDONDERRY, May 28, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Your letter reached me yesterday. I am sorry for William Sparks; but pride must have a fall. T. Johnson has better work. He never sent down John Pawson [Pawson was at Bristol] (nor would he have been sent) on any such errand. They are two pious men. I am not without hope that Joseph Jones will recover, if he is at present a little out of the way. Sam. Stevens is a poor man indeed! 'Tis well if he has not fallen to rise no more.

Mr. Furz [John Furz, Assistant at Brecon. See heading to letter of Oct. 23, 1759] is a man of an unblameable behavior; but he must not look to escape slander more than his neighbors. It is your part to go straight forward, neither looking to the right hand nor to the left. Possibly, if I live till autumn, I may call upon you at Burnham! Press on for the whole image of God.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To his Brother Charles LONDONDERRY, May 30, 1773.

DEAR BROTHER,--I have had no letter from any of our preachers to stop Mr. Davis coming to help us [See letter of July 10, 1772, to his brother]. But I easily foresaw there would be objections to the largeness of the salary. If a few of our brethren would asset herein, that matter will be quite easy. I really believe his heart is with us and that God will make him useful to the people. He is given to us, and we should take care to be as useful to him as we can.

Nay, but you have intended again and again to stand by me at this and that Conference, and then left me to stand by myself [Charles Wesley was keeping aloof from the work of Methodism, to his own loss and his brother’s. See letter of Dec. 15, 1772]. It is certain we two can turn the tide. I alone can only stem it.

I have been in two mobs since I came into Ireland, one in the South and one in the North. The Protestant mob was far the worst. But I am still in an whole skin [For the riot at Waterford on April 25, and the more serious one at Enniskillen on May 24-5, see Journal, v. 503-4, 507-9]. Durn vivimus vivamus [‘Whilst we live let us live’]. Peace be with you and yours. Adieu.

To Miss Cummins [14]

CLONMAIN, June 8, 1773.

Do not think it strange, my dear Miss Cummins, that I write to you; the regard I have for you constrains me. It is possible I may see you no more: I am not young, and you are not healthy; nay, and the ten thousand gates of death stand continually open to every child of man. Will you take it ill, then, that I tell you freely you have been much upon my mind Ever since I saw you first, I felt an earnest desire that you should be wise and happy; that you should make the best of a few uncertain days, and improve the time which flees away as a shadow and knows not to return. Believe me, my dear maid, what are called pleasures and diversions can give you no solid happiness. They are poor, empty, insignificant trifles; and you was made for better things. You are not only to consider yourself as having an agreeable person; you are an immortal spirit. You was made a little lower than the angels, that you may live with them for ever. You are come forth from God, and are returning to God as fast as a few fleeting years can carry you. But I am in pain for you: I am concerned lest you should forget this, like other pretty, giddy, unthinking creatures. What if it should be said of you,--

At dawn poor Stella danced and sung;

The gazing youth around her bowed:

At night her passing-bell was rung;

I saw, and kissed her in her shroud!

O make haste! Be a Christian, a real Bible Christian now! You may say, ‘ Nay, I am a Christian already.’ I fear not. (See how freely I speak.) A Christian is not afraid to die. Are not you Do you desire to depart and to be with Christ A Christian is happy in God. Are you Can you say,

I noting need, beneath, above,

Happy, happy in Thy love

A Christian (though perhaps he never heard the name of a Methodist) has power over all sin. Have you If not, it is certain you may; for God is no respecter of persons. Whatsoever He has given to any other He is willing to give to you also. O let your heart cry to Him, ‘ What I know not teach Thou me. Let me not die before I long to die! Give me the wisdom that sitteth by Thy throne, and reject me not from among Thy children!’ To His care I tenderly commit you; and am, my dear Miss Cummins,

Yours affectionately.

If you love me, hear Mr. Saunderson preach.

To Ann Bolton

LIVERPOOL, July 7, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You will not be sorry to hear that God has once more brought me safe to England, and that I hope to be with you at Witney (coming from Birmingham) on Thursday, the 15th instant. Probably I shall preach abroad at half-hour after six. You know I am, my dear Nancy,

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Mary Bosanquet

LONDON, July 17, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--By the blessing of God I reached this place an hour ago in nearly as good health as I left it. I am glad my friend [His wife] was at your house; she would receive no hurt, and possibly a little good. I think Tho. Mitchell [The three preachers at Birstall in 1772 were Thomas Taylor, Thomas Mitchell, and John Nelson. In 1773 Mitchell remained. See letter of Aug. 15, 1751, about the riotous mob at Wrangle, where he was thrown into a pond] at least may spend another year in Birstall Circuit. There did seem to be a providential call for what was done at Harrogate! I am glad you find your soul unencumbered. You are just in your place. Stand fast in glorious liberty!--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss Bosanquet, At Morley Common,

Near Leeds.

To Ann Bolton [15]

LONDON, July 18, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Your late conversation was exceeding pleasant to me. I had sometimes been almost inclined to think that your affection was lessened; but now I believe it is not. I trust your love is not grown cold. This gave me much satisfaction, though I could not but be concerned at seeing you so encumbered with worldly business. Surely it will not be so always. But God's time is best!

Two or three of those little things I have sent you :--

With peaceful mind thy race of duty run:

God nothing does, or suffers to be done,

But what thou wouldst thyself, if thou couldst see

Through all events of things as well as He.

Let thy repentance be without delay:

If thou defer it to another day,

Thou must repent for a day more of sin,

While a day less remains to do it in.

Nor steel nor flint alone produces fire,

Nor spark arises till they both conspire:

Nor faith alone, nor works without it right;

Salvation rises when they both unite.

If gold be offered thee, thou does not say,

‘To-morrow I will take it, not to-day’:

Salvation offered, why art thou so cool

To let thyself become to-morrows fool

Prayer and thanksgiving is the vital breath

That keeps the spirit of a man from death:

For prayer attracts into the living soul

The life that fills the universal whole;

And giving thanks is breathing forth again

The praise of Him who is the life of men.

Two different painters, artists in their way,

Have drawn religion in her full display.

To both she sat: one gazed at her all o’er;

The other fixed upon her features more.

Hervey has figured her with every grace

That dress could give; but Law has hit her face.

The specious sermons of a learned man

Are little else than flashes in the pan.

The mere haranguing upon what they call

Morality is powder without ball:

But he who preaches with a Christian grace

Fires at your vices and the shot takes place.

Faith, Hope, and Love were questioned what they thought

Of future glory, which Religion taught.

Now Faith believed it firmly to be true,

And Hope expected so to find it too:

Love answered, smiling with a conscious glow,

Believe! Expect! ! I know it to be so.’

Go on in this humble, gentle love, that you may abound therein more and more. Aim at nothing higher than this. And may the God of love still possess you whole, and guide your every thought and word and work. Continue to pray for Your affectionate brother.

To John Fletcher

LEWISHAM, July 21, 1773.

DEAR SIR,--It was a great satisfaction to me that I had the opportunity which I so long desired of spending a little time with you [Wesley got to Madeley on Friday, the 9th, preached twice in the church on Sunday, and left on Monday. See Journal, v. 517], and I really think it would answer many gracious designs of Providence were we to spend a little more time together. It might be of great advantage both to ourselves and to the people who may otherwise soon be as sheep without a shepherd. You say, indeed, ‘Whenever it pleases God to call me away, you will do all you can to help

them.’[See letter on Jan. 15 to him.] But will it not then be too late You may then expect grievous wolves to break in on every side, and many to arise from among themselves speaking perverse things. Both the one and the other stand in awe of me, and do not care to encounter me. So that I am able, whether they will or no, to deliver the flock into your hands. But no one else is. And it seems this is the very time when it may be done with the least difficulty. Just now the minds of the people in general are on account of the Checks greatly prejudiced in your favor. Should we not discern the providential time Should we stay till this impression is worn away Just now we have an opportunity of breaking the ice, of making a little trial. Mr. Richardson [John Richardson, Wesley’s clerical assistant. Conference met on Aug. 3 in London] is desirous of making an exchange with you and spending two or more weeks at Madeley. This might be done either now or in October, when I hope to return from Bristol. And till something of this kind is done you will not have that * [Affection] for the people which alone can make your labor light in spending and being spent for them. Methinks ‘tis pitty we should lose any time. For what a vapor is life!

Could not you spare a few days to be with us at the Conference Probably it would be a means of strengthening you.--I am, dear sister, Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse

LEWISHAM, NEAR LONDON, July 30, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I am sorry for poor Mr. Fletcher [See letter of April 1 to her]; but still more for poor Mary Meggot [Was she the widow of Samuel Maggot See Journal, v. 465; and letter of Feb. 10, 1783], of whom I expected [better] things. She may now keep the room for her new guests, for certainly we shall have nothing to do with them. The point they aim at is this--to make Calvinists. Our point is to make Christians. They endeavor to convert men to the dear Decrees; we to convert them to God. In every place they have used their whole strength in opposition to us. But you and many more will not be tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine.

Stand fast in the truth which you have received, and be not removed from the hope of the gospel.

I desire the building [The chapel at Misterton] may be finished without delay. Follow after all the fullness of the promises.

My wife joins with me in love to you, with, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse, At Mr. Hutton’s,

In Epworth, Near Thorne, Yorkshire.





To Joseph Benson [16]

LEWISHAM, July 31, 1773.

DEAR JOSEPH,--I am glad you have preached so much abroad: this will everywhere do most execution. Some time since, I promised you to Billy Thompson for his fellow laborer the ensuing year; and you will have no cause to repent of it, for his heart (as well as yours) is in the work.

Mr. Hopper desires to spend another year in the Newcastle Circuit. I refer it to him whether it would not suffice to have preaching at Newcastle five nights in a week.

‘God has made practical divinity necessary, and the devil controversially.’ [See heading to letter in Dec. 1751 to Bishop Lavington]. Sometimes we must write and preach controversially, but the less the better. I think we have few if any of our travelling preachers that love controversy. But there will always be men de pste [Titus i. 11:’whose mouths must be stopped.’]--Antinomians and Calvinists in particular. By our long silence we have done much hurt both to them and the cause of God.--I am, dear Joseph, Your affectionate brother.





To Christopher Hopper,

LEWISHAM, July 31, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I believe what you desire is for the glory of God, and have therefore no objection to your spending! another year in the Newcastle Circuit. I am glad you have preached on the Ballast Hills. Follow the blow, and you will soon see the fruit. Billy Smith [Hopper stayed at Newcastle in 1773. William Smith married Mrs. Wesley’s daughter, and was a leading Methodist layman in Newcastle] will nearly supply your place at the Conference, and you will find full employment where you are.

We have money in hand both for Dundee and Edinburgh [See letter of Aug. 7]; but I do not think right that a shilling more should be given to either till the houses are settled in another manner. I am sorry so much has been given already.--I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Savage,

LEWISHAM, July 31, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I did receive a letter from you while I was in Ireland; but whether I answered it or no I cannot tell. It gives me pleasure to hear that you still stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free, and that His blessed work still continues to widen and deepen among you. It will do so as long as you walk in love and strive together for the hope of the gospel. As God has made Mr. Wolfe an instrument of promoting this among you, I think it will be well for him to stay another year [Francis Wolfe and Richard Seed were the preachers in Gloucestershire. Wolfe was appointed to Bristol by the Conference of 1773, and Seed to Derryshire].

When I was at Worcester [He was there on March 16], a young woman had just joined the Society who had her fortune in her own hands. Is she with you still And is she married or single I have a particular reason for asking. How has Mr. Seed behaved Is he serious, zealous, active And has God prospered his word--I am, my dear sister, Your affectionate brother.

To Christopher Hopper [17]
LONDON, August 7, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Before any more money is paid for Dundee house security must be given that the house shall be settled according to our plan as soon as the debt upon it is paid.

As to Edinburgh house, you say, ‘ If they pay the interest and the out-rent, it is no mater whether you pay one shilling more.’ No matter! What becomes then of the Preaches' Fund Blessed committee, who lent near two hundred pounds out of it!

We have gone a few steps farther towards a general trust; but that matter goes on very slowly. You are to cure Robert Swan of preaching too long. We all judge it best that the four preachers should follow one another through the whole circuit.--I am, with love to Sister Hopper,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ann Bolton

LONDON, August 8, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--It gives me much pleasure to observe that you do not lose your simplicity. You seem not only to retain simplicity of spirit (the great thing), but likewise of sentiment and language. God has indeed dealt very graciously with you from the beginning hitherto. He has led you tenderly by the hand from grace to grace and from faith to faith; and you may well say,--

The mercy I feel

To others I show;

I set to my seal

That Jesus is true.

Go on in His name, and earnestly exhort all that know Him to press forward to the mark. Encourage them to aspire after full salvation--salvation into the whole image of God. Beware you do not decline in your zeal for this; let no prudence, hinder you. Let prudence ‘ guide not cool its fires.’

Still let it for His glory burn

With unextinguishable blaze;

And trembling to its source return,

In flames of love and joy and praise.

But I had forgotten that I am in haste. I hope Mr. Severn [William Severn, just admitted on trial, and appointed to Gloucestershire. See letter of June 23, 1776] will be a blessing to many. He is alive to God. This day I set out for Bristol, and thence to Cornwall; but I hope to, be at Bristol again on the 28th instant. Life is short! We have need to improve every moment! Adieu!

To Hannah Ball

BRISTOL, September 1, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I was glad you had an opportunity of spending a few days in London, and also that you was not ashamed to declare what God had done for your soul This is the way, not only to receive an increase of grace yourself, but likewise to impart it to others. Even this kind of simplicity, the speaking artlessly, as little children, just what we feel in our hearts, without any reasoning what people will think or say, is of great use to the soul. I hope you will be able to speak to Mr. Saunderson [Hugh Saunderson, Assistant of the Oxford Circuit] without the least reserve. He has tasted of the pure love of God, and should be encouraged to hold it fast. But I wonder a little how some of our friends at Witney come to take exception at honest John Wittam [Wittam, who had come from Armagh, was second preacher]. He is an Israelite indeed; not much polished but serious, solid, and sensible. I preferred him before two or three young men (who offered for Oxfordshire), because I have seen the proof of him.--I am, my dear sister,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Ball, At Mr. Ball’s, Laceman, In High Wycombe, Bucks.

To Philothea Briggs

BRISTOL, September 8, 1773.

MY DEAR PHILLY,--We have the clearest proof, when we have to do with children, that 'the help which is done upon earth God doeth it Himself.' All our wisdom will not even make them understand, much less feel the things of God. The Instructions for Children [See letter of Feb. 23] contain the best matter that we can possibly teach them. But nothing less than the finger of God can write it on their hearts. On Saturday night He sent another shower of grace upon our children at Kingswood [See Journal, v. 525]. Sixteen of them were deeply affected, and I think thirteen found peace with God. Four or five of them were some of the smallest we had, not above seven or eight years old.

Although there may be some use in teaching even very young children to 'say their prayers daily,' yet I judge it to be utterly impossible to teach any to 'practice prayer' till they are awakened. For what is prayer but the desire of the soul expressed in words to God, either inwardly or outwardly How, then, will you teach them to express a desire who feel no desire at all When, therefore, Madame Guyon talks in that manner, it often makes me afraid that both she and her teacher, Archbishop Fenelon, talked by rote of the things they knew not. Both of them had an amazing genius, but I doubt full little experience. It is exceeding certain neither his nor her writings are likely to do us any solid service. We have all the gold that is in them without the dross, which is often not only useless but dangerous. Let you and I keep the good old way:

In doing and bearing

The will of our Lord,

We still are preparing

To meet our reward.

Go on steadily in this path: there is none better. By patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory and honor and immortality. You shall reap if you faint not.--I am, my dear Philly,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Bennis [18]

BRISTOL, September 10, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--When two or three agree to seek God by fasting and prayer, it cannot be that their labor should be in vain; especially if they add their endeavors to their prayers for the increase of the work of God. I hope you will encourage every preacher to visit the whole Society in order from house to house: dinner or drinking tea does not answer the same intention. This may and ought to be done over and above.

I thought you had been in more danger of being hurt by worldly abundance than worldly care. But we cannot stand under either one or the other unless we be endued with power from on high, and that continually from hour to hour, or rather from moment to moment. Yet distress is not sin; we may be grieved, and still resigned. And this is acceptable with God. In all these cases you should remember that observation never to be let slip,--

With even mind thy course of duty ran:

God nothing does, or surfers to be done,

But thou wouldst do thyself, if thou couldst see

The end of all events as well as He!

[See letter of July 18].

--My dear sister, adieu. Your affectionate brother.

To Joseph Benson

BRISTOL, September 10, 1773.

DEAR JOSEPH,--If Mr. Thompson [The Assistant in Edinburgh. See letters of July 31 and Oct. 23 to Benson] consents, all is well. The more you preach abroad, both in England and Scotland, the better. Only take care not to do more than you can do, not to go beyond your strength. And keep to the plain, old Methodist doctrine laid down in the Minutes of the Conference. At Trevecca you were a little warped from this; but it was a right-hand error. You will be buried in Scotland if you sell your mare and sit still. Keep her, and ride continually. Contrive (you and Mr. Thompson) how this may be. Sit not still at the peril of your soul and body! Mr. Fletcher [John Fletcher] ought to have received their thanks.--Dear Joseph, adieu!

Do all you can for poor Scotland, and write how things are there.

To Francis Wolfe [19]

BRISTOL, September 15, 1773.

Franky, are you out of your wits Why are you not at Bristol

To the Countess of Huntingdon [20]

BRISTOL, September 16, 1773.

MY DEAR LADY,--Your last favor gave me unspeakable satisfaction and occasioned much thankfulness to God. Indeed, I could not look upon it in any other view than as an answer to many prayers which I have been led to offer up from time to time, particularly when I have heard of your Ladyship’s meeting with any difficulty or affective providence of any kind. I have then let my heart melt within me, and have longed to tell your Ladyship either by word or writing what part I have in your sufferings. This lay the weightier upon me when I considered how few are now left below of those who many years ago rejoiced to see the undaunted fervor with which your Ladyship left the quiet pleasant shades to come abroad and espouse in open day the cause of a despised Saviour. What a blessing is it that His love and guardian care have preserved you from those early days in known and unknown dangers, and carried you through honor and dishonor, evil report and good report! O may you still (like that man of God that is gone before us into Abraham’s bosom)

Stand like an iron pillar strong

And steadfast as a wall of brass!

It is extremely remarkable that the gentleman of the province should undertake to build the Orphan House. Surely this is the Lord’s doing! Will your Ladyship permit me just to mention a thought which has passed through my mind: might it not be for the glory of God to adhere in part to the original design --to have some orphans there (a glorious charity) as well as an academy I just take the liberty to mention this, and leave it to your Ladyship’s mature consideration.

Wishing your Ladyship a continual increase of faith and loving zeal, I remain, my dear Lady,

Your Ladyship’s most affectionate servant.

To John Bredin

BRISTOL, September 18, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--Observe and enforce all our Rules exactly as if you were in England or Ireland. By foolish complaisance our preachers in Scotland have often done harm. Be all a Methodist; and strongly insist on full salvation to be received now by simple faith.--I am

Yours affectionately.

To John Valton [21]

BRISTOL, September 18, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--When Dr. Monkley attended that good man Mr. Colley [Benjamin Colley, a native of Tollerton in Yorkshire. He joined the Methodists in 1761. See letters of May 2, 1767, and Oct. 13, 1784 (to Valton)] in his consumptive disorder, he said one day, 'I can't imagine how it is none of my medicine have any effect.' After pausing he asked one standing by, ‘ Is this gentleman lately married’ On her answering, ‘ About four months since,’ he replied, ‘ Then he is a dead man.’

Finding Sam. Levick in Dublin of a consumptive habit, having been married some months, I advised him to leave his wife there and ride with me round the kingdom. But she persuaded him to remain with her; in consequence of which in a few months more she buried him [See letter of Jan. 12 to Alexander Clark].

Humanly speaking, this would be the case with you if you marred during your present state of health. I think you ought at all events to take a journey of a thousand miles first.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Valton, At Purfleet, Essex.

To Mary Bishop [22]

BRISTOL, September 19, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--It is certainly most profitable for us to have a variety of seasons. We could not bear either to be constantly in storms or constantly in a calm; but we are not certain, we cannot judge what proportion of one or the other is best for us. So it is well we are not left to our own wisdom, that we do not choose for ourselves. We should make strange work; but we know He that chooses for us orders all things well.

There are excellent things in most of the Mystic writers. As almost all of them lived in the Romish Church, they were lights whom the gracious providence of God raised up to shine in a dark place. But they do not give a dear, a steady, or an uniform light. That wise and good man Professor Francke [August Hermann Francke (1663-1727) was professor at Halle 1692, and founded his famous Orphanage there in 1695] used to say of them, ‘ They do not describe our common Christianity, but every one has a religion of his own.’ It is very true: so that if you study the Mystic writers, you will find as many religions as books; and for this plain reason, each of them makes his own experience the standard of religion.

Madame Guyon was a good woman and is a fine writer, but very far from judicious. Her writings will lead any one who is fond of them into unscriptural Quietism. They strike at the root, and tend to make us rest contented without either faith or works. It is certain the Scripture by ‘ prayer’ almost always means vocal prayer. And whosoever intermits this for any time will neither pray with the voice nor the heart. It is therefore our wisdom to force ourselves to prayer-- to pray whether we can pray or no. And many times while we are so doing the fire will fall from heaven, and we shall know our labor was not in vain.--I am, my dear Miss Bishop,

Yours affectionately.

PS.--It is on Wednesday sennight (the 29th inst.) that I purpose to preach at Bath (in my return from Bradford) at twelve o’clock.

To John Valton [23]

BRISTOL, September 20, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--My first advice to you was, Preach the gospel everywhere. But you shrank back. I have now another proposal to make to you, which requires one that has an honest heart and much industry. Come and take charge of the books at London. I think it would take you up six or seven hours a day. And you would have opportunity of preaching every Sunday and (if you chose it) frequently on weekdays. I would give you either five-and-twenty pounds a year with your board and a room in the Foundery, or fifty pounds without it. If you incline to accept of it, send me word immediately, and we can talk father. I will speak to no one else till I hear from you.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Valton, At Purfleet, Essex.

To Philothea Briggs

BRISTOL, September 29, 1773.

MY DEAR PHILLY,--Your own experience may give an answer to your question. You did yourself enjoy a foretaste of that constant communion with God, though it did not continue long [See letter of May 8, 1780]. And you know it was given you in a moment. It was the same case with Sally Ryan, with Nancy Bolton, and with all those whom I have known that are now enabled to pray without ceasing. To every one of them that blessing was given in an instant. So it will be given to you again; although probably you will find a strong hope first which will incite you to cry out,

Big with earnest expectation,

See me sit at Thy feet,

Longing for salvation.

Grace in one sense will make an things new. And I have sometimes known this done to such a degree that there has been no trace of the natural temper remaining. But generally the innocent natural temper does remain, only refined, softened, and cast into the mould of love.

I make no doubt but Charles Perronet would be as well as me in six months if he would punctually follow Dr. Cadogan’s rule [William Cadogan (1711-97), physician to London Founding Hospital 1754]. But without steady, unintermitted exercise he never can have health. On Saturday se'nnight I hope to be in London.--I am, my dear Philly,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Phil. Briggs, At Miss March’s, In Worship Street,, Moorfields, London.

To John Valton

BRADFORD (UPON AVON), September 29, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--All is well. Persons enough offer for the place [To take charge of Wesley’s Book-Room in London. See letters of Sept. 20 and Oct.20] who know it is easier by far than that of a merchant’s clerk. Am in no haste to change. Probably I shall do nothing more till I come to London. You was present at the Conference, and heard what was then said concerning unqualified preachers. I think Rd. Packer [Richard Packer came to London from Northamptonshire, was verted at the Foundery, and became a prosperous builder in Mile End. See Stevenson’s City Road Chapel, pp. 477-8] is as weak as most. Yet he has been often useful; and, what is stranger, in several places they are fond of him!--I am

Your affectionate brother.

I hope to be in town this day se'nnight.

To Certain Proprietors of East India Stock [24]

[End of September 1773.]

TO ALL WHO HAVE HAD EAST INDIA STOCK LATELY TRANSFERRED TO THEM, IN ORDER TO QUALIFY THEM FOR VOTING AT THE ELECTION FOR DIRECTORS ON WEDNESDAY NEXT.

GENTLEMEN AND LADIES,--Do you know what the oath is which you are to take before you will be admitted to vote It is as follows: ‘ I, A B, do swear that the sum of five hundred pound, or more, of the capital stock of the United Company of Merchants of England trading to the East Indies doth at this time belong to me in my own right, and not in trust for any other person or persons whatsoever. So help me God.’

Do not you hereby call upon God either to help you or to send down His curse upon you as your oath is true or false

If you consider this, can you take a false oath can you call God to witness to lie

Are you not doing this if the stock standing in your name is not your real and true property

Have you not given a note of your hand for it, which is to be returned upon your retransferring the stock

Are you either benefited or hurt by the rise or fall of the stock If not, can you say you are proprietor at all

Does it alter the case, though a third person lend you the money to pay for that stock which you are so to retransfer Still you nether gain nor lose by the rise or fall of the stock: a plain proof that you have no property therein.

Weigh this in time; and do not, to oblige a friend, bring the guilt of perjury on your own soul.

To James Barry [25]

BRISTOL, October 1, 1773.

DEAR JAMES,--Sister Haughton is an upright woman and desires to please God. I advise her rather to throw her high head into the fire than to pain one of the little ones. She will have no fewer scholars. God will make her amends.

My mother never would suffer one of her children to 'go to a dancing-school.' But she had a dancing-master to come to her house who taught all of us what was sufficient in her presence. To this I have no objection. If I had convenience, I would be glad to have all our preachers taught, even by a dancing-master, to make a bow and to go in and out of a room.--I am, with love to Sister Barry, dear James,

Your affectionate friend and brother

To Hannah Ball

LONDON, October 4, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--The being sealed by the Spirit in the full sense of the word I take to imply two things: (1) The receiving the whole image of God, the whole mind which was in Christ, as the wax receives the whole impression of the seal when it is strongly and properly applied; (2) The full assurance of hope, or a clear and permanent confidence of living with God in glory. Either of these may be given (and sometimes is, though not frequently) separate from the other. When both are joined together, then I believe they constitute the Seal of the Spirit. But even this admits of various degrees: a degree of it I trust you have. Work and pray! Do and suffer the whom will of Him that calleth you! And He will supply whatever is wanting.--I am, my dear sister, Your affectionate brother.

To Christopher Hopper

LONDON, October 7, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--I came hither last night. For two or three weeks I was not well, but am now recovering daily [See letter of Oct 17].

In town or country Brother Swan [Swan was two years at Haworth after leaving Newcastle. See letter of Oct. 7] must conclude in an hour, or else he cannot be a travelling preacher after this year. His daughter must go to service: you observe well, it will not be safe to keep her at the Orphan House. I am glad to hear that you have but one circuit; that will be most for the glory of God.

The case of Brother Hilton [See letters of Oct 9, 1767, and Nov. 12, 1773, to Hopper] exceedingly delicate. Shall I tell you my thoughts freely They are the same with yours. I think he is pursuing what will never come to pass. But which of us can convince him of this How easily we believe what we desire! However, it is the part of a friend to try: you love him well, and you will give him still more cause to love you if you can persuade him to drop the whom affair and put it out of his head for ever.

That is a good point carried, the persuading the classes to meet at their own houses. The fruit of this will soon appear both by the increase of their grace and their number. If I was in Joseph Benson’s place, I would not be buried at Dunbar--no, nor at Edinburgh, nor any one place whatever. Who hath required this at his hands The Lord go before him! Why should we not call sinners to repentance in every market town [See letter of Oct. 23].

Peter Jaco [Peter Jaco, now in Dublin, was tall and handsome. He dies in 1781. See letter of Sept. 3, 1756, n, to Samuel Walker] would willingly travel. But how Can you help us to an horse that will carry him and his wife What a pity we could not procure a camel or an elephant!

I do not despair of the salvation of a lunatic.--I am, with love to Sister Hopper,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

PS.--My wife sends her love; she has her old companion the gout.

To Samuel Sparrow

WINDMILL HILL, October 9, 1773.

DEAR SIR,--On Scripture and common sense I build all my principles. Just so far as it agrees with these I regard human authority.

God could not command me to worship a creature without contradicting Himself: therefore, if a voice from heaven bade me honor a creature as I honor the Creator, I should know this is the voice of Satan, not of God.

The Father and the Son are not ' two beings,' but ' one.' As He is man, the Father is doubtless 'greater than the Son'; who as such 'can do nothing of Himself,' and is no more omniscient than omnipresent. And as man He might well say, ' I ascend to my Father and your Father,' and pray to His Father and His God. He bids His disciples also to pray to Him, but never forbids their praying to Himself. I take this to be the plain, obvious, easy meaning of our Lord’s words, and the only one wherein they are reconcilable with an hundred passages both of the Old and New Testament.

With regard to original sin (I mean the proneness to evil which is found in every child of man), you have supposed it in the essays with which you favored me [See letter of Feb. 26, 1772, to him], almost from the beginning to the end: and you have frequently asserted it; although you could not assert it in plainer terms than the honest, unbiased heathens have done: Vitiis nemo sine nascitur [Horace’s Satires, I.iii.68: ‘No one is born without vices’]. Hence Omnes natura proclives ad libidinem [Terence’s Andria, I. i. 51. ‘All, by nature are prone to evil desire’]. Hence Dociles imitandis turpibus et pravis omnes sumus [Juvenal’s Satires, xiv. 41: ‘All are apt to imitate shameful and vicious things’].

But I believe nothing can set this point in a more clear and strong light than the tract which I beg you to accept of [Fletcher’s Appeal]. Accept likewise the best wishes of, dear sir,

Your affectionate servant.

To Mary Bosanquet

LONDON, October 17, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I was laid up for a week or two last month; but have now nearly recovered my strength [See letter of Oct. 7]. If I live till spring and am as well as I am now, I shall move northward as usual. I am glad you have begun that little meeting for prayer. It will not be without a blessing. T. Lee [Thomas Lee, the Assistant at Birstall] may have half a dozen of the Instructions for Children [See letter of Feb. 23] to give as he sees needful.

If you undertake the care of the books, I shall be under no farther concern about them; for I know what you do you will do in earnest. I wish you would immediately cause all the books which are at Birstall to be removed to your house [See letter of Nov. 17]. You will then be so kind as to send me a catalogue of them and of the books which you would have sent down. All those who keep my books for the future I shall desire to state their accounts once a month. But I do not know what you send me the bills for.--I am, my dear

Your affectionate brother.

To John Valton

WITNEY, October 20, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--When all circumstances are considered, I think you place the matter upon the right footing. If you are promoted, and if you recover your health (and in order to which you should ride every day), then it seems you will be called to marry [See letter of Sept. 18 to him].--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse [26]

LONDON, October 22, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Arthur Kershaw is exceedingly happy in God, and I believe he will be an useful preacher. Two months longer he must stay Northampton; then he may make a trial in Epworth Circuit. In the meantime William Thom may labor there, of whom Mr. Rhodes gives me a good account. I am afraid Lady Huntingdon’s preachers will do little good wherever they go. They are wholly swallowed up in that detestable doctrine of Predestination, and can talk of nothing else. I am glad to hear so good an account of Mr. Woodhouse. We have to do with a God that heareth prayer. If you seek Him with your whole heart, He cannot withhold any manner of thing that is good.--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Woodhouse, At Mr. Hutton’s

In Epworth, Near Thorne, Yorkshire.

To Joseph Benson [27]

LONDON, October 23, 1773.

DEAR JOSEPH,--I wish every one of our preachers who goes to Scotland were of the same mind with you. We are not called to sit still in one place; it is neither for the health of our souls nor bodies. Billy Thompson [See letter of Sept. 10] never satisfied me on this head, not in the least degree. I say still we will have traveling preachers in Scotland or none. The thing is fixed; the manner of effecting it is to be considered. Now set your wit to this: find out the t p [‘The manner’]. How shall this mater be accomplished You did not do well in selling your horse [See letter of Sept. 18, 1774],' and thereby laying another bar in the way. Though I am (by the exquisite negligence of my late bookkeeper [See letters of Sept. 20 and Nov. 6] ) a thousand pounds worse than nothing, I would have spared a few pounds to have eased that burthen. However, you must do as you can. Our preachers shall either travel there as in England, or else stay in England.--I am, dear Joseph, Yours affectionately.

To Martha Chapman

NEAR LONDON, October 27, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Now is the hour and the power of darkness. But

In vain does Satan rage his hour;

Beyond his chain he cannot go.

And I doubt not most of those that are scattered abroad in the dark and cloudy day will again be gathered in by our good Shepherd. It is right, therefore, to be concerned for them; but not to sorrow as those without hope, seeing the Lord hath not forgotten to be gracious. You that are spiritual, labor to restore them that are fallen, in the spirit of meekness; and your labor shall not be in vain. Meantime in your patience possess your own soul. All things shall work together for your good, shall bring you nearer to God. Your affectionate brother.

To Mary Bishop

LONDON, October 31,1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I have laid your letter so carefully by that I cannot find it. But as I am going into Norfolk early in the morning, I will not stay till I come back before I write.

There is upon the whole nothing new under the sun. But that violent jealousy among your young women is utterly a new thing among the Methodists; I have known nothing like it in the three kingdoms. And yet I do not know that they have either less sense or less grace than others of their age or sex. But this is one proof among a thousand that if God leave us for a moment to ourselves, there is no folly into which our subtle adversary may not drive the wisest of the human race. Yet I do not see that you are at liberty to give up your charge on this account. It seems you should simply lay the whole affair before Mr. Pawson and Allen [John Pawson was a Supernumerary in Bristol; John Allen, who became an itinerant in 1766 and died in 1810, was Wesley’s Assistant]. They are candid and impartial judges, prejudiced neither on one side nor the other; and I believe they will be able to judge on every emergence what steps are the most proper to be taken.

One reason, it may be, why this was permitted, was to confound the pride of your understanding. You had been accounted a woman of sense and commended for it. And our nature readily receives such commendation. But see how little your sense avails! You can do no more herein than if you was an idiot. ' The help that is done upon earth He doeth it Himself,' whether with or without instruments. Let your whole soul be stayed upon Him for time and eternity. I am always wen pleased to hear from you. And you can speak freely to, my dear Miss Bishop,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Bishop, Near the Cross Bath,

In Bath.

To Joseph Benson [28]

LONDON, November 6, 1773.

I came to London. The rest of the week I made what inquiry I could into the state of my accounts (at the Room). Some confusion had arisen from the sudden death of my bookkeeper; but it was less than might have been expected.

To Christopher Hopper LONDON, November 12, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--We see not how the work can continue, and we saw not (beforehand) how it could ever come to what it is now. All we can say is, It is the Lord’s doing. And He must see to His own work.

You must contract your sails if you live another year, and not take so large a compass. Unless you should pass into a warmer climate, Northumberland is cool enough.

I am glad you spoke freely to Brother Hilton [See letters of Oct. 7, 1773, and Aug. 18, 1775; and for Erskine, April 24, 1765]. It would do immense mischief; humanly speaking, it would be the greatest stumbling that was ever in Edinburgh yet. And truly there need be no more while good Dr. Erskine lives.

But the preachers in Scotland never had their wages yet--I mean not from Scotland. We are obliged to supply them every year.

English people we certainly may cure. We have the staff in our own hands. Therefore mend them or end them. Let them meet in band and class where you appoint or nowhere. Stand your ground. Kill or cure....





To Thomas Wride

LONDON November 12, 1773.

DEAR TOMMY,--The matter is short; I see no reason yet why you should remove from York Circuit [Wride was second preacher at York. See letter of Aug. 29, 1774, to him]. Do all the good you can there. Observe and enforce all our Rules. Exhort all the believers to go on to perfection and be gentle to all men.--I am Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mary Bosanquet

LONDON, November 17, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I am afraid the assortment of books which is at Birstall house is exceeding imperfect. As soon, therefore, as we receive the account from you, we shall send down such small books as are wanting and such as are most called for and most useful [See letter of Oct. 17].

My health seems now to be as well established as for many years. And this we are sure of--health we shall have if health be best. What have we to do but to make the best use of all our talents, and according to our power to glorify Him with our bodies and with our spirits--I am, my dear sister, Yours affectionately.

To Hannah Ball

LONDON, November 18, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--You never did anything to disoblige me yet, nor anything (that I remember) which I wished undone. At all hazards you should prevent any misunderstanding between Mr. Saunderson and Brother Westrup. The best way is for them to talk calmly and freely together and reason the matter over. Then I think both of them will agree to what shall appear best upon the whole.

Those fears are not from Him that calleth you. Give no place to them any farther than as they stir you up to prayer. A trying time there may be, and yet a growing time: this we frequently find. You should in any wise speak freely to Mr. Saunderson and tell him whatever you think or fear. Discipline must be kept up; only I would make an exception with regard to that gentlewoman you mention. Be more and more zealous and active for God!--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.





To Mrs. Bennis [29]

SHEERNESS, December 1, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Some time since, when I heard Brother Bennis had got very rich, I was in fear for you lest the world should again find a way into your heart and damp your noblest affections. I am not sorry that you have not that temptation. It is most desirable to have nether poverty nor riches; but still you cannot be without temptation unless you would go out of the world. How far that sudden emotion which you speak of is a preternatural dart from Satan and how far it springs from your own heart it is exceeding hard to judge. It is possible it may be nether one nor the other, but a mere effect of the natural mechanism of the body, which has no more of good or evil than blushing or turning pale. But whether it be natural or preternatural, it is grievous to one whose conscience is tender. We may therefore undoubtedly pray against it. And surely He can and will deliver us. Come, therefore, boldly to the throne of grace, and find grace to help in time of need.

You will find full employment in Waterford: I believe that Society wants your exertions. See, therefore, that you be not weary of well doing.--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Thomas Rankin [30]

LONDON, December 4, 1773.

DEAR TOMMY,--Captain Webb does not willfully tell lies, but he speaks incautiously; so that we must make large allowance for this whenever he speaks, otherwise we shall be deceived. But where is he now, and what is he doing I fear his wife will have need of patience.

If you suffer any one to remain a leader who does not stay at the Society, that will be your fault. Improper leaders are not to be suffered upon any account whatever. You must likewise deal honestly with the Societies, whether they will hear or whether they will forbear. Only do not tell them continually 'You are dead,' for that will surely make them so. Endeavor to quicken their hope by speaking strongly and at the same time cheerfully. Exhort them to look for better days--yea, such as they have never seen yet.

I judge George Shadford will do good at New York. So would Robert Williams for a little time.

You have hurt yourself by giving way to reasoning, and if you don’t take care you will hurt others. There has been good, much good done in America, and would have been abundantly more had Brother Boardman and Pilmoor continued genuine Methodists both in doctrine and discipline. It is your part to supply what was wanting in them. Therefore are you sent. Let Brother Shadford, Asbury, and you go on hand in hand, and who can stand against you Why, you are enough, trusting in Him that loves you, to overturn America. Go on in His name and in the power of His might, and all your enemies shall be found liars.

Read David Brainerd again, and see your pattern! He was a good soldier of Jesus. Ah! but he first suffered, and then saw the fruit of his labor. Go and do likewise!

I have written to Robert Williams and given him leave to print the Notes on my account; nothing on his own. I never knew he did till afterward.

Be of good courage! Strengthen yourself in the Lord, and you will see good days, and will send better news to, dear Tommy, Your affectionate friend and brother.





To Mrs. Savage

LONDON, December 11, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--Whatever was reported concerning Brother Wolfe [Francis Wolfe had removed from Gloucestershire to Bristol] it did not come to my ears. I never heard anything of him but good; nor do I know of anything laid to his charge. I advise you to speak very freely to Mr. Collins [William Collins, Assistant in Wiltshire South. See letter of May 6, 1774, to her]. He has much experience in the things of God, and has likewise seen so much of trouble and temptation that he knows how to sympathize with those that are tempted.

By stirring up the gift of God that is in you, you will find a constant increase of inward life. Labor to be more and more active, more and more devoted to Him. Be ready to do and suffer His whole will; then will He

Sink you to perfection’s height,

The depth of humble love.

--I am, dear Molly, Your affectionate brother.

To Ann Bolton

LONDON, December 12, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--How easily we believe those we love! I believe it was as you say, and that it was only business, not want of affection, which kept you so long from writing. And so long as that business is not your choice, but providentially laid upon you, it is certainly best for you as bring ordered by unerring Wisdom.

But I am startled at what you speak of Laving Witney [See letter of Jan. 20, 1774]. I do not well understand it. Where can you have the same opportunities of personal improvement (Unless it were at London or Bristol.) Where can you have so large a field of action so many opportunities of improving others What advantages have you reason to expect which will countervail this loss A design of so important a kind should be long and thoroughly weighed. I can conjecture only one advantage--more leisure, more freedom from hurry of business. That you will have no living souls near you, that all are dark and dead, is surely no reasonable motive for going anywhere. I am afraid lest you should be too hasty, lest you should run before the Spirit. Remember our dear friend Ally Eden [See letters of Feb. 11, 1772, and March 27, 1781]. She took one step without consulting any friend (save those under her own roof), and how dearly has she repented it! But perhaps you may give me reasons I am yet unacquainted with, so I suspend my judgement. I want to find you exactly right in all things. I wish you to be wise and good as an angel! I cannot tell you how near you are to, my dear Nancy,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Bolton, In Witney,

Oxfordshire.









To Thomas Carlill [31]

LONDON, December 17, 1773.

DEAR TOMMY,--I was a good deal out of order when I was at Bristol [In September. See Journal, vi. 3], both with a sore throat and with the rheumatism; but am now, by the blessing of God, just as well as I was before. Put an end to smuggling at all hazards.

You should eat a small crust of bread every morning, fasting, and I think it will cure you of your gravel.--I am, dear Tommy, Your affectionate brother.





To Mrs. Pywell

LONDON, December 19, 1773.

MY DEAR SISTER,--It is plain the wisdom and power of God order all things well. He has brought you to the right place [She had been in Stenton near Derby in 1772. See letters of Jan. 22, 1772, and Dec. 29, 1774], and you have no need to be careful for anything, but only in everything to make your requests known unto Him with thanksgiving. I am glad to hear that Mrs. K--y’s love does not grow cold. One part of your work is to stir up all who have believed to go on to perfection and every moment to expect the full salvation which is received by simple faith. I am persuaded your bring where you are will be for good. Speak to all about you, and spare not. God will bear witness to His own truth.--I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Walter Churchly

LONDON, December 23, 1773.

MY DEAR BROTHER,--You and I love one another; therefore we speak freely. (1) 'They have thrown themselves on Providence.' Not at all. From a very low state most of them had thrown themselves into plenty and honor. (2) ' It is possible they may do good.' True; but it is probable they may do harm. They have everywhere done our Societies all the harm they could. (3) 'The place they now have is a cold place.' I see no good of their having any at Hay. The land is wide enough. (4) They have no inclination to peace. (5) 'Our neighbors will see our professions true.' I do not profess any coalition with Calvinism. I see the mischievousness of it more and more. (6) 'Their preaching would not lessen the number of our hearers.' Indeed it would if the people minded what they say. And besides, it would puzzle and perplex those that still hear us, and probably set many an one’s sword against his brother. (7) 'They do not intend Antinomianism.' But they preach it continually. (8) 'And our people will not hear Calvinists.' Indeed they will if they play with the fire. You forget my brother’s verses:

What my soul does as hell-fire reject,

A Pope--a Count--a leader of a sect.

[Poetical Works of J. and C. Wesley, vi. 62].

I am of no sect, but the Church of England.

If James Barry or Stephen Proctor [The preacher at Brecon] is faulty in the Article you mention, tell them of it, and I am persuaded they will mend. You will do well to remind them in particular of teaching the children and visiting the sick. I believe they will take it kindly.--I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Samuel Sparrow

LONDON, December 28, 1773.

DEAR SIR,--Upon the head of Authority we are quite agreed. Our guides are Scripture and reason. We agree, too, that preachers who ' relax our obligation to moral virtues, who decry holiness as filthy rags, who teach men that easy, palatable way to heaven, of faith without works,' cannot easily fail of having a multitude of hearers; and that therefore it is no wonder if vast numbers crowd Blackfriars church and the chapel at the Lock [William Romaine was Rector of St. Anne’s, Blackfriars, from 1766 to 1795. Martin Madan was Chaplain of the Lock Hospital, 1750-80; he published Thelyphthora, in favor of polygamy, in 1780].

There is also too ' just a ground for charging the preachers both there and at the Tabernacle with grievous want of charity.' For most of them flatly maintain all who do not believe as they believe are in a state of damnation, all who do not believe that absolute decree of election, which necessarily infers absolute reprobation.

But none were induced to hear my brother and me or those connected with us by any such means as these: just the reverse. We set out upon two principles: (1) None go to heaven without holiness of heart and life; (2) whosoever follows after this (whatever his opinions be) is my 'brother and sister and mother.' And we have not swerved an hair’s breadth from either one or the other of these to this day.

Thus it was that two young men without a name, without friends, without either power or fortune, 'set out from College with principles totally different from those of the common people,' to oppose all the world, learned and unlearned; to 'combat popular prejudices' of every kind. Our first principle directly attacked all the wickedness, our second all the bigotry, in the world. Thus they attempted a reformation, not of opinions (feathers, trifles not worth the naming), but of men’s tempers and lives; of vice in every kind; of everything contrary to justice, mercy, or truth. And for this it was that they carried their lives in their hands, that both the great vulgar and the small looked upon them as mad dogs and treated them as such; sometimes saying in terms, ' Will nobody knock that mad dog on the head'

Let every one, then, speak as he finds; as for me, I cannot admire either the wisdom or virtue or happiness of mankind. Wherever I have been, I have found the bulk of mankind, Christian as well as heathen, deplorably ignorant, vicious, and miserable. I am sure they are so in London and Westminster. Sin and pain are on every side. And who can account for this but on the supposition that we are in a fallen state I have proved at large it can no otherwise be accounted for. Yet none need perish; for we have an almighty Saviour, one who is able and willing to save to the uttermost all that come unto God through Him.--I am, dear sir, Your affectionate servant.

To James Hutton

December 31, 1773.

DEAR JEMMY,--I am of the same mind still. I love you well; and I love to talk with you. But I have an awkward disorder, commonly called an hydrocele; on account of which I shall be next week in the surgeon’s hands [Dr. Samuel Wathen removed it on Jan. 4, 1774. See Journal, v. 474, vi. 8]. Any time after that I shall be glad to meet you either at John Folgham’s [Folgham was a member of the Foundery Society and one of the trustees of City Road Chapel. Wesley dined with him on Dec. 31, 1782, and at other times. See Journal Index] or anywhere.--I am, dear Jemmy, Yours affectionately.