To Elizabeth Ritchie
Date: TRACWN, PEMBROKESHIRE, August 19, 1784.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1784)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BETSY, - I was a little surprised at a letter from Sister D----, in which she seems to approve of all that Mrs. Crosby has done; and speaks as if it were just and right and done in obedience to the order of Providence ! I could not help saying, 'There is but one advice which I can give her upon the present occasion: "Remember from whence thou art fallen. Repent, and do thy first works."'

Some years ago I committed a little company of lovely children to the care of one of our sisters at Haverford. [To Miss Warren in 1781. See letter of Oct. 19, 1779.] I was concerned yesterday to find she was weary of well-doing and had totally given up her charge. I hope, my dear Betsy, this will never be your case! You will never leave off your labor of love; though you should not always (not immediately at least) see the fruit of your labors. You may not immediately see Mrs. H - so established in grace as you desire and hope. But in this, as well as many other instances, in due time you shall reap if you faint not.

I have been often musing upon this, - why the generality of Christians, even those that really are such, are less zealous and less active for God When they are middle-aged than they were when they were young. May we not draw an answer to this question from that declaration of our Lord (no less than eight times repeated by the Evangelists), 'To him that hath,' uses what he hath, 'shall be given; but from him that hath not shall be taken away that he hath' A measure of zeal and activity is given to every one when he finds peace with God. If he earnestly and diligently uses this talent, it will surely be increased. But if he ceases, yea or intermits, to do good, he insensibly loses both the will and the power. So there is no possible way to retain those talents but to use them to the uttermost. Let this never be the case of my dear friend! Never abate anything of your diligence in doing good. Sometimes, indeed, the feeble body sinks under you; but when you do all you can, you do enough.

Remember in all your prayers,

Yours most affectionately.