To James Hutton
Date: BRISTOL, June 4, 1739.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1739)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BRETHERN, -- Tuesday, 22nd, about a thousand were present at Bath, and several fine gay things among them, whom I exhorted in St. Paul's words, 'Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead; and Christ shall give thee light.' The next morning I was sent for to the young woman whose relations had confined her as mad. They now agreed she should go where she would, and seem themselves ‘not far from the kingdom of God.’[See previous letter.]

I preached to about two thousand on Wednesday at Baptist Mills on ‘Hear what the unjust judge saith.’ In the evening the female bands admitted seven women on trial and ten children; and Eliz. Cutler and six other women, having been on trial their month, were by lot fixed in their several bands. At eight we received into our Society (after the month's trial) Jonathan Reeves [Jonathan Reeves was afterwards ordained and appointed the first chaplain of the Magdalen Hospital in June 1758, and held that position till 1764. He afterwards had a curacy in Whitechapel. See Compston's Magdalen Hospital, pp. 46, 63; Stamp's Orphan House, p. 41; Atmore's Memorial, pp. 345-6; and letter of Dec. 10, 1751.] and six others, who at the lovefeast on the 27th instant were by lot fixed in their bands. We then received upon trial John Haydon and eight other men, and Thomas Hamilton (aged fourteen) with four other children.

Thursday, 24th, we breakfasted at Richard Champion's, [See Journal, ii. 204d; W.H.S. v. 6. R. Champion (1743-91), the founder of the pottery works at. Bristol, where the ‘British China Ware’ was made, was perhaps his son.] where were eight or nine other Quakers. We had a mild conference on justification by faith alone, concluded with prayer, and both met and parted in love. At three I preached again on Priestdown, near Publow, to a larger congregation than before, on ‘The chastisement of our peace was upon Him, and by His stripes we are healed.’

On Friday I preached (the first time) at the Fishponds, on the edge of Kingswood, about two mile from Bristol, on the same words, to about a thousand souls. The next morning one came to us in deep despair. We prayed together an hour, and he went away in peace. About two thousand (as is usual on Saturdays) were at the Bowling Green, to whom, and to about six thousand on Sunday morning, I farther explained the great law of love. To about two thousand five hundred at Hanham I preached on Isaiah liii. 5-6; at Rose Green, to upwards of ten thousand, on ‘Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. For the Son of Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.’ At the Society in the evening at Gloucester Lane eleven were cut to the heart and soon after comforted.

Monday, 28th, I began preaching in the morning at Weavers’ Hall, where two persons received remission of sins; as did seven in the afternoon at the Brickyard, before several thousand witnesses; and ten at Baldwin-Street in the evening, of whom two were children.

On Tuesday in the afternoon I preached at Two-Mile-Hill to about a thousand of the colliers; and at five expounded to about the same number in the Back Lane at John Haydon's door. The next morning a young woman (late a Quaker) was baptized and filled with the Holy Ghost. In the afternoon I (unknowingly) fell in with a famous infidel, [See Journal, ii. 206n.] a champion of the unfaithful in these parts. He was shocked, desired I would pray for him, and promised to pray earnestly himself that God would show him the right way to serve Him.

We went from him to Baptist Mills. Two or three thousand were present; on whom I enforced those words on which my

Testament opened: ‘And all the people which heard Him, and the publicans, justified God .... But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves.’

On Holy Thursday many of us went to King's Weston Hill, four or five miles from Bristol. As we were sitting on the grass two gentlemen went by; and by way of jest sent up many persons to us from the neighboring villages, to whom therefore I took occasion to speak on those words, 'Thou hast ascended up on high, Thou hast led captivity captive, &c.' In the evening, our landlady in Baldwin Street not permitting us to meet there any more, we had our second Society at Weavers' Hall; where I preached the next morning also. In the afternoon I was at a new brickyard, where were twelve or fifteen hundred. The rain was so violent on Saturday that our congregation in the Bowling Green consisted of only nine hundred or a thousand. But in the morning we had about seven thousand, to whom I described (in concluding the subject) a truly charitable man.

At Hanham were about three thousand, to whom I explained those words, ‘That every mouth may be stopped, and all the world become guilty before God.’ The same I again insisted on at Rose Green, to (I believe) eight or nine thousand. We could not meet in the evening at Nicholas Street; but we made shift to do so in the shell of our schoolroom, without and within which (I suppose) about two thousand or two thousand five hundred were present. [In the Horsefair. See letter of May 14.] We had a glorious beginning; the scripture that came in turn to be read was, ‘Marvel not if the world hate you.’ We sung, ‘Arm of the Lord, awake, awake.’ [In J. and C. Wesley's Hymns and Sacred Poems (1739).] And God, even our own God, gave us His blessing.

Farewell in the Lord, my dear brethren; and love one another!