To Mary Bishop
Date: IPSWICH, November 5, 1769.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1769)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR MISS BISHOP,--When I was last in Bath, [About Sept. 21.] Mr. Hodsal told me Miss Bishop would be glad to see me. But as I did not know you at all, and I had not an hour to spare, I did not think of it any farther till yesterday, when I heard from Miss March, who gave me a particular account of your situation.

We have had a Society in Bath for about thirty years, sometimes larger and sometimes smaller. [See Wes. Meth. Mag. 1846, pp.1088-1825. The chapel was then in Avon Street.] It was very small this autumn, consisting only of eleven or twelve persons, of whom Michael Hemmings was leader. I spoke to these one by one, added nine or ten more, divided them into two classes, and appointed half of them to meet with Joseph Harris. But if you are willing to cast in your lot with us, I had rather that those single women in both classes who desire it should meet with you and any others who are not afraid of the reproach of Christ. In that little tract A Plain Account of the People called Methodists you see our whole plan. [See letter in Dec. 1748 to Vincent Perronet.] We have but one point in view--to be altogether Christians, scriptural, rational Christians. For which we well know, not only the world, but the almost Christians, will never forgive us. From these, therefore, if you join heart and hand with us, you are to expect neither justice nor mercy. If you are determined, let me know. But consider what you do. Can you give up all for Christ the hope of improving your fortune, a fair reputation, and agreeable friends Can He make you amends for all these Is He alone a sufficient portion I think you will find Him so. And if you was as entirely devoted to God as my dear Jenny Cooper was, you would never have cause to repent of your choice either in time or in eternity.

I never had one thought of resigning up our room to any person on earth. What I wrote to Lady Huntingdon [See letter of Nov. 22.] was, 'I am willing your preachers should have as full and free use of it as our own.' I could not go any farther than this: I have no right so to do. I hope you will send me as particular an account as you can of all that has lately passed and of the present state of things. The more freely you write, the more agreeable it will be to

Your affectionate brother.

PS.--You may direct to London. To Miss Bishop, In the Vineyard, Bath.