To James Hutton
Date: BRISTOL. April 26, 1739.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1739)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BRETHREN,--On Sunday evening, the 15th, the women had their first lovefeast.

On Monday about three thousand were at the Brickyard. In the evening the brother of the person who owns it told me 'his brother did not care I should be there any more, and desired me to look out for some other place.' There was much power at the Society this night.

Tuesday, 17th, at three in the afternoon, eleven unmarried women met at Mrs. Grevil's, [The sister of the Rev. George Whitefield. She lived in Wine Street, Bristol, and John Wesley lodged there for some weeks on his coming to the city.] and desired three others might be admitted among them. They were then divided into three bands.

The same day we were with the two prisoners who are under sentence of death, the younger of whom seemed much awakened. At five I was at a Society where I had not been before. The upper room in which we were was propped beneath; but the weight of people made the floor give way, so that in the beginning of the expounding the post which propped it fell down with much noise. However, we stayed together till seven. I then went to Baldwin Street Society, where it was much impressed upon me to claim the promise of the Father for some that heard it, if the doctrine was of God. A young woman (named Cornish) was the first who felt that our prayer was heard, being after a short agony fully set at liberty; the next was another young woman (Eliz. Holder); the third was one Jane Worlock; the last (a stranger in Bristol), John Ellis, was so filled with the Holy Ghost that he scarce knew whether he was in the body or out of the body. He is now gone home to declare the marvelous works of the Lord. Behold how He giveth us above what we can ask or think! When Miss Cornish began to be in pain, we asked God to give us a living witness that signs and wonders were now wrought by the name of His holy child Jesus. We asked for one, and He hath given us four.

Wednesday, 18th, about two thousand five hundred were present at Baptist Mills. At six the female bands met and admitted Lucretia Smith (late a Quaker, who was baptized the day before), Rebecca Morgan (deeply mourning), Elis,. Holder, Hannah Cornish, Jane Worlock, and Mary Cutler. Lucretia Smith was by lot chose leader. At seven, all the female bands being met together, Rebecca Morgan received the promise of the Father.

At eight the men met and received into fellowship with them Richard Hereford (leader), William Farnell, Jo. Goslin, Jos. Ellis, Capel Gilas, Thomas Oldfield, and John Purdy.

Likewise William Lewis was by lot added to the first, Kenelm Chandler to the second, and James Robins to the third band.

Then the married band was filled up as follows: John Brooks (a soldier), leader; Jo. Williams, Thomas Arnot (a soldier), William Davis, Anthony Williams, and Thomas Robins. But Thomas Robins has since declined meeting.

Two boys were also admitted: Thomas Davis, aged fourteen, and Deschamps Panou, aged ten; both of whom ‘have found the Savior in their hearts.’

Thursday, 19th, Mr. Griffith Jones called in his return to Wales, and went with us to Castle Street Society, where two were deeply convinced of sin. At seven several in Nicholas Street received much comfort. On Good Friday, at five in the evening, Mr. Wathen's mistress received remission of sins; as at seven did Samuel Goodson and Anne Holton, who had long been in heaviness. On Easter Eve the rain obliged me to preach in the Poorhouse (not at the door, as usual). While we were afterwards in prayer at Weavers' Hall, a young man was seized with a violent trembling, and in a few minutes sunk down on the ground. We prayed on, and he was soon raised up again. On Easter Day was a thorough rain, so that we could not stand in the Bowling Green nor in the open air at Hanham Mount. All I could do was to preach at Newgate at eight in the morning and two in the afternoon, and to as many as the house would hold at Hanham at eleven in the forenoon. In the afternoon we likewise gathered at an house near Rose Green as many of the neighbors as we could together, after which we had a large company at Nicholas Street, where many were wounded and many comforted.

Every day this week I have been out of town, which prevented my writing sooner. Pray ye much that, after I have preached to others, I may not myself be a castaway.--I am, my dear brethren, Your ever affectionate brother.