To Edward Jackson

LONDON, January 2, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- It is no wonder many of the Societies should be in poor condition, considering what poor care has lately been taken of them. They will soon find the difference.

The books that are damaged you may give away as you judge proper.

None ought to have made a collection for any place before the house at Dewsbury was built. However, do what you can, and you do enough. -- I am, with love to Sister Jackson,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Tattershall

NEAR LONDON, January 6, 1790.

DEAR TOMMY, -- Because you desire some word I write, although I have no tidings ready. I know of no preacher that is now ready to go out; and you know we can neither buy nor hire preachers. Yet I am not sorry that your small friend [William Green, his colleague. See letter of Oct. 25, 1789, to him.] has taken himself away; for he was really a dangerous man. His bitter enmity against the Church made him utterly unfit to be a Methodist preacher; and his elaborate Discourse against Going to Church was enough to confound any one that was not used to controversy. Yet I did not dare to put him away; but I am not at all sorry that he is gone away. I shall not be forward to take him again; but in any other way I would be glad to help him. I would not scruple giving him a few pounds if it would do him any good. -- I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Tattershall, At the Preaching-house,

Norwich.

To Thomas McGeary [1]

LONDON, January 9, 1790.

DEAR TOMMY, There is no danger of my thinking your writing troublesome. If Mr. [Funnal] thinks he did wrong in going away, and that it is a favor to receive him again, you may receive him; but he seems to me to be out of his senses. Mr. Carr has not wrote to me at all. I hope he (at least) knows when he is well. Such another place for him can hardly be found.

You must be absent from the School at some times, that you may be present more effectually. But I desire you will take a little tour next month if the weather will allow. The spending a week or two now and then in the open air is the best physic in the world for you. Perfect love ούν άσχημονεϊ, is not ill-behaved or illmatured. Peace be with all your spirits !--I am, dear Tommy, Yours most affectionately.

Mr. Bradily, a pious young man from Antigua, earnestly desires to be a boarder at Kingswood. I do not object.

To John Mason

NEAR LONDON, January 13, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- As long as I live the people shall have no share in choosing either stewards or leaders among the Methodists. We have not and never had any such custom. We are no republicans, and never intend to be. It would be better for those that are so minded to go quietly away. I have been uniform both in doctrine and discipline for above these fifty years; and it is a little too late for me to turn into a new path now I am gray-headed. Neither good old Brother Pascoe [Probably the grocer at St. John's, Cornwall, who entertained the preacher there. His brother's wife was the mother of Methodism in Sithney. See Journal, iii. 261n; Methodist Mag., 1801, p. 483.] (God bless him!) expects it from me, nor Brother Wood, [Richard Wood, of Port Isaac. See Journal, v. 283.] nor Brother Flamank. [See letter of June 9, 1789.] If you and I should be called hence this year, we may bless God that we have not lived in vain. Come, let us have a few more strokes at Satan's kingdom, and then we shall depart in peace! -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Daniel Jackson

NEAR LONDON, January 19, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You send me an agreeable account of the work of God in Stockport. Many were afraid that it would have been greatly hindered by Thomas Smith in particular. But it is plain they feared where no fear was; for our Lord took care of His own work.

I am glad Tommy Farrant [Probably Thomas Tennant, Jackson's colleague.] continues to exert himself. The more he does the more he may; for to him that hath (even what he hath) shall be given, and he shall have more abundantly.--I am, with love to Sister Jackson,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Rutherford

LONDON, January 22, 1790.

DEAR TOMMY, -- You do well to exclude all that will not regularly meet their class.

I am glad you were so unanimous at the Yearly Meeting and that Brother [Erckbarn] made that excellent proposal. The sooner it is carried into execution the better.

Dr. Coke hopes to visit you in summer. He is in an excellent spirit. But he must take Scotland in the way to Ireland. You send me good news indeed concerning Sister Cox. [See letter of July 31, 1785.] See the work of the Lord. She should immediately meet in a lively band. And our friends will take care that she does not want. My kind love to her and to Sister Rutherford. -- I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Adam Clarke [2]

LONDON, January 28, 1790.

DEAR ADAM, -- I often wonder at the people of Bristol. They are so honest, yet so dull; 'tis scarce possible to strike any fire into them. Only with God all things are possible. Many years ago I put the Society at Bath in a way wherein, if they had persevered, they would now have owed nothing. They were at Plymouth but thirty in number, and their debt was fourteen hundred pounds. I advised them, Let every member subscribe monthly what he can; and an hundred at the Dock promised to do the same. 'I,' said one, 'will give a crown a month'; 'I,' said another, 'half a crown.' Many subscribed a shilling, sixpence, or threepence a month. And now the debt is paid. I began such a subscription in Bath; as I have done in many places with success. But they left it off in two or three weeks. Why Because I gave four guineas to prevent one that was arrested from going to jail! Good reason, was it not 'Why,' said one and another, 'might he not have given it to me'

I am glad to hear my dear sister is in a fair way of recovery. On Monday four weeks I shall probably set out for Bristol. [He set out on March 1.] Peace be with your spirits! -- I am, dear Adam,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To John Valton

LONDON, January 29, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Where you and Adam Clarke are it would be strange if there should be no revival. You do well to prune the circuit, and I advise to cut off all those (unless extremely poor) who do not according to our original rule contribute a shilling every quarter and a penny once a week. Many members you will lose thereby; but our gain will be greater than our loss. You should likewise rigorously insist that every one meet his class weekly without some very peculiar hindrance. I am glad you have taken a catalogue of the Society as the Minutes of the Conference require. According to that catalogue the classes should always be met that every one may be marked exactly. If it should please God that I should see another Conference at Bristol, I should willingly spend a day or two at your house. Peace be with your spirit! -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Freeborn Garrettson [3]

LONDON, February 3, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Two or three weeks ago I had the pleasure of a letter from you dated August 23, 1789, giving me a comfortable account of the swift and extensive progress of the work of God in America. You likewise informed me that you had written an account of your life, and directed it should be sent to me; and I have been expecting it from day to day ever since, but have now almost given up my expectation; for unless it comes soon it will hardly overtake me in the present world. You see, time has shaken me by the hand, and death is not far behind. While we live let us work our Lord's work betimes; and in His time He will give us our full reward. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Morrell [4]

LONDON, February 4, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You gave me a very agreeable account of the progress of the gospel in America. One would hope the time is approaching when the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord. Indeed, the amazing revolutions which have [been in] Europe [The States-General met on May 5, 1789. The Bastille was destroyed on July 14, and the Royal family put under arrest on Oct. 5. See letter of March to William Black.] seem to be the forerunners of the same grand event. The poor infidels, it is true, who know nothing of God, have no such design or thought. But the Lord sitteth above the waterfloods, the Lord remaineth a king for ever. Meantime it is expedient that the Methodists in every part of the globe should be united together as closely as possible. That we may all be one is the prayer of

Your affectionate friend and brother.

I have seen nothing of Brother Garrettson's letter. [This probably refers to a letter with his Journal, which went down with the ship that was bringing it. See Bangs's Garrettson, p. 176; and previous letter.]

To William Horner [5]

LONDON, February 8, 1790.

DEAR BILLY, -- I am determined there shall be no circuits in England with more than four preachers whilst I live. Four are too many if I could help it.

I should have no objection to have pews at Oxford under the gallery, but not elsewhere. I wish to have our preaching-houses different from all others.

Do not seek to be honorable; be content to be despised. I am glad you are all friends at Witney and that you prosper at High Wycombe. -- I am, with love to Sister Horner,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. William Horner, Preaching-house,

Newing Hall, Oxford.





To Adam Clarke [6]

LONDON, February 11, 1790.

DEAR ADAM, -- On Monday, March 1st, I hope to set out hence; and to preach that evening and on Tuesday at half hour past six o'clock in Bath. On Thursday, if he desires it, I will dine at Mr. Durbin's; and on Monday following begin as usual to meet the classes. I am not at all sorry that James Gore is removed from this evil world. You and I shall follow him in due time, as soon as our work is done. Many of our friends have been lately gathered into the garner as ripe shocks of wheat. Peace be with both your spirits! -- I am, dear Adam,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Cock

LONDON, February 13, 1790.

MY DEAR SISTER, The tender affection which I bear you makes me love to see your name at the bottom of a letter; but especially when it brings me the good news that your spirit is still rejoicing in God your Savior. My sight is so far decayed that I cannot well read a small print by candlelight; but I can write almost as well as ever I could: and it does me no harm but rather good to preach once or twice a day. I love to hear the particulars of your experience, and I had a letter a few days ago from one of our sisters in Scotland whose experience agrees much with yours; only she goes further. She speaks of being 'taken up into heaven, surrounded with the blessed Trinity, and let into God the Father.' I commend you to His care; and am

Yours most affectionately.

To Joseph Benson

NEAR LONDON, February 16, 1790.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- On Monday se'nnight the 1st I hope to be at Bath; on the Thursday following at Bristol; on Monday the I5th I expect to be at Stroud, and on the Friday following at Birmingham. In a few days you will see the remaining part of my treatise [Was this The Rules of the Strangers' Friend Society in Bristol, dated Bristol, March 12, 1790 See Journal, viii. 49; Miles's Chronological History (4th edition), p. 180; Tyerman's Wesley, iii. 253; and letter of Dec. 31, 1785, to John Gardner.] in one of the public papers.

It is probable Dr. Priestley himself may be at length sated with controversy, and may choose to have a little interval between fighting and death. It may be such a contrast as you mention between the Doctor and the inspired writers may convince some gainsayers. -- I am, with love to Sister Benson, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Robert Carr Brackenbury [7]

LONDON, February 24, 1790.

DEAR SIR -- Is the bailiff the same gentleman who subscribed to the chapel and let us have a lease for building If so how came his mind to be so changed But his heart is still in God's hand. And therefore you take the very best way possible to allay the present storm by seeking Him that turneth the hearts of men as the waters. Without His help human means will not avail. It has pleased God to give me more strength than I had in the autumn; but my eyes continue weak. It is enough that we are in His hands. -- I am, dear sir,

Your very affectionate friend and brother.

To Whom it may Concern

LONDON, February 25, 1790.

In August 1788 Mr. Atlay wrote me word, 'I must look out for another servant, for he would go to Dewsbury on September 25.' So far was I from 'bidding him go,' that I knew nothing of it till that hour. But I then told him, 'Go and serve them'; seeing I found he would serve me no longer.

He sent me word that I had in London 13,751 18s. 5d. stock in books. [See letter of Sept. 4, 1788.] Desiring to know exactly, I employed two booksellers to take an account of my stock. The account they brought in, October 31, 1788, was:

Value of stock, errors excepted, 4,827 10s. 5d. John Parsons, Thomas Scollick.

Why did John Atlay so wonderfully overrate my stock Certainly to do me honor in the eyes of the world.

I never approved of his going to Dewsbury; but I submitted to what I could not help.

With respect to Dewsbury House, there never was any dispute about the property of preaching-houses (that was an artful misrepresentation), but merely the appointing of preachers in them.

If John Atlay has a mind to throw any more dirt upon me, I do not know I shall take any pains to wipe it off. [See letter of May 12.] I have but a few days to live; and I wish to spend those in peace.

To Thomas Tattershall

LONDON, February 28, 1790.

DEAR TOMMY, -- If you had given me in time a particular account of your late disorder, &c., it is highly probable I should have saved you some expense and a good deal of pain.

But never imagine you and I shall be saved from reproach unless we changed our Master. Although it was determined at the Conference not to begin any other house till that at Dewsbury was finished {which is not done) I believe none will be offended at your receiving private benefactions from particular friends. -- I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother. To Mr. Tattershall, At the Preaching-house, In Norwich.

To William Black [8]

March, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am glad to hear you have some increase of the work of God in Halifax. If you take care that the brethren fall not out by the way, and that there be no jealousies or coldness between the preachers, but you all go on in peace and harmony, there will be an increase of it in every place. I have great hopes that the days of coldness and darkness are now past, and that the Sun of Righteousness is rising on Nova Scotia likewise. O stir up the gift of God that is in you, and wrestle with God in mighty prayer. He is doing great things in many parts of Europe such as have not been seen for many generations [See letter of Feb. 4.]; and the children of God expect to see greater things than these. I do not know that England was ever before in so quiet a state as it is now. It is our part to wait the openings of Divine Providence, and follow the leadings of it. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Preachers and Friends [9]

LONDON, March 1, 1790.

As many persons desire to know where I am from this time till the Conference, I here set down my route, which, if God permit, I shall keep till that time.

March.

Monday, 15, Stroud; 16, Gloucester; 17, Worcester; 18. Stourport; 19, Birmingham. Monday, 22, Wednesbury; 23, Dudley and Wolverhampton; 24, Madeley; 25, Salop; 26, Madcloy; 27, Newcastle-under-Lyne; 28, Lane End and Burslem. Monday, 29, Congleton; 30, Macclesfield.

April.

Thursday, 1, Stockport; 2, Manchester. Monday, 5, Nantwich and Liverpool; 7, Warrington and Chester; 9, Wigan; 10, Bolton. Monday, 12, Blackburn; 13, Colne; 17, Keighley; 18, Haworth and Halifax. Tuesday, 20, Huddersfield; 2x, Dewsbury; 24, Wakefield; 25, Bitstall and Leeds. Tuesday, 27, Bradford; 29, Otley.

May.

Saturday, 1, Parkgate; 2, York; 4, Pocklington; 6, Newcastle. Monday, 10, Alnwick; 12, Dunbar; 13, Edinburgh. Tuesday, 18, Dundee; 19, Arbroath; 20, Aberdeen.

N.B. -- I have not yet finally settled the rest of my plan. I probably shall if I come to York. Many persons are continually teasing me to visit more places. Now let them judge whether I have not work enough.

To Friends in Trowbridge

BATH, March 3, 1790.

My DEAR BROTHER, -- I have only one thing in view -- to keep all the Methodists in Great Britain one connected people. But this can't be done unless the Conference, not the trustees, appoint all their preachers. Therefore the bond I recommend to the proprietors of all the unsettled preaching-houses is in this form: 'The condition of this obligation is such that if A, B, C, D, &c., the proprietors of the preaching-house in Trowbridge lately built for the use of the Methodists, do give a bond to settle the said house on seven trustees chosen by Mr. Wesley as soon as the present debt on it is paid, then this bond is void: otherwise it shall remain in full force.' Long writings I abhor. This is neither too long nor too short. Any of you that writes a fair hand may write this if on properly stamped paper without any lawyer. -- I am, my dear brethren,

Your affectionate brother.

To George Sykes

BRISTOL, March 13, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You have particular reason to bless God for the good spirit wherein you found and left your father. [See letter of April 8.] This is the Lord's doing, and is undoubtedly the effect of prayer. But I am sorry he is not weary of pain, otherwise he would have applied the bruised or baked onions. I know no instance yet wherein they failed to ease if not take away the pain.

I have much hope that your father's visit to Mr. Linder's will cut up all misunderstandings by the roots. We are all in peace here; and I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.





To Jasper Winscom [10]

BRISTOL, March 13, 1790.

DEAR JASPER, The account of Thomas Whitwood [A young man in the Isle of Wight who died suddenly while shouting, which awful providence was followed by an outpouring of the Spirit on the Society and congregation.] is very remarkable, and the story is well told; and God has done much honor to him by the happy effects which have been consequent upon his death. [A young man in the Isle of Wight who died suddenly while shouting, which awful providence was followed by an outpouring of the Spirit on the Society and congregation.]

I am in no haste at all concerning building without having paid some more of our debts. I am likewise in no haste to multiply preachers or to divide circuits. Most of our circuits are too small rather than too large. I wish we had no circuit with fewer than three preachers in it or less than four hundred miles' riding in four weeks. Certainly no circuit shall be divided before the Conference. If we do not take care we shall all degenerate into milksops. Soldiers of Christ, arise!

--I am, dear Jasper,

Yours affectionately.

To Mr. J. Winscom, At the Preaching-house, In Sarum.

To Henry Moore

BRISTOL, March 14, 1790.

DEAR HENRY, -- I have received the parcel by the coach. I quite approve of your sending the note to all our Assistants, and hope it will have a good effect. I would do anything that is in my power toward the extirpation of that trade which is a scandal not only to Christianity but humanity. [Slavery in the abolition of which Wesley took the keenest interest. See letter of Oct. 11, 1787.]

It will require both time and thought and much patience to bring into execution the other design which we see at a distance.

We go on well in this circuit; and no wonder, since John Valton and Adam Clarke and Miss Johnson are here. -- I am, with kind love to Nancy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To William Smith [11]

BIRMINGHAM, March 21, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I was not sorry that you are discharged from the Army, seeing it was not by your own act and deed, but rather by a stroke of Divine Providence; and I doubt not but it will be to the glory of God. The question was, What part of the vineyard would it be best for you to labor in I cannot in reason consent to your being long confined in the Londonderry Circuit. Is there any particular part of Ireland which you would prefer to others Or would you rather spend some time in England You may speak freely to

Your affectionate brother.

To Charles Atmore [12]

MADELEY, March 24, 1790.

DEAR CHARLES, -- I am glad you have set up Sunday schools at Newcastle. This is one of the best institutions which have been seen in Europe for some centuries, and will do more and more good, provided the teachers and inspectors do their duties. Nothing can prevent the success of this blessed work but the neglect of the instruments. Therefore be sure to watch them with all care that they may not grow weary of well-doing.

I shall be at Darlington, if God permit, on Tuesday and Wednesday, May 4, 5; on Thursday, at Durham, to preach at twelve o'clock; and at Newcastle between four and five in the afternoon. Peace be with you all, and yours.--I am, dear Charles,

Your affectionate friend and brother.





To Adam Clarke

MADELEY, March 25, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You have done exceeding well in making the friends to understand the case of that young woman. I wonder she would be so open; surely she was constrained to reveal her own secrets. It seems now as plain as plain can be that this animal magnetism [See letter of April 14.] is diabolical from the beginning to the end. At first I supposed it was only a cheat; but afterwards Satan struck in, and cheated the spectators, who had not skill to discern when the natural part ended and the preternatural began. Go on with faith and prayer to brave and detect all these depths of Satan. Peace be with your spirits! -- I am, dear Adam,

Your affectionate friend and brother.





To Samuel Bardsley

NEWCASTLE-UNDER-LYME, March 27, 1790.

DEAR SAMMY, -- Take particular care that neither Michael Fenwick nor any other give any just offense, and especially that they offend not God; then He will make your enemies be at peace with you.

If I remember well, I did write to the Mayor of Bideford; and I expect that makes him more quiet. [See letter of Nov. 25, 1789.] By meekness, gentleness, and patience, with faith and prayer, you will prevail at Torrington also. You have only to go on calmly and steadily, and God will arise and maintain His own cause. Only let us labor to have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward man. -- I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Dr. Pretyman Tomline, Bishop of Lincoln () [13]

[March 1790.]

MY LORD, -- I am a dying man, having already one foot in the grave. Humanly speaking, I cannot long creep upon the earth, being now nearer ninety than eighty years of age. But I cannot die in peace before I have discharged this office of Christian love to your Lordship. I write without ceremony, as neither hoping nor fearing anything from your Lordship or from any man living. And I ask, in the name and in the presence of Him to whom both you and I are shortly to give an account, why do you trouble those that are quiet in the land those that fear God and work righteousness Does your Lordship know what the Methodists are that many thousands of them are zealous members of the Church of England, and strongly attached not only to His Majesty but to his present Ministry Why should your Lordship, setting religion out of the question, throw away such a body of respectable friends Is it for their religious sentiments Alas, my Lord! is this a time to persecute any man for conscience' sake I beseech you, my Lord, do as you would be done to. You are a man of sense; you are a man of learning; nay, I verily believe (what is of infinitely more value), you are a man of piety. Then think, and let think. I pray God to bless you with the choicest of His blessings. -- I am, my Lord, &c.

To Peter Garforth [14]

MANCHESTER, April 2, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- It would give me pleasure to see you anywhere, and particularly at Skipton.

But I am afraid it will not be in my power. Since my last illness I cannot preach so often as I used to do. But let us do what we can, and our Lord be well pleased. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

Mr. Garforth, At

Skipton-in-Craven, Yorkshire.

To Peard Dickinson

NEAR STOCKPORT, April 2, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- The settling in a new house must needs be attended with some hurry and inconvenience. [Dickinson lived near City Road Chapel. See letters of April 29, 1788, and April 28, 1790 (to Sarah Wesley).] But the conveniences on the other hand will more than [avail] if you are careful to make your full use of them. I hope you will be resolute as to your time of going to bed and rising in the morning; that I may have one curate at least who will join me herein in setting a pattern to the flock. And I pray you fight against slowness, not only in reading Prayers, but in all things great and small. Ne res omnes tardi gelideque ministrat. [Apparently his adaptation of Horace's Ars Poetica, line 171: quod res oranes tirnide gelideque rninistrat.]

Be lively! Be quick! Bestir yourself! In everything make haste, though without hurry. I am glad you attend the children. Your labor will not be in vain. My health rather increases than decreases. I think the summer will either kill or cure me. All is good. Peace be with you and yours! -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Tattershall

MANCHESTER, April [3], 1790.

DEAR TOMMY, -- So you have reason to acknowledge that God has not forgotten to be gracious. If you can build preaching-houses without increasing the General Debt, it is well; but otherwise it will eat us up. But I have no more to do with these matters. I have appointed a Building Committee, and shall leave to them everything pertaining to building for the time to come. In all these parts of the kingdom there is a fair measure of the work of God. There will be so everywhere if the preachers are holy and zealous men. -- I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Tattershall, At the

Preaching-house, In Norwich.

To Thomas Taylor

MANCHESTER, April 4, 1790.

DEAR TOMMY, -- I did not approve of Dr. Coke's making collections either in yours or any other circuit. I told him so, and I am not well pleased with his doing it. It was very ill done.

It is exceeding probable that sea-bathing will be of use to Brother Simpson; especially if he be temperate in all things, particularly in that which one hardly knows how to name. [William Simpson was Taylor's colleague in Hull.]

I do not know what you mean concerning talking 'about the Church.' I advise all our brethren that have been brought up in the Church to continue there; and there I leave the matter. The Methodists are to spread life among all denominations; which they will do till they form a separate sect. -- I am, with love to Sister Taylor, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Printer

LIVERPOOL, April 8, 1790.

SIR, -- It is a melancholy consideration that there is no country in Europe, or perhaps in the habitable world, where the horrid crime of self-murder is so common as it is in England! One reason of this may be that the English in general are more ungodly and more impatient than other nations. Indeed, we have laws against it, and officers with juries are appointed to inquire into every fact of the kind. And these are to give in their verdict upon oath whether the self-murderer was sane or insane. If he is brought in insane, he is excused, and the law does not affect him. By this means it is totally eluded; for the juries constantly bring him in insane. So the law is not of the least effect, though the farce of a trial still continues.

This morning I asked a coroner, 'Sir, did you ever know a jury bring in the deceased felo-de-se' He answered, 'No, sir; and it is a pity they should.' What, then, is the law good for If all self-murderers are mad, what need of any trial concerning them

But it is plain our ancestors did not think so, or those laws had never been made. It is true every self-murderer is mad in some sense, but not in that sense which the law intends. This fact does not prove him mad in the eye of the law. The question is, Was he mad in other respects If not, every juror is perjured who does not bring him infelo-de-se.

But how can this vile abuse of the law be prevented and this execrable crime effectually discouraged

By a very easy method. We read in ancient history that at a certain period many of the women in Sparta murdered themselves. This fury increasing, a law was made that the body of every woman that killed herself should be exposed naked in the streets. The fury ceased at once.

Only let a law be made and rigorously executed that the body of every self-murderer, lord or peasant, shall be hanged in chains, and the English fury will cease at once. [The letter appeared in a London paper.]

To George. Sykes [15]

LIVERPOOL, April 8, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- What says our Lord 'Let the dead bury their dead; but preach thou the gospel.' O refuse not Him that speaketh, but take up thy cross and follow Him! -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To his Niece Sarah Wesley [16]

BOLTON, April 11, 1790.

MY DEAR SALLY, -- Persons may judge I am not so well as I was once because I seldom preach early in the morning. But I have been no otherwise indisposed than by the heat and dryness of my mouth, which usually begins between one and two and ends between seven and eight. [See letter of June 1 to Henry Moore.] In other respects I am no worse but rather better than I was six months ago. How much care must we take of these houses of clay that they sink not into the dust before the time! All the advice which the art of man can give, my sister will hear from Dr. Whitehead. But, indeed, in most chronical cases vain is the help of man!

Our steward, Mr. Taylor, [Edward Taylor. See Journal, viii, 115d, 126d; and for the Charity School at West Street, Seven Dials, Telford's Two West End Chapels, p. 72.] is one of the School Stewards. If you tell him I desire it, he will have that girl admitted into West Street School.

I am glad Sammy is diligent in study. It will save him from many temptations; and if he strictly follows the method of Kingswood School, he will profit much.

Peace be with all your spirits.--I am, my dear Sally,

Ever yours.

To Miss Wesley, In Chesterfield Street,

Maryhone, London.

To Adam Clarke [17]

MANCHESTER, April 14, 1790.

DEAR ADAM, -- You have done exceeding well in searching this diabolical matter to the bottom and in arming our innocent members of the Society against that plausible delusion. I am glad you have at length succeeded in plucking honest Mr. Durbin out of the net. I have now hopes that his poor daughter will be delivered and will live to be a comfort to him. I wish you would write a particular account of your own state of health to Dr. Whitehead; and follow his advice with regard to every point, except the leaving off of preaching. I think, if I had taken this advice many years since, I should not have been a living man.

Peace be with you and yours! -- I am, dear Adam,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Anne Cutler [18]

WALTON, April 15, 1790.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- There is something in the dealings of God with your soul which is out of the common way. But I have known several whom he has been pleased to lead exactly in the same way, and particularly in manifesting to them distinctly the three Persons of the ever-blessed Trinity. You may tell all your experience to me at any time; but you will need to be cautious in speaking to others, for they would not understand what you say. Go on in the name of God and the power of His might. Pray for the whole spirit of humility; and I beg you would write and speak without reserve to, dear Nanny,

Yours affectionately.

To Mr. Andrews

HALIFAX, April 20, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- John Atlay goes on with flying colors, telling all that will give him the hearing how cruelly he has been used by me and the preachers after having faithfully served me so many years. He does not much concern himself about truth, but affirms whatever he thinks will serve his cause. But it is enough that He who is higher than the highest regards it, and will in due time cause His power to be known. I am glad to hear that the work of God prospers in your circuit. So it does here, notwithstanding all the pains such small friends take to hinder it. In due time God will command all these things to work together for good. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Andrews, near Hertford.

To the care of Mr. Whitfield,

New Chapel, London.

To William Smith

WAKEFIELD, April 23, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Your reasons are good. I entirely agree with your judgment. Considering the kindness which your friends in Londonderry have shown, it would not be advisable for you to be removed from them immediately. You had better remain with them another year. [See letter of March 21.] I will therefore write to Dr. Coke that it may be so. But O beware of thinking too highly of yourself. You walk on slippery ground. May God keep you humble. -- I am,

Your affectionate brother.





To Henry Moore

PARKGATE, April 25, 1790.

I thank you, my dear Harry, for giving me another proof that you are a man to be depended on. You keep your love and you keep your integrity even among weathercocks, But who was it that turned Dr. Coke from east to west and (much more strange!) Dr. Hamilton But how is the fact Is the Society in Dublin quiet or no Is contention forgot or does it continue Are a majority of the people for retaining or for abolishing the eleven o'clock service [See letters of May 6, x788, and May 12, 1790.] Surely Dr. Coke is not well in his senses.

I have wrote a loving but plain letter to Arthur Keene [See next letter, and that of July 6, 1789.] (without saying a word of the forenoon service) to this effect: 'You would not have been justified in removing such a friend as me even if I had turned Papist or Mahometan.' -- I am, with kind love to Nancy, dear Henry,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Arthur Keene

PARKGATE, LEEDS, April 28, 1790.

DEAR ARTHUR, -- Many years you and I loved as brethren. We were united by no common ties. We took sweet counsel together and walked to the house of God as friends. On a sudden you renounced all intercourse with me, because, you said, I had left the Church. Alas! what a cause! Are such friends as I was to be thrown away for such a reason as this Truly I think such a step would not have been justifiable if I had turned Papist or Mahometan, much less for my turning Presbyterian, if it only had been so. And to your example chiefly was owing the unjust, unkind behavior which I met with from many when I was in Dublin last! Well, I cannot help it; I am to be guided by my own conscience, not that of another man! Many a weary journey have I had to Ireland; I seem now to be fairly discharged. May the peace of God be with you and yours! I do not depend on seeing you any more till we meet in the world of spirits.

Dear Arthur, adieu!

To Arthur Keene, Esq., Dublin.

To his Niece Sarah Wesley

PARKGATE, April 28, 1790.

MY DEAR SALLY, -- Now if you was but sitting at my elbow you would see one of the pleasantest spots in the world. A round, clear fishpond is at a small distance surrounded by a smooth, green meadow which has a gently rising hill on one side and is surrounded with trees. After breakfast we are going to Miss Ritchie at Otley, [He had breakfast at 8, and reached Otley at 10.15. He got back to London on Oct. 2. See Journal, viii. 62, 100-1.] who will not be sorry to hear I have been writing to you. I shall now soon be moving northward; but must shorten my journey through Scotland as the work increases on all sides. If I am brought back into England, I shall then be able to judge whether I can take London in my way to Bristol. But I doubt I shall not be able to reach it before my usual time (if I live), the beginning of October.

I am glad to find you have not forgotten your way to the City Road. You should always look on our house as one of your homes; and when you are there, you will not forget Mrs. Dickinson--no, nor poor George Whitfield.

There is a little knot of people that love you well. What a blessing it is to have a few sincere friends! Surely they that fear the Lord can want no manner of thing that is good! I wish Charles and Sammy [See next letter and that of June 12.] could find their way thither. Well, the time is coming when we shall meet and part no more. My kind love attends you all.--I am, my dear Sally,

Ever yours.

Miss Ritchie writes:

Your dear Uncle gives me leave to add a few lines to the other side; therefore I cannot omit this opportunity of wishing my dear Miss Wesley multiplied blessings while visiting our dear City Road friends. My kind love awaits them, your aunt, [Mrs. Hall.] &c. Oh that the spirit of the Lord may be poured out upon you all! I love my London friends, and rejoice in hope of soon spending a happy eternity with them and all who by patient continuance in well doing seek for honor, immortality, eternal life. Let us, my dear sister, be all for God, and His love shall change, renew, and sanctify. May much of the inward kingdom, the spiritual kingdom, faith... [Pieces torn away.] And may you walk in the corn[fort]... [Pieces torn away.] -- My dear friend,

Yours affecy., ELIZ. RITCHIE.

To his Nephew Samuel Wesley [19]

OTLEY April 29, 1790.

DEAR SAMMY, -- For some days you have been much upon my mind. I have been pained concerning you, and have been afraid lest I should feel, when it was too late, that I had been wanting in affection to you. For ought I to see you in want of anything and not strive to supply your want What do you want not clothes or books or money. If you did, I should soon supply you. But I fear you want (what you least of all suspect), the greatest thing of all -- religion. I do not mean external religion, but the religion of the heart; the religion which Kempis, Pascal, Fnelon enjoyed: that life of God in the soul of man, the walking with God and having fellowship with the Father and the Son.

When you contracted a prejudice in favor of the Church of Rome, I did not regard your embracing such and such opinions (were they right or wrong), but your being cut off from those instructions which you then especially needed. Had you attentively read but a small part of my writing (which Providence recommended to your attention by your near relation to me), or had you so diligently attended my ministry as you ought to have done, you would have known more of that religion than you do now: Christ in you the hope of glory, Christ reigning in your heart and subduing all things to Himself. And I lament that fatal step, your relinquishing those places of worship where alone this religion is inculcated, I care not a rush for your being called a Papist or Protestant. But I am grieved at your being an heathen. Certain it is that the general religion both of Protestants and Catholics is no better than refined heathenism.

O Sammy, you are called to something better than this 1 You are called to know and love the God of glory, to live in eternity, to walk in eternity, and to live the life which is hid with Christ in God. Hearken to the advice of one that stands on the edge of eternity.

In spite of prejudice, go and hear that word which is able to save your soul. Give God your heart. Consider these, my dear Sammy, as probably the dying words of

Your affectionate Uncle.

To Thomas Wride

DARLINGTON, May 5. 1790.

DEAR TOMMY, -- It was a little thing to me, when I was able to ride on horseback, to strike a few miles out of my way. But that time is past. All I can do now is to visit the chief Societies. I hope to see our friends in Weardale and Barnard Castle, and I believe that will be as much as I must attempt.

I hope you have now got quit of your queer, arch expressions in preaching, and that you speak as plain and dull as one of us. [Wride was now in the Dales. See letter in Dec. 1786 to Bradburn.] -- I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Henry Moore

ALNWICK, May 12, 1790.

DEAR HENRY, -- I think of the Dublin affair [See letter of April 25. Rutherford was the Assistant in Dublin.] just as you do. But it seems our small friends have half converted T. Rutherford.

That bill was for the share of a lottery ticket. The remaining money you may pay to George Whitfield.

Good John Atlay has just published a curious paper, in which he flatly affirms that 'Mr. Charles Wesley wrote those verses in his room after we had relinquished Dewsbury House on that occasion.' I want, therefore, Brother Sammy Brad-burn to clear up this matter, which he may do, especially by certifying the day which was appointed for meeting at Mr. Hunter's, where they sang those very verses. Should not this certificate be as strong and as explicit as may be, that if possible it may stop the mouth of the blatant beast [See Spenser's Faerie Queene, Book vi, canto xii.] Love to dear Sammy and you; but let this be done without delay. -- I am, my dear Henry,

Ever yours.

To George Holder

ABERDEEN, May 24, 1790.

DEAR GEORGE, -- I have no objection to your being in an English circuit next year, [He was appointed to the Dales Circuit in 1790.] as Brother Brown is staying another in the island; which I suppose may be supplied by three preachers this year, as it was the last. When the wit told the world of my being in the water at Portsmouth, I was three or four hundred miles from it. Be zealous for God, and you will all see the fruit of your labor. -- I am, dear George,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Adam Clarke

DUMFRIES, June, 1790.

MY DEAR SISTER, The great question is, What can be done for Adam Clarke [See next letter and that of April 14.]~ Now, will you save his life Look round; consider if there be any circuit where he can have much rest and little work; or shall he and you spend September in my rooms at Kingswood, on condition that he shall preach but twice a week and ride to the Hot Wells every day I think he must do this, or die; and I do not want him (neither do you) to run away from us in haste. You need not object that this will be attended with some expense; if it be, we can make that matter easy. I am apt to think this will be the best way. In the meantime let him do as much as he can, and no more. It is probable I shall stay with you a little longer, as my strength does not much decline. I traveled yesterday near fourscore miles and preached in the evening without any pain. The Lord does what pleases Him. Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am, my dear sister,

Yours most affectionately.

To Henry Moore

DUMFRIES, June 1, 1790.

DEAR HENRY, -- So I am upon the borders of England again. My sight is much as it was; but I doubt I shall not recover my strength till I use that noble medicine [See letter of April 11.] preaching in the morning. But where can we put poor Adam Clarke He must not preach himself to death; and what circuit is he equal to, where he can have rest as well as labor The best place I can think of at present is Leeds. [Clarke went to Dublin. See letter of July 31 to John King.]

The dying words of the Prince of Orange are much upon my mind: 'Lord, have mercy upon the people!' [William the Silent, assassinated 1584.]

I never saw so much likelihood of doing good in Scotland as there is now if all our preachers here would be Methodists indeed.

My dear Henry, love me as well as you can. -- I am, dear Henry,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Cock

NEWCASTLE, June 6, 1790.

My DEAR SISTER, -- To hear from you is always a pleasure to me; though it is a pleasure mixed with concern when I hear of your weakness or sickness. Only I know the Lord loveth whom He chasteneth. But of what kind is your illness Perhaps I might be enabled to tell you how to remove it. And if you can recover your health, you ought; for health is a great blessing. In August last my strength failed almost at once, and my sight in a great measure went from me. But all is well: I can still write almost as easily as ever, and I can read in a clear fight; and I think, if I could not read or write at all, I could still say something for God. [See letter of July 3 to Mr. Heath.] When you have more strength, tell me more of the work of God, whether in yourself or those round about you. And ought you not to let me know if you are in any temporal distress For everything that concerns you, concerns, my dear Jenny,

Yours most affectionately.

First addressed--

To Mrs. Jane Cock, St. Heller, Isle of Jersey.

Then--

To Mrs. Jane Cock, St. Maws, Cornwall.

To Peard Dickinson [20]

DURHAM, June 12, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am exceedingly pleased that you have made a little tour to Portsmouth and the adjoining places; and cannot doubt but it has been a blessing to many there as well as to your own soul. I seem to remember that I had a letter from you some time since; but I do not remember whether I answered it or not.

If the good impressions which Sammy Wesley frequently feels could be changed, he would probably be a real Christian. You should contrive to see him as often as you can. Who knows but you may save a soul alive. [See letter of April 28 to Sarah Wesley.]

To take a little journey (were it but for a week) now and then would be of service both to your mind and body. -- I am, with kind love to Betsy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.









To William Black [21]

SUNDERLAND, June 14, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You did well to send me an account of your little Societies. Here is a good beginning, though it is as yet in many places a day of small things, and although it does not please God to carry on His work so rapidly with you as in some of the provinces. But one soul is worth all the merchandise in the world; and, whoever gets money, do you win souls.

Never was there throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland so great a thirst for the pure word of God as there is at this day. The same we find in the little islands of Man, Wight, Jersey, Guernsey, and Alderney in the Western Ocean. In the Isle of Man alone (thirty miles long) the Societies contain about four-and-twenty hundred members. I have just now finished my route through Scotland, where I never had such congregations before. So it pleases God to give me a little more to do before He calls me hence.

What has become of Brother Scurr, Dodson, and our other Yorkshire friends Some of them doubtless are gone into a farther country; but some I suppose remain. I doubt you do not keep up a constant intercourse with each other. Love as brethren -- I am, dear William,

Your affectionate friend and brother.





To John Dickins

WHITBY, June 19, I790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- This morning I received yours of April 9, with Mr. Asbury's bill enclosed. I was surprised when Lady Huntingdon absolutely forbade any preacher in her Connection to marry. All can say in that respect is, 'If thou mayst be free, use it rather.' I married because I needed a home, in order to recover my health; and I did recover it. But I did not seek happiness thereby, and I did not find it. We know this may be found in the knowledge and enjoyment and service of God, whether in a married or Single state. But whenever we deny ourselves and take up the cross for His sake, the happier we shall be both here and in eternity. Let us work on likewise, and in His time He will give us a full reward. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Rev. John Dickins, Philadelphia.





To William Thom

MALTON, June 21, 1790.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I concur in the judgment of my brother that the using of the form of prayer will tend to unite our people to the Church [Charles Wesley's view. The fourth Sunday they were to take the Sacrament at Church.] rather than to separate them from it, especially if you earnestly insist on their going to church every fourth Sunday.

I am very indifferent concerning the preaching-house, and shall not concern myself about it any more. I have lost 10 by it already, although to no purpose. If anything more is done concerning it, it must be done by the people at Sarum themselves. I am, with love to Sister Thom, dear Billy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Dr. Pretyman Tomline, Bishop of Lincoln [22]

HULL, June 26, 1790.

MY LORD, -- It may seem strange that one who is not acquainted with your Lordship should trouble you with a letter. But I am constrained to do it; I believe it is my duty both to God and your Lordship. And I must speak plain; having nothing to hope or fear in this world, which I am on the point of leaving.

The Methodists in general, my Lord, are members of the Church of England. They hold all her doctrines, attend her service, and partake of her sacraments. They do not willingly do harm to any one, but do what good they can to all. To encourage each other herein they frequently spend an hour together in prayer and mutual exhortation. Permit me then to ask, Cui bono, 'For what reasonable end,' would your Lordship drive these people out of the Church Are they not as quiet, as inoffensive, nay as pious, as any of their neighbors except perhaps here and there an hairbrained man who knows not what he is about. Do you ask, 'Who drives them out of the Church' Your Lordship does; and that in the most cruel manner -- yea, and the most disingenuous manner. They desire a license to worship God after their own conscience. Your Lordship refuses it, and then punishes them for not having a license! So your Lordship leaves them only this alternative, 'Leave the Church or starve.' And is it a Christian, yea a Protestant bishop, that so persecutes his own flock I say, persecutes; for it is persecution to all intents and purposes. You do not burn them indeed, but you starve them. And how small is the difference! And your Lordship does this under color of a vile, execrable law, not a whir better than that de haeretico cornburendo. [Concerning the burning of heretics.] So persecution, which is banished out of France, is again countenanced in England!

O my Lord, for God's sake, for Christ's sake, for pity's sake suffer the poor people to enjoy their religious as well as civil liberty! I am on the brink of eternity I Perhaps so is your Lordship too! How soon may you also be called to give an account of your stewardship to the Great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls! May He enable both you and me to do it with joy! So prays, my Lord,

Your Lordship's dutiful son and servant.