To Thomas Olivers
Date: LEWISHAM, March 24, 1757.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1757)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR TOMMY, --We should neither be forward nor backward in believing those who think they have attained the second blessing. Of those in Courtmatrix and Ballingarrane I can form no judgment yet. Barely to feel no sin, or to feel constant peace, joy, and love, will not prove the point. We have known some who remained in that state for several years, and yet have afterwards lost almost all they had received.

In the two sermons on this subject, the Minutes of the Conference, the preface to the second and third volumes of Hymns, and some of our controversial writings, you have a full account of Christian Perfection. [The Circumcision of the Heart, preached before Oxford University on Jan. 1, 1733, and Christian Perfection, 1741; Hymns and Sacred Poems 1741, 1742; and Minutes, 1744.] (1) It undoubtedly implies salvation from all sin, inward and outward, into all holiness. (2) Without it none can be admitted into heaven, nor be completely happy upon earth. But we must speak very tenderly on this head, for it is far better to lead men than to drive. Study to recommend it rather as amiable and desirable than as necessary. (3) A gradual growth in grace precedes, but the gift itself is always given instantaneously. I never knew or heard of any exception; and I believe there never was one. (4) One fruit given at the same instant (at least usually) is a direct, positive testimony of the Spirit that the work is done, that they cannot fall away, that they cannot sin. In consequence of this they have no slavish fear, but uninterrupted sight, love, and joy, with continual growth in wisdom, holiness, and happiness, till they are filled with all the fullness of God.

Beware of pride and stubbornness. Consult Brother Hopper in all things. Be obstinate only in pressing on to perfection.

My love to Fanny and Sally Moore. They forget me as soon as I cross the water. Peace be with your spirit. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.