To his Niece Sarah Wesley
Date: PARKGATE, April 28, 1790.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1790)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR SALLY, -- Now if you was but sitting at my elbow you would see one of the pleasantest spots in the world. A round, clear fishpond is at a small distance surrounded by a smooth, green meadow which has a gently rising hill on one side and is surrounded with trees. After breakfast we are going to Miss Ritchie at Otley, [He had breakfast at 8, and reached Otley at 10.15. He got back to London on Oct. 2. See Journal, viii. 62, 100-1.] who will not be sorry to hear I have been writing to you. I shall now soon be moving northward; but must shorten my journey through Scotland as the work increases on all sides. If I am brought back into England, I shall then be able to judge whether I can take London in my way to Bristol. But I doubt I shall not be able to reach it before my usual time (if I live), the beginning of October.

I am glad to find you have not forgotten your way to the City Road. You should always look on our house as one of your homes; and when you are there, you will not forget Mrs. Dickinson--no, nor poor George Whitfield.

There is a little knot of people that love you well. What a blessing it is to have a few sincere friends! Surely they that fear the Lord can want no manner of thing that is good! I wish Charles and Sammy [See next letter and that of June 12.] could find their way thither. Well, the time is coming when we shall meet and part no more. My kind love attends you all.--I am, my dear Sally,

Ever yours.

Miss Ritchie writes:

Your dear Uncle gives me leave to add a few lines to the other side; therefore I cannot omit this opportunity of wishing my dear Miss Wesley multiplied blessings while visiting our dear City Road friends. My kind love awaits them, your aunt, [Mrs. Hall.] &c. Oh that the spirit of the Lord may be poured out upon you all! I love my London friends, and rejoice in hope of soon spending a happy eternity with them and all who by patient continuance in well doing seek for honor, immortality, eternal life. Let us, my dear sister, be all for God, and His love shall change, renew, and sanctify. May much of the inward kingdom, the spiritual kingdom, faith... [Pieces torn away.] And may you walk in the corn[fort]... [Pieces torn away.] -- My dear friend,

Yours affecy., ELIZ. RITCHIE.