1784

To Isaac Andrews

CITY ROAD, January 4, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - After all I can say you will not conceive what I mean unless the Holy Spirit open your understanding.

Undoubtedly faith is the work of God; and yet it is the duty of man to believe. And every man may believe if he will, though not when he will. If he seek faith in the appointed ways, sooner or later the power of the Lord will be present, whereby (1) God works, and by His power (2) man believes.

In order of thinking God's working goes first; but not in order of time. Believing is the act of the human mind, strengthened by the power of God. What if you should find it now - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Andrews, Near James Street,

Bethhal Green.

To Robert Carr Brackenbury [1]

LONDON, January 4, 1784.

DEAR SIR, - I rejoice to hear that you have had a safe passage, and that you have preached both in Guernsey and Jersey. [See Lelivre's Histoire du Mthodisme dans les les de la Manche, p. 185.] We must not expect many conveniences at first: hitherto it is the day of small things. I should imagine the sooner you begin to preach in French the better: surely you need not be careful about accuracy. Trust God, and speak as well as you can. Peace be with your spirit! I wish you many happy years; and am, dear sir,

Your very affectionate friend and servant.

To John Valton

LONDON, January 6, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I do not suppose Bristol water would have done you much good; but exercise and change of air would. I do not know Dr. Davison [See letter of Oct. 13 to Valton.]; but I have seen (perhaps thrice) more patients than he has done. And I know many that have perished by swallowing large quantities of powdered wood. Beware of this, and you may live and do good.

I shall have no objection to Mr. Taylor if he does not baptize children; but this I dare not suffer. I shall shortly be obliged to drop all the preachers who will not drop this. Christ has sent them not to baptize, but to preach the gospel. [See letters of May 19, 1783, and March 4, 1784 (to Percival).] I wonder any of them are so unkind as to attempt it, when they know my sentiments. We have heard twice from Dr. Coke. They all go on well. - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Robert Cart Brackenbury [2]

LONDON, January 10, 1784.

DEAR SIR, - While those poor sheep were scattered abroad, without any shepherd and without any connection with each other, it is no wonder that they were cold and dead. I am glad you have gathered a few of them together; and surely, if prayer be made concerning it, God will provide you with a convenient place to meet in. Perhaps an application to the gentlemen who have hired the ballroom might not be without success.

'Tis pity but you had the Earnest Appeal to present to the governor as well as the minister. I trust both you and our newly connected brethren will overcome evil with good. We can easily print the Rules here, and send them down with some other books. 'Tis good that every one should know our whole plan. We do not want any man to go on blindfold. Peace be with your spirit! - I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend.

To Walter Sellon

LONDON, January 10, 1784. DEAR SIR,"I sincerely thank you for your speedy and satisfactory answer. T. Maxfield affirms that you either wrote such a deed or signed it. So fare it well.

On the 28th of last June I finished my eightieth year. When I was young I had weak eyes, trembling hands, and abundance of infirmities. But, by the blessing of God, I have outlived them all. I have no infirmities now but what I judge to be inseparable from flesh and blood. This hath God wrought. I am afraid you want the grand medicine which I use - exercise and change of air. I believe what you say concerning that place in the Journal is true. I can trust your memory better than my own.

You used to meet me when I came near you; but you seem of late to have forgotten

Your old friend and brother.

To the Rev. Walter Sellon, At Ledsham,

Near Ferrybridge, Yorkshire.

To Thomas Carlill

LONDON, January 12, 1784.

DEAR TOMMY, - It gives me pleasure to have so good an account of all your fellow laborers. Go on in one mind and one spirit, and your labor will not be in vain.

I have received one or two uncommon letters from your wise friend at Lowth. It would have been cruelty to the people if you had suffered him to continue leader of a class. Be in earnest to spread the magazines. - I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Carlill, At the Preacher's House,

In Great Grimsby, Lincolnshire.

To Joseph Taylor

LONDON, January 12, 1784.

DEAR JOSEPH, - I am sorry that so useful a man as Brother Lewly [Taylor had moved from Cornwall West to Gloucester, where he appears in the Minutes for 1784. See letter of Jan. 12, 1791, to Edward Lewly.] was constrained to leave Worcester. But I am not sorry that the books are delivered into your hands, as I am clearly persuaded a far greater number of them will be disposed of.

Take care of the select societies as well as the bands. - I am, dear Joseph, Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Parker [3]

NEAR LONDON, January 21, 1784.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I have taken time to consider your letter calmly; and now I will speak freely to you concerning it.

You assign three reasons for discarding the Methodist preachers: one, because several who had left your chapel promised to join you again, on condition that you would suffer the Methodists to preach there no more; a second, that these preached perfection; and a third, that while one of them was preaching several persons were suddenly and violently affected.

But are these reasons valid Let us coolly and impartially consider them before God.

I. 'Several who had left you promised to join you again, provided you would suffer the Methodists to preach in your chapel no more.' I cannot but think you ought never to have joined with or received persons of such a spirit. What a narrow popish spirit was this! What vile bigotry I The exact spirit of Calvinism! Such as surely none that is not a Calvinist ought to encourage either by word or deed. Every one that does I call the maintainer of a bad cause, as bad as bad can be. For whom has God owned in Great Britain, Ireland, and America like them Whom does He now own like them in Yorkshire, in Cheshire, in Lancashire, in Cornwall Truly these are the tokens of our mission, the proof that God hath sent us. Threescore thousand persons setting their faces heavenward, and many of them rejoicing in God their Savior. A specimen of this you yourself saw at Leeds. Come again, and see if the work be not of God. O consider the weight of that word, 'He that rejecteth you rejecteth Me and Him that sent Me.'

2. 'But they preach perfection.' And do not you Who does not that speaks as the oracles of God Meaning by that scriptural word neither more nor less than 'loving God with all our heart,' or having the mind that was in Christ and walking as Christ walked.

3. 'But, while one of them was preaching, several persons fell down, cried out, and were violently affected.' Have you never read my Journals or Dr. Edwards' Narrative or Dr. Gillies's Historical Collections [A Faithful Narrative of the Conversion of many hundred Souls in Northampton, by Jonathan Edwards, 1736; and John Gillies's Historical Collections relating to Remarkable Periods of the Success of the Gospel, 1754.] Do not you see, then, that it has pleased the all-wise God for near these fifty years, wherever He has wrought most powerfully, that these outward signs (whether natural or not) should attend the inward work And who can call Him to account for this Let Him do as seemeth Him good.

I must therefore still think that neither these nor any other reasons can justify the discarding the messengers of God, and consequently that all who do, or abet this, are maintaining a bad cause. Yet I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Robert Hopkins [4]

LONDON, January 21, 1784.

DEAR ROBERT, - The return you are to make for the blessings you have received is to declare them to all mankind and to exhort all believers strongly and explicitly to go on to perfection. You never need lose what you now experience; but may increase therein till your spirit returns to God.

You cannot infer that the air of this or that place does not agree with you because you have a fever there. But if there be a necessity, Christopher Peacock will change places with you. - I am, dear Robert,

Your affectionate brother.

To Victory Purdy [5]

LONDON, February 1, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - Your father was one of our first Society, which met at Fetter Lane, and one of the first that found peace with God. When it was thought best that I should go to Bristol, we spent a considerable time in prayer, and then cast lots who should accompany me thither. The lot fell upon him; and he was with me day and night till he judged it proper to marry. But I had no curiosity; so that I scarce ever asked him a question concerning his parents, birth, or former way of life. I first saw him when he came to Fetter Lane and desired to be admitted into the Society. He was a man of eminent integrity and simplicity, 'fervent in zeal and warm in charity'; both in his spirit and behavior greatly resembling Joseph Bradford. Be you a follower of him, as he was of Christ! - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Victory Purdy, At the New

Room, In Bristol.

To Alexander Knox

NEAR LONDON, February 5, 1784.

DEAR ALLECK, - As to the love of praise, I do not doubt but you have much more of it than you want; and I am persuaded the Great Physician shows you the disease on purpose that He may cure it. But yet, I apprehend, you a little mistake. You blame yourself where no blame is. ' To be pleased with the approbation of our fellow creatures' is no part of corrupt nature. It belongs to our pure nature; and to cherish it in a degree is a duty, and not a sin....

Peace be with you and yours! - I am, my dear Alleck,

Ever yours.

To Samuel Bardsley [6]

LONDON, February 13, 1784.

DEAR SAMMY, - It was a senseless, unreasonable prejudice which two or three persons conceived against James Rogers and labored to infuse into others - a mere trick of the devil to hinder his being more useful than any Assistant in that circuit had been before. They will never be able to undo the mischief they have done. If Brother Garside persists in not hearing him, I will trouble his house no more.

You don't tell me anything of Hetty Roe. I hope you have seen and conversed with Mr. Smyth [Edward Smyth. See letter of March 3 to Bardsley.] and that his preaching at Macclesfield had been useful. He is an alarming preacher l Strongly exhort the believers to go on to perfection! - I am, with tender love to Brother and Sister Rogers, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Robert Carr Brackenbury [7]

LONDON, February 13, 1784.

DEAR SIR, - It is undoubtedly our duty to use the most probable means we can for either preserving or restoring our health. But, after all, God does continually assert His own right of saving both souls and bodies. He blesses the medicines, and they take place; He withdraws His influence, and they avail nothing. You will not easily be forgotten by any of this family. I trust we are all one body united by one Spirit. I doubt not but we have also a few fellow members in your little islands. May He whom we serve in the gospel of His Son increase them an hundred-fold I We hear of some increase of the work of God almost in every part of England; but above all in Cornwall, in Lancashire, Cheshire, and various parts of Yorkshire. It pleases God to bless Mr. Valton wherever he turns his face; but his body sinks under him, and he is still hovering between life and death. Would it not be advisable, if you still continue feeble, to return to England as soon as possible; especially if you have reason to believe the air of ~ Jersey does not agree with your constitution I commend you to Him who is able to heal both your soul and body; and" am, dear sir,

Your very affectionate friend and brother.

To John Baxendate

LONDON, February 19, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - You do well to put me in mind of my promise; for otherwise I might have forgotten it. It seems at length the time is come for poor Wigan to lift up its head. I shall be glad to give them a sermon at Wingates myself in my way from Wigan to Bolton. [He preached at Wingates, five or six miles from Bolton, On April and in the evening at Wigan.] We should mark the places where God is pleased to work eminently, and strive to pour in all the help we can.

You would do well to read over and consider the Large Minutes of the Conference. See if you can thoroughly agree with what is there laid down both with regard to doctrine and discipline. If you can, then set your hand to the plough in God's name, and never look back. [See letters of March 7, 1783, and Feb. 25, 1785, to him.] Begin as soon as you please ordering your affairs, and go on with circumspection. Meantime stir up the gift of God that is in you, and do all the good you can. - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Samuel Bradburn

LONDON, February 25, 1784.

DEAR SAMMY, - At present I have but just time to tell you I hope to be at Leeds on Tuesday, March [9]. [Wesley went first to Scotland, and did not get to Leeds till July 25, for the Conference which began on the 27th.] Your manner of proposing your objection puts me in mind of your friend Mr. Dodd, your speaker cathedra.

But the matter is not half so dear as it appears to you. It is, however, a point, though considered long ago, worth considering again and again. But you must stay your stomach till you either see or hear again from

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Bailey

BATH, March 3, 1784.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I am glad to hear that Mr. Bailey recovers his health and that he is not quite unemployed. The more both he and you are employed for a good Master the better; seeing it is a sure truth that every man shall receive his own reward according to his own labor. On Monday, April 5 (if nothing unforeseen prevent), I expect to be at Stockport, and Tuesday, 6th, at Manchester. [His route was varied a little, so that he did not reach Manchester till April 10.] - I am, my dear Rachel,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. Rachel Bailey, In Salford,

Manchester.

To Samuel Bardsley

BATH, March 3, 1784.

DEAR SAMMY, - I am glad Mr. Smyth [See letter of Feb. 13 to Bardsley.] preached at Macclesfield. He is, indeed, a son of thunder. I believe God employed him to awake several poor sinners at Manchester. Now, Sammy, do all the good you can; be instant in season and out of season 1 Put forth all your strength! - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Arthur Keene [8]

BATH, March 3, 1784.

DEAR ARTHUR, - It is a true saying, 'There is in love a sweetness ready penned.' Copy out only that, and save expense. You mean what you speak, and that is enough.

I am glad the school is begun, and am in great hope that it will be continued. Those that are frequently apt to weary of well doing might be frequently stirred up; otherwise the love of many, both in England and Ireland, will in process of time wax cold.

I am in hopes that Dr. Coke has spoke to my brother concerning writing a few hymns for the poor widows. [The Widows' Alms House in Dublin.] But, because the Doctor is apt to forget, I have this morning desired Mr. Whitfield to remind him of it. You did well in sending me an account of the widows themselves, living or dead. There is one (if she be yet alive) whom I visited in Cuffe Street several times. Rachael Davis I never recommended before; but I should be glad if she could be admitted - when there is a vacancy.

As yet I do not know any reason why Mr. Blair may not spend the next year at Dublin. I agree with you that a year is generally quite enough for a preacher to spend in one place. When he stays longer, both the people and the preacher usually grow flat and dead together.

This year, if God prolong my life and health, I am to visit Scotland; otherwise I should have willingly accepted your kind invitation.

Peace be with you and yours! - I am, dear Arthur,

Your affectionate brother.

To Susanna Knapp [9]

[BRISTOL, March 4, 1784.]

MY DEAR SUKY, - I am glad to find you are still desiring and seeking the best portion. To-morrow fortnight I hope to see you at Worcester. It gives me pleasure to learn that Mrs. Knapp's health is in some measure restored. We are sure of this - Health we shall have if health be best.

I am a good deal better than I was in autumn; but we are always well while we are in our Lord's hands. - I am, my dear Suky,

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Knapp, At Mr. Knapp's, Glover, In Worcester.

To William Percival [10]

BRISTOL March 4, 1784.

DEAR BILLY, - I desire Mr. Murlin, if any of our lay preachers talk either in public or private against the Church or the clergy, or read the Church Prayers, or baptize children, [See letter of Jan. 6.] to require a promise from them to do it no more. If they will not promise, let them preach no more. And if they break their promise, let them be expelled the Society.

From Macclesfield I expect to go to Chester, Monday, April 5; on Wednesday the 7th to Liverpool; Good Friday, April 9, Warrington; Saturday, 10th, Manchester; Tuesday, 13th, Bolton; Thursday, 15th, Wigan. - I am, dear Billy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Brian Bury Collins [11]

BRISTOL, March 11, 1784.

DEAR SIR, - When I was at Bath last, I found a very uncommon liberty of spirit, both in prayer and preaching, which I supposed to be partly owing to the spirit of the congregation, who appeared more than usually serious. I am therefore a little surprised that you should find less liberty than you usually do. [If] you have not since then found any change for the better; if you still feel that restraint upon your spirit at Bath, I am of the same judgment with you: it seems to be a divine indication that you are called to other places. Should you think well of taking either a short or a long journey with me, I am to set out on Monday morning for Stroud. I have an easy horse; and whenever you are tired with riding, you may come into the chaise. If you like the proposal, come hither either upon Sunday morning or afternoon. If you choose it, you may preach in Temple Church. [Wesley preached at Bath on March 3.]

I am a little embarrassed with regard to Dr. Witherspoon. It is natural for you to be prejudiced in his favor. But he cannot be surprised if most Englishmen are strongly prejudiced on the other side: when they consider him as the grand instrument of tearing away children from their parents to which they were united by the most sacred ties, so that I know not with what face I can mention him, or with what probability of success.

Wishing all happiness to you and yours, I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

If you do not come, you will send a line directly.

To Zachariah Yewdall

WORCESTER, March 21, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - My judgment is that you must not have any respect of persons. But whoever will not promise to put away the accursed thing, to refrain from buying stolen goods (such are all uncustomed goods), can no longer be a member of our Society. [See letter of Jan. 29, 1780.] And you should everywhere scatter the Word to a Smuggler.

Let every one rich or poor show his ticket, or not be admitted at the meeting of the Society. [See letter of April 9, 1781.] You must mend or end that local preacher. Make an example of him for the good of all.

Let the rail in the new preaching-house go down the middle of the room. We have found this the only effectual way of separating the men from the women. This must be done, whoever is pleased or displeased. [See letter of Sept. 16, 1785.] Blessed is the man that endureth temptation! When he has been tried, he shall come forth as gold. - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ann Bolton

BURSLEM, April 1, 1784.

MY DEAR NANCY, - The recovery of Mr. Boltoh's health and much more of his cheerfulness you should look upon as a token for good, a fresh proof that God is on your side. It is another blessing that your spirits do not sink, but you are still kept above the billows. It shows, indeed, how you are called to trust God, though without knowing which way He will lead you. In due time He will reveal this also and make it plain before your face. At present it is easier to know what is not to be done than what is. But you are in God's school, and He will teach you one lesson after another fill you have learned all His holy and acceptable will. O tarry thou the Lord's leisure. Be strong, and He shall comfort thy heart; and put thou thy trust in the Lord! - I am, my dear Nancy,

Yours most affectionately.

To Hannah Ball

EDINBURGH, April 25, 1784.

MY DEAR SISTER, - It would not be strange if your love did grow cold. It would only be according to the course of nature. But, blessed be God, we know there is a power that controls the course of nature; and the affection which flows from this does not depend upon blood and spirits, and therefore ' never faileth.'

I was afraid there had been some misunderstanding between Mr. Broadbent [John Broadbent, the Assistant.] and you. Let him and you be free and open with each other, and I trust nothing will hurt you.

Whenever the preachers strongly exhort the people to accept of full sanctification, and to accept it now, by simple faith, there the work of God in general will prosper. This is the proper Methodist testimony! - I am, with kind love to Ann, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To his Nephew Charles Wesley [12]

DUNDEE, May. 12, 1784.

DEAR CHARLES, - I doubt not but both Sarah and you are in trouble because Samuel has 'changed his religion.' Nay, he has changed his opinions and mode of worship. But that is not religion; it is quite another thing. 'Has he, then,' you may ask, 'sustained no loss by the change' Yes, unspeakable loss; because his new opinion and mode of worship are so unfavorable to religion that they make it, if not impossible to one that once knew better, yet extremely difficult.

'What, then, is religion' It is happiness in God, or in the knowledge and love of God. It is 'faith working by love, producing' righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.' In other words, it is an heart and life devoted to God; or communion with God the Father and the Son; or the mind which was in Christ Jesus, enabling us to walk as He walked. Now, either he has this religion or he has not.' If he has, he will not finally perish, notwithstanding the absurd, unscriptural opinions he has embraced and the superstitious and idolatrous modes of worship. But these are so many shackles which will greatly retard him in running the race that is set before him. If he has not this religion, if he has not given God his heart, the case is unspeakably worse: I doubt if he ever will; for his new friends will continually endeavor to hinder him by putting something else in its place, by encouraging him to rest in the form, notions, or externals, without being born again, without having Christ in him, the hope of glory, without being renewed in the image of Him that created him. This is the deadly evil. I have often lamented that he had not this holiness, without which no man can see the Lord. But though he had it not, yet in his hours of cool reflection he did not hope to go to heaven without it. But now he is or will be taught that, let him only have a right faith (that is, such and such notions), and add thereunto such and such externals, and he is quite safe. He may, indeed, roll a few years in purging fire; but he will surely go to heaven at last!

Therefore you and my dear Sarah have great need to weep over him. But have you not also need to weep for yourselves For have you given God your hearts Are you holy in heart Have you the kingdom of God within you righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost the only true religion under heaven O cry unto Him that is mighty to save for this one thing needful! Earnestly and diligently use all the means which God hath put plentifully into your hands! Otherwise I should not at all wonder if God permits you also to be given up to a strong delusion. But whether you were or were not, whether you are Protestant or Papist, neither you nor he can ever enter into glory, unless you are now cleansed from all pollution of flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness in the fear of God! - I am, dear Charles,

Your affectionate Uncle.

To James Rogers

ABEEDEEN, May 5, 1784.

DEAR JEMMY, - All letters to any part of Scotland must go through Edinburgh. Therefore it is sufficient to direct thither till the 15th instant, and then to Newcastle-on-Tyne. I objected to nothing in that sermon but a few tart expressions concerning the clergy. When these are altered, I believe it will be of use; and the more of them you can sell the better.

You have done well in restoring the meetings at five in the morning. These are the glory of the Methodists. My kind love to Hetty Roe. [Whom he married on Aug. 19. See letters of June 5, 1783 (to John Valton), and Nov. 7, 1784.] - I am, dear Jemmy,

Your affectionate brother and friend.

To William Black [13]

INVENESS, May 11, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I am glad you have given a little assistance to our brethren at Halifax and along the coast. There is no charity under heaven to be compared to this, the bringing light to the poor heathens, that are called Christians, but nevertheless still sit in darkness and the shadow of death. I am in great hopes that some of the emigrants from New York are really alive to God. And if so, they will every way be a valuable acquisition to the province where their lot is now cast. This may be one of the gracious designs of God's providence in bringing them from their native country. And if they not only themselves grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, but are likewise happy instruments in His hand of imparting that knowledge to others, they will have unspeakable reason to praise God both in time and in eternity.

There is no part of Calvinism or Antinomianism which is not fully answered in some part of our writings, particularly in the Preservative against Unsettled Notions in Religion. I have no more to do with answering books. It will be sufficient if you recommend to Mr. Alline's [See letter of Nov. 27, 1783, to Benjamin Chappel.] friends some of the tracts that are already written. As to himself, I fear he is wiser in his own eyes than seven men that can render a reason.

The work of God goes on with a steady pace in various parts of England. But still the love of many will wax cold, while many others are continually added to supply their place. In the West of England, in Lancashire, and in Yorkshire God still mightily makes bare His arm. He convinces many, justifies many, and many are perfected in love.

My great advice to those who are united together is: Let brotherly love continue! See that ye fall not out by the way! Hold the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace! Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ! - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Simon Day [14]

NEWCASTLE, June 1, 1784,

DEAR SIMON, - You shall be in Oxfordshire. Adieu.

To Mr. Simon Day, At Mr. Wicken's,

Shoemaker, Near the Castle, Oxon.

To Alexander Surer

DARLINGTON, June 13, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - Your letter gave me not a little satisfaction. I am glad to hear that your spirit revives. I doubt not but it will revive more and more, and the work of the Lord will prosper in your hands. I have a very friendly letter from Sir Lodowick [Sir Lodovick Grant. Wesley visited him at Grange Green, near Forres, in June 1764, and on June 7, 1779. See Journal, v. 74-6; vi. 237.]; and hope you will have an opportunity of calling upon him again, especially if Brother McAllum [Duncan McAllum was Assistant at Aberdeen, and Alexander Suter his colleague in Inverness.] and you have the resolution to change places regularly, as I proposed. I dearly love the spirit of Sister McAllum. She is a woman after my own heart. It will be of great and general use, when you have a quantity of little books, partly to sell and partly to give among the poor - chiefly indeed to give. If I live till the Conference, I will take order concerning it. Certainly you shall not want any help that is in the power of

Your affectionate brother.

To Zachariah Yewdall [15]

DARLINGTON, June 13, 1784.

DEAR ZACHARY, - I really think it is a critical case; and as we shall all (if God permit) meet together at the Conference in Leeds, I agree to what you say of referring the full consideration of the matter till that time. Meanwhile I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Joseph Entwisle and David Gordon [16]

SCARBOROUGH, June 20, 1784.

MY DEAR BRETHERN, - Having very little time, I take the opportunity of answering you both together. You have great reason to bless God continually, who has dealt so graciously with you. You have good encouragement to put forth all your strength in publishing the glad tidings of salvation. You are particularly called to declare to believers that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from all sin. Watch and pray that you may be little in your own eyes. - I am, my dear brethren,

Your affectionate brother.

To Francis Wrigley

SCARBOROUGH, June 20, 1784.

DEAR FRANCIS, - You did right with regard to Captain Colmer [Wrigley was at Bradford (Wilts). 'Brother Colmet' is mentioned on July 28, 1783 (Journal, vi. 437d).]; but you should likewise apply, if it can be done, to all his employers. I think he will soon find he has missed his mark.

I advise you to write to Mr. Shipman and ask whether he did give or offer [money] for Risgwy. I hope it is a slander.

Pray inform the minister of St..... I have tried that point in Westminster; and if he requires it of me, I will try it again.

If the preaching-places can be [supplied] during his absence, James Thom [Thom was in Cornwall East, to which Wrigley is appointed next Conference. Probably he had already gone there, and both of them wished to attend Conference in July in Leeds.] may come with you to the Conference.

I am afraid that kind of rupt[ure under] which Mary Hooker labors will [admit] of no natural remedy. - I am, dear Francis,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Francis Wrigley.

To Mrs. Christian

BRIDLINGTON, June 21, 1784.

MY DEAR SISTER, - The summer is already so far spent that I shall have little time to spend in Lincolnshire. I hope to be at Epworth on Saturday the 26th instant, and after visiting Gainsborough (on Monday the 28th) and Owston on Tuesday, at Epworth again on Wednesday, and in the neighboring towns the rest of the week. On Monday I am to Be at Rotherham: so that I shall not see Mr. Dodwell, [See letters of Aug. 14, x782, and July 17, 1785.] unless I could have the pleasure of seeing him at Epworth. My work is great, and my time is short. 'I would my every hour redeem.' Why should any time be spent in vain - I am, with kind love to your husband, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Arthur Keene [17]

BRIDLINGTON, June 21, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHR,"I agree with you in hoping that Brother Blair's labors will be productive of a blessing to many in Dublin; the rather because he not only preaches but also lives the gospel. And wherever a man's life confirms his doctrine God will confirm the word of His messenger.

It gives me pleasure to hear that the school succeeds well. It is an excellent institution. I am very glad that Richard Condy's brother has come over to assist him. [See letter of March 3 to Keene.] I hope Brother Condy continues to go out on Sunday noon to the little towns round Dublin. We try all the little towns round London, and have Societies in most of them. What a shame it is that we should so long have neglected the little towns round Dublin, and that we have not a Society within ten miles of it

During the present state of Mr. Pawson's health he would be of little service at Dublin. You want lively, zealous, active preachers. And, to tell you a melancholy truth, few of our elder preachers are of this character. You must look for zeal and activity among the young preachers. I am greatly scandalized at this, that a preacher fifty years old is commonly but half a preacher. I wonder that every preacher does not use Bishop Stratford's prayer, [Nicholas Stratford (1633-1707), Bishop of Chester 1689.] 'Lord, let me not live to be useless.' A gradual work of grace constantly precedes the instantaneous work both of justification and sanctification. But the work itself (of sanctification as well as justification) is undoubtedly instantaneous. As after a gradual conviction of the guilt and power of sin you was justified in a moment, so after a gradually increasing conviction of inbred sin you will be sanctified in a moment. And who knows how soon Why not now May the whole blessing of the gospel be on you and Sister Keene! - I am, dear Arthur,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Arthur Keene, in Dublin.

To John Valton

YORK, June 25, 1784.

MY DEAR BROTHER,"I just snatch time to write a line. I hope to be at Dawgreen on July 17 at half hour after six, at Birstall on Sunday and on Monday the I9th in the morning. [He preached in Bingley on July 18 in the morning and afternoon; at Dawgreen, where a new chapel was to be built, on the 24th; at Bitstall 'to several thousands' on Sunday 25th.]

It will, I believe, be better for you to be at Scarborough, because many there are much alive, and hardly any at Bridlington. John Alien may stay at Birstall another year. [Valton was appointed to Bradford, and Alien remained at Bitstall.] Peace be with you all! - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ann Bolton [18]

EPWORTH, June 28, 1784.

MY DEAR NANCY, - The strong and tender regard which I have for you makes your letters always welcome. Providence has seen good to try you for many years in the furnace of affliction, but all will work together for your good. You shall lose nothing but your dross. I wonder you do not find one person that knows how to sympathize with you. Surely there must be some such in the Society at Witney; although you have not yet found them, perhaps for want of praying for this very thing. I advise you to make it a matter of earnest prayer; and certainly God will give you a friend. Accommodableness is only the art of becoming all things to all men without wounding our own conscience. St. Paul enjoins it in those words, 'Please all men for their good unto edification.' Bare rules will hardly teach us to do this. But those that have a single eye may attain it, through the grace of God, by reflection and experience. - I am, my dear Nancy,

Very affectionately yours.

To Miss Bolton, Near Witney,

Oxfordshire.