To the Mayor of Newcastle-upon-Tyne
Date: NEWCASTLE, July 12 1743.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1743)
Author: John Wesley
---
MR. MAYOR, -- A message was delivered to me yesterday in the street by one at the head of a crowd of people, to this effect: ‘Mr. Mayor, being informed of the tumult you raised on Sunday, discharges you from preaching at the Sand Hill any more.’

I reverence all magistrates as the ministers of God. Therefore at the Sand Hill I will preach no more. This is my answer to you as a magistrate. But will you not pardon me, sir, if I add a few words, not as one accused to a judge, but as one reasonable man speaking to another When I was first pressed by the Countess of Huntingdon to go and preach to the colliers in or near Newcastle, that objection immediately occurred, ‘Have they no churches and ministers already’ It was answered, ‘They have churches, but they never go to them! and ministers, but they seldom or never hear them! Perhaps they may hear you. And what if you save (under God) but one soul’ I yielded. I took up my cross and came. I preached Jesus, the Savior of sinners. Many sinners of all sorts came and heard. Many were (and are) saved from their sins. The drunkards are sober, the common swearers fear God, the Sabbath-breakers now keep that day holy. These facts are undeniable, the persons being well known and ready at any time to attest them. Last week I was informed that abundance of Sabbath-breakers and drunkards used to wander about the Sand Hill on Sunday evenings. Immediately my heart burned within me to call those sinners also to repentance. I came, and (nothing terrified by their noise) cried aloud in the name of the Lord, --

‘Sinners, turn; why will you die

God, your Maker, asks you why.’

They subsided apace, and more and more began to sink into seriousness. Some gentlemen (I am sorry to say it) labored exceedingly to prevent this; and one particularly, in light gray clothes, went to and fro with great diligence, and gave money to, I believe, twenty or thirty persons, to shout and strike or push their neighbors. Much tumult arose. In the intervals of calm I cried the more earnestly, ‘Turn ye, turn ye; for why will ye die, O house of Israel’ After almost an hour (the time I had first proposed) I withdrew, walking through the thickest of the rioters, who dropped away to the right and left, and could no more bear my eye than they could His that sent me. [See Journal, iii 80-1.]

Now, sir, what an insult it is upon common sense to say that I raised that tumult. Had only these gentlemen (so called) stood quietly, I would have answered for the behavior of the rest, who within one quarter of an hour would have been as orderly and silent as an assembly in a court of justice. However that be, I have now delivered my own soul; and if these poor sheep do continue in sin, and consequently perish, I am clear. I have done what in me lay; their blood is not on my head.

I am persuaded, sir, you do not take the freedom with which I have spoken as a mark of disrespect, but rather as a proof that I am, sir,

Your most obedient servant.