1789



To Benjamin Rhodes

NEAR LONDON, January 7, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You have done exactly right. Observe the rules of the Conference, both in changing the stewards or in any other point, whoever is pleased or displeased. [See letters of Nov. 6, 1788, and April 26, 1789.] And do not fail mildly to expostulate the case, either with George [George Shadford at St, Ives.] or any other Assistant who does not observe them. The trustees and leaders will soon trample them under-foot if you will let them. But I think you can be mild, and yet firm. -- I am, with love to Sister Rhodes,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Ann Bolton

LONDON, January 9, 1789.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- 'Sir, you are troubled,' said Mr. Law to me, 'because you do not understand how God is dealing with you. Perhaps if you. did, it would not so well answer His design. He is teaching you to trust Him further than you can see Him.' He is now teaching you the same lesson. Hitherto you cannot understand His ways. But they are all mercy and truth. And though you do not know now what He does you shall know hereafter.

I am acquainted with several persons whom I believed to be saved from sin. But there is great variety in the manner wherein God is pleased to lead them. Some of them are called to act much for God, some to rejoice much, some to suffer much. All of these shall receive their crown. But when the Son of Man shall come in His glory, the brightest crown will be given to the sufferers. Look up, thou blessed one l the time is at hand! -- I am

Ever yours.

To Duncan McAllum

LONDON, January 20, 1789.

DEAR DUNCAN,--By all means choose trustees without delay; and let them be such as belong to the circuit, only such as you can depend upon both for judgment and honesty. I think it is by prayer that you must alter the purpose of the Earl of Findlater. [For the late Earl's care for his estates around Banff, see Journal, vi. 10.] I am not at all surprised at the behavior of John Atlay. In a year or two he will find whether he has changed for the better. He was the first occasion of the division at Dewsbury by sending word to the trustees that, if the Conference would not supply them with preachers, he would come himself and settle among them. [See letter of Aug. 25, 1788.] I am, with love to Sister McAllum, Your affectionate friend and brother. To the Rev. Mr. McAllum, Inverness,

To James Currie [1]

LONDON, January 24, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You have great cause to praise God for pouring out His Spirit on poor Northampton and turning your heaviness into joy. You should try with all diligence to work together with God and improve this day of His power: first, by laying hold on all the backsliders you can, and laboring if possible to bring them back to the fold; and, secondly, by earnestly exhorting the brethren to go on to perfection. This should be done both in pubic and private. -- I am

Yours affectionately.

To Mr. James Currie,

In Northampton.

To Mrs. Tighe [2]

NEAR LONDON, January 22, 1789.

MY DEAR MADAM, -- A few years since, Mr. Armstrong from the North of Ireland was stationed in the Liverpool circuit. He said business called him to Ireland. I-Ie left his circuit, Havant, Chester, without consulting his Assistant. In consequence of this he was excluded the Connection. In these things we are obliged to be very exact. The Assistant told Chester Band that the circuit could not' spare him, and that his quitting it at a time when there was none to supply his place would be attended with bad consequences. He was therefore not a little to blame. However, thus far I can favor him (especially as you desire it) that I will not exclude him, but only remove him into the next circuit. Wishing you many happy years. -- I am, my dear Madam,

Your affectionate servant.

To Mrs. Tighe, at Woodstock,

Innistoyne, near Kilkenny.

To Freeborn Garrettson [3]

LONDON, January 24, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- It signifies but little where we are, so we are but fully employed for our good Master. Whether you went, therefore, to the east, it is all one, so you were laboring to promote His work. You are following the order of His providence wherever it appeared, as an holy man strongly expressed it, in a kind of holy disordered order. But there is one expression that occurs twice or thrice in yours which gives me some concern: you speak of finding 'freedom' to do this or that. This is a word much liable to be abused. If I have plain Scripture or plain reason for doing a thing well. These are my rules, and my only rules. I regard not whether I had freedom or no. This is an unscriptural expression and a very fallacious rule. I wish to be in every point, great and small, a scriptural, rational Christian.

In one instance formerly you promised to send me your Journal. Will you break your word because you do not find freedom to keep it Is not this enthusiasm O be not of this way of thinking I You know not whither it may lead you. You are called to

Square your useful life below

By reason and by grace.

But whatever you do with regard to me you must do quickly, or you will no more in this world.

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Walter Churchey [4]

LONDON, January 27, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- On Monday, March 2, I hope to be in Bath or Bristol; then we may talk about the number of copies. I have been much more concerned than you for these sixty years in printing books both with and without subscription. And I still think, with all our skill and industry, we shall be hard set to procure three hundred subscribers. Perhaps three hundred may promise! But we must never imagine that all who promise will perform. But of this we may talk more when we meet at Bristol. [The list of subscribers printed in Churchey's Poems on Various Occasions accounts for 195 copies. See letters of Dec. 6, 1788, and March 3, 1789, to him.]

I suppose every one that loves King George loves Mr. Pitt.

Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

I will inquire after the vintage.

To Mr. Churchey, Near the Hay,

Brecon.

To Robert Dull [5]

LONDON, January 28, 1789.

DEAR ROBERT, -- I am thoroughly satisfied with your economy in the building of the house. It is exceeding cheap. But the grand difficulty is how to raise the money, or, at least, how to raise it as soon as it will be wanted. This is no time of year for making collections. It should be matter of much prayer. I see no way but, Who will lend I will be security for forty pounds more. Look up! -- I am, dear Robert,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Rutherford [6]

LONDON, January 31, 1789.

DEAR TOMMY, -- I think you have done exactly right with regard to Thomas Smith. It seems the less you say about him the better. You have only to go straight forward. The leaders, I doubt not, will take your advice and set an example to others.

If it pleases God to continue my life and health, I purpose to set out for Ireland at the usual time and to call upon you at Stockport about the latter end of March.

Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Whereat [7]

LONDON, February 4, 1789.

MY DEAR PATTY, -- We seem to be now just where we were some years ago. You had a strange dream; but it is past, and you are now awake. He that was the chief means of lulling you asleep is now likewise broad awake. Well, let us now redeem the time. The night is far spent! The day of eternity is at hand! I am now preparing to take leave of London, perhaps to see it no more. But perhaps my bones may rest here in a vault which is prepared for me and a few more preachers. -- I am, my dear Patty,

Your very affectionate Uncle.

To Mrs. Pat. Whereat, At the New Room,

In Bristol.

Send it to her.

To Abraham Case

LONDON, February [7], 1789.

DEAR ABRAHAM, -- I make no doubt but He that loved you enabled you to say yea from the ground of thy heart. 'The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord.' Especially as the Lord made her ready before He took her to Himself. But although it has pleased God to remove her, you cannot quit the task which He has assigned you. You are still to watch over both the children and the infant Society, and in due time God will provide you with another helper. -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Tighe [8]

LONDON, February 7, 1789.

DEAR MADAM, -- It would not easily be that I should refuse anything which you desired. Therefore I have sat four [Journal, vii, 459-64.] times to Mr. Romney, and he has finished the picture. It is thought to be a good likeness, and many of my friends have desired an engraving taken from it. But I answer, 'The picture was not mine but yours. Therefore I can do [no] thing without your consent.' But if you have no objection, then I will employ an engraver that I am well assured will do it justice. Wishing every blessing to you and all your family, I remain, dear madam, Your affectionate servant.





To Mrs. Rogers

February 9, 1789.

MY DEAR HETTY, -- I am glad to hear that you do not grow weary or faint in your mind, that you are rather increasing in the way of holiness. Go on in the name of the Lord and in the power of His might, doing the will of God from the heart.

It was a providence indeed that the flood did not begin in the night rather than in the day. So it is that judgment is usually mixed with mercy, that sinners may be awakened and not destroyed. I liked well to lodge at Brother Laffan's [See Feb. 9, 1783.] when I was in Cork last; but certainly I shall like much better to lodge with Brother Rogers and you. I shall be more at home with you than I could be anywhere else in Cork. I still find (blessed be God) a gradual increase of strength, and my sight is rather better than worse. If my life and health be continued, I shall endeavor to reach Dublin about the end of March and Cork before the end of June. Peace be with your spirits! -- I am, my dear Hetty,

Yours most affectionately.

To Joseph Taylor

LONDON, February 11, 1789.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- I am glad to hear that the little stumbling-blocks in your circuit are so happily removed. [See letter of Nov. 16, 1788.] Undoubtedly after I am gone several of our preachers will leave the Church; perhaps all that have not a single eye -- that desire honor, or money, or anything upon earth. But I hope I shall not live to see this. While I am here let us go on in the old way.

There is no danger of my seeing Nottingham this year. On the 2nd of March I hope to be in Bath, on the 4th at Bristol, on the 17th at Gloucester, the 21st at Birmingham, and then in Dublin as soon as I can. -- I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Roberts

LONDON, February 12, 1789.

DEAR TOMMY, -- You send me good news indeed. I congratulate you upon your deliverance. [See letter of Jan. 18, 1788, to him.] It is not a little one. Only He that is almighty was able to burst those bonds in sunder. Many years ago I was in exactly the same case; and just then, when I came to these words in the Lesson for the day, 'Son of man, behold I take from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke,' [See letter of Feb. 14, 1786.] I was quite stunned, and could not just then read a word more. But afterwards I saw God was wiser than me.

It seems to me that you drew the right conclusion from this remarkable providence. Surely God does now give you a loud call to devote yourself to God in a single life. I advise you to read with much prayer the Notes on I Corinthians 7th. And remember the wise direction of Kempis, [Book I. chap. viii.] 'Avoid all good women, and commend them to God.' --I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. T. Roberts, At the New Room,

In Cork.

To Joseph Taylor

LONDON, February 13, 1789.

DEAR JOSEPH, -- I have a business of some importance for you to transact. Pray go to my old friend Matthew Bagshaw, and in my name desire of him, (1) to tell you how far John Wilson has wronged him: (2) to introduce you to Mr. Henshaw, of whom you are to inquire (and write me word directly) what he heard between John Wilson and him: desire him also (3) to let you know whether he has wronged any one beside in Nottingham: if he has, in what manner

If you can come clearly to the bottom of his affair, it is possible I may be of some real service to him. But till then it is not possible. For God will surely fight against him while he continues to cover his sin.--I am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Walter Churchey

[LONDON, February 18, 1789.]

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am fully convinced we cannot possibly dispose of more than five hundred copies. My printer has carefully computed what the printing of these on a fine paper will cost, and finds it will come rather under a hundred and fifty pounds. [See letter of March 3, 1789.] So the sooner you begin the better. I am

Your affectionate brother.

I am so set hence for Bristol on Monday, March 2.

To Ann Bolton

NEAR LONDON, February 20, 1789.

MY DEAR NANCY, -- We have conversed together a fair number of years; and I never was tired of you yet. From the time of its birth to this day my love to you never grew cold; though I have often observed yours to vary, being sometimes warmer and sometimes colder. But it can never be quite cold in this region of sorrow and care.

It has seemed good to our Lord for many years to lead you in a rough and thorny way. But still His hand has held you up, and His care. Therefore you have no need to take [thought] for to-morrow, but trust in Him to-day.

But how does poor Neddy Bolton go on Does he go forward or backward Has he an hard bargain still Or is he likely to keep his head above water [See letter of Jan. 5, 1783.] He has need of patience as well as you; and when you have been tried you shall both come forth as gold.

The young woman who has foretold that I should follow my brother before the end of March added that I should be incapable of preaching for two months before my death. But if so, how shall we reconcile one part of the prophecy with the other For at present I am as capable of preaching as ever I was in my life. But be that as it may, while we live let us live to Him that died for us. -- I am, my dear Nancy,

Affectionately yours.

On Wednesday, March 4, I expect to be at Bristol; and on Monday, March T7, at Stroud.

To Sarah Mallet [9]

LONDON, February 21, 1789.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- As your speaking at Mr. Hunt's was not a premeditated thing, I see no harm in it, and indeed you was so hedged in by a concurrence of circumstances that I do not know how you could well avoid it. Perhaps there was some end of Divine Providence (not known to us) to be answered thereby. Therefore I am not at all sorry that it so fell out. But you must expect to be censured for it.

But I was a little surprised a while ago when one speaking of you said, 'Sally Mallet is not so serious as Betty Reeve.' I thought Sally Mallet was as serious as any young woman in Norfolk. Be wary in all your actions, and you will never [want] any assistance which is in the power of, my dear Sally,

Yours affectionately.

To John Stretton [10]

LONDON, February 27, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Thirty years ago we had thirty or forty preachers, the greater part of whom were truly devoted to God; but one or two of them departed from us, loving the present world. At present we have in Great Britain and Ireland about two hundred traveling preachers, and probably there are three or four of these whose hearts are not right with God; but we do not know it; we have no proof of this, or we should put them away.

I do not know that Henry Brians has any gifts for preaching or any desire of it. Samuel Woods I do not remember at all. But in a few days I shall probably set out for Ireland.

What becomes of James Wray [See letter of June 30, 1788, to John Mann.] Is he dead or alive I know not that I have had a letter from him for above this twelve months.

What concerns me is that I cannot find any union between you northern preachers. John Hoskins, John McGeary, and

John Stretton I should imagine would have all acted in concert; on the contrary, each seems to be afraid of the other. How is this What is the true ground of this shyness What objections have you to John Hoskins or John McGeary What objections have they to you 'Tis a pity but you had all spoken freely to

Your affectionate brother.

To George Holder

LONDON, February 28, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You say, 'The last quarter, when we compared our plans with the Minutes of Conference, we wanted a considerable number of people whom Mr. Crook had given in to you.' I cannot understand this. Cannot Mr. Crook cast up a plain account And surely neither he, nor you, nor any preacher would willfully give in a false account. [Holder had followed John Crook as Assistant in the Isle of Man. See letter of June 24.]

There is something very remarkable in the relation which you give of the life and death of Mr. Charles Laco. 'Right precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.' And every Assistant should take all possible care to procure the best account of them that can be had. These accounts are frequently means of awakening men of the world as well as of encouraging the children of God. In every place the subscribers to the Magazines will fall off unless great care be taken. You have need of great diligence as well in this as in all other parts of your office. -- I am, dear George,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Tegart

LONDON, February 28, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Henry Moore and I, after reading and considering both your letter and one from Richard Condy, are clearly of opinion that he cannot and ought not to leave Waterford till another Assistant comes to take his place. [Tegart was a merchant in Waterford. See letter of Aug. 2, 1788, to Mrs. Ward.] We do not conceive him to be in any fault in this matter. We think he did no more than it was his duty to do. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To James Creighton [11]

BRISTOL, March 3, 1789.

DEAR SIR, -- I think you may advise Brother Black either (1) When they persecute you in one city, flee to another; we have often done with good success. Or (2) You may write to Lord Inniskillen, a word from whom would terrify the rioters. Or (3) Let Mr. Moore write to one of our lawyers in I)ublin, and inquire which is the best method, -- To move the King's Bench for an information, or to arrest three or four of the chief rioters, with an action of assault and battery. My judgment, if the King's Bench is moved, it should be against one or more of the Justices. -- I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Walter Churchey [12]

BRISTOL, March 3, 1789.

I have now revised the five volumes of my brother's Hymns on the Four Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles. He had himself revised them no less than seven times in the space of twenty years. Many of them are little or nothing inferior to the best of them that have been printed. Those of them that savor a little of Mysticism I have rather corrected or expunged; but I have no thought or design at all of printing them. I have other work to do which is of more immediate importance. Besides that, I have not two or three hundred pounds to spare. I will order my printer to strike off some of your proposals, which I will then occasionally recommend to my friends. Some of them I know will subscribe; and it may be God will incline the hearts of more than I am aware of. But with whom do you agree for paper and printing Proceed warily, or you may get into much trouble. That God may bless you and yours, and be your Guide in this and in all things, is the prayer of

Your affectionate brother.

To Susanna Knapp

[BATH, March 3, 1789.]

MY DEAR SUKY, -- I am glad to find you still desiring and seeking the best portion. To-morrow fortnight I hope to see you at Worcester. It gives me pleasure to hear that Mrs. Knapp's health is in some measure restored. We are sure health we shah have if health is the best for us.

Yours affectionately.

To Miss Knapp, At Mr. Knapp's,

In Worcester.





To John Taylor [13]

BRISTOL, March 4, 1789

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I think here we must close our friendly contest, for neither can convince the other.

Yet still I must maintain, I plead simply for this. 1. Let the Conference have the right of stationing the preachers, the same that I have now; and which is secured to me by the deed in question.

2. This deed gives me no property in any houses, nay, by this deed I lose the property of those houses which were mine before.

3. Pray consider this. These houses were my property till that deed took place. Since then I am not proprietor of any house in England. And can that deed convey a property to the Conference, which divested me of it -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. John Taylor,

At Gomersal, near Leeds.

To Rachel Jones

BRISTOL, March 4, 1789.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- As you desired it, I cannot but send you a line, although I have not a moment to spare. You have exceeding reason to praise God, who has dealt so mercifully with you. You have reason to praise Him likewise for hearing your prayer and hearing for those of your household. Now be a pattern for all that are around about you. Be a pattern of meekness and lowliness in particular. Be the least of all and the servant of all. Be a companion of them, and them only, that worship in spirit and in truth. Read again and again the 13th chapter of St. Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians. Then shall your light shine more and more unto the perfect day. -- I am, dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Miss Rachel Jones, Of Barton-le-Willows,

Near York.

To Adam Clarke, [14]

BRISTOL, March 9, 1789.

DEAR ADAM, -- If I should live to see you another Conference, I should be glad to have Sister Clarke and you here rather than at most other places, because I spend more time here myself than at any other place except London. I am glad to hear that God has raised up so able a preacher from the islands [On July 15 Adam Clarke says: John De Queteville, ' who has now all the meekness, gentleness and simplicity of the gospel, united with that burning zeal before which mountains shrink into molehills, and aided by that faith to which all things are possible.'' See Dunn's Life, 70.]; but certainly you should spare no pains in teaching him to read and write English by reading with and explaining to him first the Christian [Library] and then the Instructions to Children. And I do not doubt but if he learned with a single eye, he would be largely strengthened by the blessed Spirit.

I suppose the cyder would come to London almost as soon as I left it, which was on the first Sunday of the year.

It would be a reason for being very wary in choosing names for our children if that old remark were true:

That our first tempers from example flow

And borrow that example from our names.

Peace be with you and yours! -- I am, dear Adam,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Richard Rodda

BRISTOL, March 11, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I hope to be with you on Good Friday between one and two o'clock. Then you dispose of me as you see best till Easter Monday in the afternoon; but that day I am to dine with Sir Philip Gibbes at Hilton Park.

The Assistant has need in most places to have a strict eye to the leaders; but they are nothing in the Methodist constitution, but single men who are employed by the Assistant as long and as far as he pleases. The account of good Sarah Ward is remarkable. -- I am, dear Richard,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Rodda, In Moore Street,

Birmingham.





To Mrs. Bowman

BRISTOL, March 14, 1789.

I have neither time nor inclination to enter into a long dispute on this or any other question. [See letter of March 4, 1786.] All I can do is, first to declare my own judgment, and then set down my reasons for it; and if your son is not satisfied therewith, I do not know any way to help it.

The judgment is that there is no more harm in keeping an hot-house than a flower garden; and I judge there is no more sin in keeping a flower garden than in smelling a rose.

My reason for judging both of these innocent is because neither of them is forbidden in Scripture, and it is sinful to condemn anything which Scripture does not condemn.

I think, therefore, to condemn all who keep hot-houses and flower gardens is a sin both against God and their neighbors; and one of them might say, 'Why am I judged of another man's conscience To my own Master I stand or fall.' I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Certain Persons in Dublin [15]

WHITEFRIAR STRERT, DUBLIN, March 31, 1789.

MY DEAR BRETHREN, -- I much approve of the manner and spirit wherein you write concerning these tender points. I explained myself upon them in some measure on Sunday; I will do it more fully now.

At present I have nothing to do with Dr. Coke; but I answer for myself. I do not separate from the Church, nor have any intention so to do. Neither do they that meet on Sunday noon separate from the Church any more than they did before; nay less, for they attend the church and sacrament oftener now than they did two years ago.

'But this occasions much strife.' True; but they make the strife who do not attend the service. Let them quietly either come or stay away, and there will be no strife at all.

'But those that attend say those that do not are fallen from grace.' No, they do not give them a bad word; but they surely will fall from grace if they do not let them alone that follow their own consciences.

But you 'fear this will make way for a total separation from the Church.' You have no ground for this fear. There can be no such separation while I live. Leave to God what may come after.

But, to speak plainly, do not you separate from the Church Yea, much more than those you blame Pray, how often have you been at church since Christmas twelve times in twelve weeks And how long have you been so fond of the Church Are you fond of it at all Do not you go oftener to a Dissenting meeting than either to St. Patrick's or your parish church My dear brethren, you and I have but a short time to stay together.

My race of glory's run, and race of shame;

And I shall shortly be with those that rest. [Milton, Samson Agonistes, ll. 597-8.]

Therefore, as one that loves you well and has loved you long, I advise you in the presence and in the fear of God, (1) Either quietly attend the Sunday service or quietly refrain from it; then there will be no strife at all. Now you make the noise of which you complain. (2) Make not this a pretense for being weary of well-doing. Do not for so poor a reason withdraw your subscription from the School or the preachers. What a miserable revenge would this be! Never let it be said that my friend Arthur Keene, that Mr. D'Olier or Boswell, was capable of this! From this hour let this idle strife be buried in eternal oblivion. Talk not of it any more. If it be possible, think not of it any more. Rather think, 'The Judge standeth at the door'; let us prepare to meet our God!





To Harriet Lewis

DUBLIN, April 2, 1789.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- Considering how changeable human nature is, I shoed have thought you would have forgotten me before now. I was therefore agreeably surprised when I had the pleasure of seeing you at Dudley. [See letter of March 29, 1788.] You seemed to be just the same as you was the first time that I conversed with you at Mr. Moon's house, [John Moon, the third preacherin the Birmingham Circuit; he died in 1801.] to be as desirous now as you was then to be not almost but altogether a Christian. But if this be your determination, you must remember you cannot be warm alone; you must needs find one if not more with whom you can converse freely on the things of God. This you may properly make matter of prayer; and sooner or later your prayer will be heard, although some of those with whom you once conversed are groin cold. But God is able to provide you with others who will not be unstable as water. It is a great blessing that He has upheld your gongs in the way and enabled you still to press on to the mark. May He stablish, strengthen, and settle you! So prays

Yours affectionately.





To Thomas Wride

DUBLIN, April 2, 1789.

DEAR TOMMY, -- I am surprised that a man who really fears God should engage himself in so bad a cause; but undoubtedly you have the better of the argument. Yet I see no prospect of convincing a man of his rank. Therefore I think it is the wisest way to let the matter drop. [Wride was again Assistant at Whitehaven. Can this refer to any dispute with the Lowthers] The publishing of a thing of this kind was only tried to stir up a nest of hornets. -- I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Cock

DUBLIN, April 7, 1789.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- I cannot but say that it was some concern to me when I first heard that you was married; because I was afraid that you would be less useful than you might have been in a single life. And, indeed, I hoped that if you married at all, it would be one of our preachers; then I could have stationed him in some circuit where I should have had frequent opportunities of conversing with you. I am glad, however, that you are still happy in God. If you had married an ungodly man, it would certainly have been a sin. But it was no sin to marry a child of God--yea, though he were but a babe in Christ. And surely, if you pray mightily for him, the Lord will hear your prayer, and supply whatever is yet wanting in his faith, till he is happy and holy and perfect in love. I hope there is no shyness between you and Mr. or Mrs. Clarke. And do you converse freely with the other preachers Do you meet in band I hope you are still acquainted with Miss Lempriere and (I think the name of her friend is) Mrs. Saumarez. [Adam Clarke wrote on Jan. 13: 'Jane Cock is still well and happy. Mrs. Saumarez gains ground. Miss Lempriere is very upright but very diffident.' See letter of Aug. 3 to Mrs. Cock.] I want you and them continually to grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. O let us improve this span of life to the uttermost!

Yours in tender affection.

To Peard Dickinson [16]

DUBLIN, April 11, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- As soon as ever Sister Dickinson is able to go abroad let her enter upon her labor of love. In things of this kind particularly delays are dangerous. Every good purpose will cool and die away if it is not as soon as possible put in execution. Only let us not undertake too much at a time. Generally one visit will be enough for one day, and that should not last above half an hour, or an hour at farthest.

I wrote a few days since to Mr. Hanby concerning his baptizing and administering the Lord's supper wherever he goes. He answers me, 'He intends to do still, for he believes it to be his duty.' I wish Brother Creighton and Moore and Rankin and you would spend an hour together, as it is a point of the utmost importance, and consider what steps are to be taken in this matter. Can this be connived at If so, I fear it is a blow at the very root of Methodism. And if not, you see the consequence: he will join John Atlay. Consider likewise another point: ought we to suffer Dr. Coke to pick out one after another the choicest of our young preachers [Evidently for his missionary work.] Peace be with your spirits! -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Lancelot Harrison [17]

DUBLIN, April 11, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- A letter which I received two or three days ago from George Whitfield [His Book Steward.] informs me that I outran my income so far last year as to be now above two hundred pounds in debt. I have therefore promised him not to draw upon him any more before the end of next month.

But do you not remember the rule in the Minutes of Conference that we are not to begin the building of any preaching-house before two-thirds of the money is subscribed This rule we may not dispense with. And I am afraid this is not the case with regard to the house you are speaking of at Lincoln. I doubt, therefore, whether the time be come for your building there. But you have cause to rejoice that the work of God prospers there, as well as at poor Blighton. -- I am, etc.

To Alexander Knox [18]

DUBLIN, April 11, 1789.

MY DEAR ALLECK, -- You see in the public papers that I shall be with you if God permits on the 30th of the next month. If I should be called to go a longer journey before that time, I hope you would be able to say, 'Good is the will of the Lord.' Every time we meet it is less and less probable that we should meet again in this world. But it is enough if we are counted worthy of that world and the resurrection of the dead. O let my dear Sally Knox [His sister.] think of this, for we know not how soon she may be called. Certainly I love her dearly; and shall be glad to meet her at our Lord's right hand. Peace be with all your spirits! -- I am, my dear Alleck,

Yours most affectionately.

To Peter Mill, Joseph Thompson, and John Stamp [19]

DUBLIN, April 11, 1789.

I require you three, Peter Mill, Joseph Thompson, and John Stamp, without consulting or regarding any person whatever, to require a positive answer of Edward Coates within three weeks after the receipt of this, 'Will you or will you not settle the house at Millbourn Place, North Shields, on the Methodist plan' If he will not do it within another week, I farther require that none of you preach in that house unless you will renounce all connexion with

Your affectionate brother.

I am at a point. I will be trifled with no longer.

To Henry Moore

NEAR LONDON, April 17, 1789.

DEAR HENRY, -- I answer all your letters immediately; but you do not consider the sea is now between us. I told you before, 'Send John Jenkins without delay.' So I suppose he is gone. I left Dr. Coke's Journal in Dublin with his daughter, to be published immediately. And undoubtedly you have printed enough of them in London to supply all the English Societies.

The work of God goes on well in most parts of Ireland, particularly in the North. They increase in Dublin as much in numbers as they do in grace. Many are much alive to God. [] I am, with kind love to Nancy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Zachariah Yewdall

ATHONE, April 18, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am glad to hear that there is so fine a prospect at Dalkeith. So is generally the way of our Lord, to try us first, and then to comfort. It is pity but James Ridall [See letter of Dec. 17, 1787.] had thoroughly settled his affairs before he attempted to travel. If that had been done, there is no doubt but he would have been useful wheresoever he went. I wish, however, Brother Dall may make a good conclusion with regard to the chapel at Dumfries. [See letter of Jan. 28.] Peace be with you and yours! -- I am, dear Zachary,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Armstrong [20]

TULLAMORE, April 22, 1789.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- You told me 'I forgot you once in not answering your letter'; but if I did, I shall not be in much danger of forgetting you again. I love you too well to forget you, and the more because I find you still looking upward and endeavoring to secure a better portion than this short-enduring world can give. I am glad you are in Athlone at this season, because peacemakers are wanted there, and I know you love making peace. I hope you will comfort your sister Rutledge. She has been sadly distressed; and a word spoken in season, how good it is I I think you will lose no opportunity of doing good to her or to any one. That you and yours may be a pattern to all is the sincere wish of, my dear sister,

Yours affectionately.

To Mrs. James Armstrong, Athlone.

To Arthur Keene [21]

PORTARLINGTON, April 23, 1789.

MY DEAR ARTHUR, -- I will not, I dare not draw the saw of controversy any longer; especially with James Deaves, [See letters of Aug. 2, 1788 (to Mrs. Ward), and May 20.] who will dispute through a stone wall.

In the name of God, have done! You can do no good by disputing. But you do much harm. You hurt your own spirit. You hurt others. You blow up a flame. You damp and hinder the work of God. By talebearing you separate chief friends. You prejudice my intimate friends against me. I have not deserved it of you. Let me alone. I act according to the best of my judgment. In speaking once you did well. But it is not well to worry me thus. I wish James Deaves would mind his own affairs. If he has a mind to renounce me, let him do it quietly. If you personally have anything to say to me, well! But I have no more to say to him--that is, James Deaves behind the curtain. None but he could tear you from

Your old, affectionate brother.









To Samuel Bardsley

CARLOW, April 26, 1789.

DEAR SAMMY, -- I am glad to hear that the work of the Lord still prospers in your hands. But there needs great steadiness, or you will not be able to keep the good old Methodist discipline. Brother Rhodes is desirous to do this; and it will be right for you to strengthen his hands therein. [See letter of Jan. 7.] Let the preachers stand firm together, and then the people will be regular; but if any of you take their part against the preacher, all will be confusion. Since you desire it, you may come to the Conference. -- I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Sam. Bardsley, At Mr. James Walker's,

In Sheffield.

To Edward Coates

WATERFORD, April 29, 1789.

Conference is out of the question. You have used me basely and ungratefully, after I have served you between forty and fifty years; and if I had not two strings to my bow I should have been in a fine condition. Your letters are a proof of all I say concerning you. If you and the six other persons who sign your letter of the 26th instant issued out all the money whereby the house at Millbourn Place was built, you are honest men; if not, I will not call you so. One of the twelve original rules of Methodism is, 'You are to do that part of the work which I appoint'; but this cannot be unless I have a right of appointing the preachers in all the Methodist preaching-houses. [See letter of April 11 to Peter Mill.] I am old, and you apparently young; yet you know not which of us will first be called hence. I wish you all well, and am

Your affectionate brother.

To Rebecca Ingram [22]

WATERFORD, April 29, 1789.

To receive a line from you was an unexpected pleasure. You will please to inform Mr. Brown that, as I purpose setting out from Kilfinane pretty early on Tuesday morning, May 12 shall probably be at Limerick between twelve and one. I am glad to find your love does not grow cold, nor your desires after all the mind that was in Christ. Now is the time to regain the whole image of God, wherein you was created. O be satisfied with nothing less, and you will surely receive it by simple faith! The Lord increase your faith! So prays

Yours affectionately.

To Walter Churchey

CORK, May 4. 1789.

My DEAR BROTHER, -- I am afraid Henry Floyd's estate is unsaleable, unless he can find the writing, for I cannot. I shall not be in London before October at soonest; but if Henry Moore will revise the copy, [Moore was at City Road, near to the printer of Churchey's Poems. See letters of March 3 and May 25 to him.] he will do almost as well as me. I hope the beginning of the work is in the press, else the book will not be printed off before Michaelmas. I wonder you do not understand mankind better, especially those wretches the great vulgar. If two in three of your subscribers stand to their word, it will be strange indeed. It was a deadly step not to secure half the money at the time of subscription. I receive the whole. I have now about sixty guineas, and hope to receive as many more. But where have you lived that you have found so many generous men It is strange that you should know more of them than I do. I am utterly against printing above five hundred copies. [Wesley's prudence and business sagacity contrast favorably with the lawyer's. See letters of Jan. 27 and May 25 to him.] If you and I between us can procure four hundred subscriptions, it is all we can expect. -- I am, in haste,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Churchey, Near the Hoy,

Brecon.

To Samual Bradburn

BRISTOL, May 6, 1789.

DEAR SAMMY, -- You are a compassionate man; and when you undertake a good work you do it with your might. For God's sake, for the gospel's sake, and for my sake, put a full stop to this vile affair, the prosecution of poor Sally Brown. [She probably met in Bower's class. Wesley's Diary has several entries. See Journal Index; and letter of Sept. 20, 1789.] If it is not stopped, I shall be under a necessity of excluding from our Society not only Eliz. Sharp but Joseph Bowers also. She would not dare to proceed thus without his connivance, if not encouragement. He can stop her if he will. She will not break with him. I will not enter into merits of the case at all. (That I have done already.) But I insist upon this. All of them are or were members of our Society. Therefore they were not at liberty to go to law with each other, but are under an obligation to stand to the decision of me or the Assistant. I pray, spare no pains. Put a full end to the business, that the scandal may be removed. Peace be with you and yours! -- I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.





To Jonathan Crowther [23]

CORK, May 20, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- 'Sessions!' 'elders!' We Methodists have no such customs, neither any of the Churches of God that are under my care. I require you, Jonathan Crowther, immediately to disband that session (so called) at Glasgow. Discharge them from meeting any more. And if they will leave the Society, let them leave it. We acknowledge only preachers, stewards, and leaders among us, over whom the Assistant in each circuit presides. You ought to have kept to the Methodist plan from the first. Who had any authority to vary from it If the people of Glasgow or any other place are weary of us, we will leave them to themselves. But we are willing to continue their servants, for Christ's sake, according to our own discipline, but no other. -- I am, dear Jonathan,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Armstrong

LIMERICK, May 14, 1789.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- You will do well to write me a line that I might know you had not forgotten me; I hope you never will till we come to the place where parting will be no more. I was well pleased when we were at Athlone to find you had not engaged with either of the contending parties. Indeed, they are contending about nothing, about straws, about such trifles as are not worth the mentioning. Till I came hither I was afraid there was some grievous misdemeanor on the one side or the other. And as you are friendly received by them all, who knows but you may be an instrument of good, a means of reconciling them to each other Let former things die and be forgotten. Now let my dear Sister Rutledge and you join hand and hand in putting out every spark of contention. [See letter of April 22.] So will you be more and more beloved by, my dear Jenny,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. James Armstrong, Athlone.

To Mrs. Freeman

CASTLEBAR, May 20, 1789.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- All this noise and confusion I impute to an artfull busy man, who has thrown wildfire among them that were quiet in the land. However, when I meet the classes, I will propose that question in each -- Who of you wishes the Sunday service to continue, and who does not [See letter of June 13, 1788.] what demonstrates the matter of this outcry to be a mere Bugbear is this: when we began the service on Sunday mornings in London, and afterwards in Bristol, no living creature ever said it was 'leaving the Church.' This is a palpable falsehood. It would not pass in England. A man bawls out, 'Fire, fire!' and puts people in a fright, when there is no fire at all but in his own imagination. And he will keep you in a fright while you hearken to him. [James Deaves: see letter of April 23.] Good it had been for that man if he had not been born I -- I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Jane Freeman, At

the New Room, In Dublin.

To Alexander Surer

KILLASHANDRA, May 21, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- It was affirmed to me that you gave one of the first occasions of disagreement by 'refusing to read the Prayers and speaking contemptuously of them.' Conversing with so many Presbyterians in Scotland might easily lead you into such a prejudice.

I have lying by me a very warm letter from one Edward Thomas, who seems ready to swallow up all that speak a word against Lawrence Kane. [Kane was Assistant at Plymouth. Thomas acknowledged his faults, and was restored to the Society. See letters of June 9 and Aug. 29.] I hear nothing from Nehemiah Janes. You are blamed for not preaching as often as you can; I hope there is no ground for this charge. [See letter of July 23, 1788.] Take care your own spirit is not sharpened! -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Surer, At the Preaching-house,

In Plymouth Dock.

To Walter Churchey

CLONES, May 25, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am afraid of delay. I doubt we shall not be able to be as good as our word, although in the last proposals I have protracted the time of delivery till the 1st of August. As you are not a stripling, I wonder you have not yet learned the difference between promise and performance. [See letters of May 4 and Aug. 26.] I allow at least five-and-twenty per cent.; and from this conviction I say to each of my subscribers (which, indeed, you cannot so decently say to yours), 'Sir, down with your money.' I know Dr. [Ogilvie] well [Probably Dr. John Ogilvie, an extract from whose poem 'Solitude, or The Elysium of the Poets,' in favor of Ossian, appears in Churchey's volume.]: he is a lovely man, and an excellent poet.

I commend you for inoculating the children. I believe the hand of God is in our present work; therefore it must prosper.

Indeed, I love Sister Churchey; and am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Thomas Wride

SIDARE, May 28, 1789.

Nay, Tommy, nay: you are more nice than wise. I have seen worse verses than these, even in print, in the very poems of William Darney. [For Darney (who published a Collection of Hymns in Four Parts in 1751) see letter of Feb. 9, 1750.] The rhymes are not bad. Why should you damp a rising genius If he and [you] were to set your wits together, you would surely produce something! Deal very gently with the young man. I am persuaded he will take advice.

You did exceeding well with regard to the house proposed to be built at Brompton. We have fresh warning. Good Brother Coates and Todd have given our preaching-house at North Shields to John Atlay and William Eels. [See letter of April 11 to Peter Mill.] So you see what we have to trust to. But you must deal exceedingly tenderly with them. Not one harsh or passionate word, or they will make their advantage of it. Above all, you should make it a matter of prayer. -- I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Mullis

NEW CHAPEL [LONDONDERRY], May 31, 1789.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- You are right in your judgment that God never withdraws the light of His countenance but for some fault in us; and in order to retain that light you should carefully follow the conviction He gives you from time to time. You should likewise labor to avoid all unprofitable reasonings; then you will soon walk in the light as He is in the light. -- I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To John Bredin LONDONDERRY, June 1, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- My belief is that neither one air nor another signifies a straw. The matter of complaint lies within, not without; and if anything could remove it, it would be the taking an ounce of lime water every morning for sixteen days and ten drops of elixir of vitriol in a glass of pure water every afternoon. Meantime you should walk an hour at least every day, five or ten minutes at a time; -- when it is fine, in the open air; when it rains, in the house. [See letters of Nov. 16, 1785 (to him), and Oct. 17, 1790.]

It will be well if you can raise a sufficient collection to build a preaching-house in Jersey. [See letter of Nov. 5, 1788.] And why not, if you set upon it in faith Are not all things possible to him that believeth But if you do build, take care to have windows enough and two broad doors; and do not build a scarecrow of an house.

Certainly, whenever you leave Jersey and Guernsey, you will do well to return to Ireland. But have a care! If you give way to discontent, it will find you in any place. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Printer of the 'Dublin Chronicle' [24]

LONDONDERRY, June 2, 1789.

SIR, -- 1. As soon as I was gone from Dublin, the Observer came forth, only with his face covered. Afterwards he came out under another name, and made a silly defense for me, that he might have the honor of answering it. His words are smoother than oil, and flow (who can doubt it) from mere love both to me and the people.

2. But what does this smooth, candid writer endeavor to prove, with all the softness and good humor imaginable Only this point (to express it in plain English), that I am a double-tongued knave, an old crafty hypocrite, who have used religion merely for a cloak, and have worn a mask for these fifty years, saying one thing and meaning another.

A bold charge this; only it happens that matter of fact contradicts it from the beginning to the end.

3. In my youth I was not only a member of the Church of England, but a bigot to it, believing none but the members of it to be in a state of salvation. I began to abate of this violence in 1729. But still I was as zealous as ever, observing every point of Church discipline, and teaching all my pupils so to do. When I was abroad, I observed every rule of the Church, even at the peril of my life. I knew not what might be the consequence of repelling the first magistrate's niece [See letters of July 5, 1737, to Thomas Causton and Mrs. Williamson (Sophia Hopkey).] from the sacrament, considering, on the one hand the power lodged in his hands, on the other the violence of his temper, shown by his declaration, 'I have drawn the sword, and I will never sheathe it till I have satisfaction.'

4. I was exactly of the same sentiment when I returned from America. I attended St. Paul's Church, and advised all our Society either to attend there every Sunday or at their several parish churches. In the year 1743 I published the Rules of the Society; one of which was that all the members thereof should constantly attend the church and sacrament. We had then a large Society at Newcastle-upon-Tyne; but one of the members totally left it after a few months,' because,' said he, 'they are mere Church-of-England men.'

5. About the year 1744 a clergyman offered me a chapel in West Street, Seven Dials (formerly a French church), and I began to officiate there on Sunday mornings and evenings. We did the same (my brother and I alternately) soon after at the French church in Spitalfields as soon as it came into our hands. This we continued from that time; and no one in England ever thought or called it leaving the Church. It was never esteemed so by Archbishop Potter, with whom I had the happiness of conversing freely; nor by Archbishop Secker, who was throughly acquainted with every step we took; as was likewise Dr. Gibson, then Bishop of London; and that great man Bishop Lowth. Nor did any of these four venerable men ever blame me for it in all the conversations I had with them. Only Archbishop Potter once said, 'Those gentlemen are irregular; but they have done good, and I pray God to bless them.'

6. It may be observed that all this time, if my brother or I were ill, I desired one of our other preachers, though not ordained, to preach in either of the chapels after reading part of the Church Prayers. This both my brother and I judged would endear the Church Prayers to them; whereas, if they were used wholly to extemporary prayer, they would naturally. contract a kind of contempt if not aversion to forms of prayer: so careful were we from the beginning to prevent their leaving the Church.

7. It is true Bishop Gibson once said (but it was before I had ever seen him), 'Why do not these gentlemen leave the Church' The answer was very ready: 'Because they dare not; they do not leave the Church because they believe it is their duty to continue therein.'

8. When the Rev. Mr. Edward Smyth came to live in Dublin, he earnestly advised me to leave the Church; meaning thereby (as all sensible men do) to renounce all connection with it, to attend the service of it no more, and to advise all our Societies to take the same steps. I judged this to be a matter of great importance, and would therefore do nothing hastily, but referred it to the body of preachers, then met in Conference. We had several meetings, in which he proposed all his reasons for it at large. They were severally considered and answered, and we all determined not to leave the Church.

9. A year ago Dr. Coke began officiating at our chapel in Dublin.- This was no more than had been done in London for between forty and fifty years. Some persons immediately began to cry out, 'This is leaving the Church, which Mr. Wesley has continually declared he would never do.' And I declare so still. But I appeal to all the world, I appeal to common sense, I appeal to the Observer himself, could I mean hereby ' I will not have service in church hours 'when I was doing it all the time I Could I even then deny that I had service in church hours No; but I denied, and do deny still, that this is leaving the Church, either in the sense of Bishop Gibson, or of Mr. Smyth at the Dublin Conference ! Yet by this outcry many well-meaning people were frighted wellnigh out of their senses.

10. But see the consequences of having Sunday service here. See the confusion this occasioned I Some time since, while a popular preacher was preaching at Leeds, one cried out, 'Fire! fire!' The people took fright; some leaped over the gallery, and several legs and arms were broken. But upon whom were these consequences to be charged Not on the preacher, but on him that made the outcry. Apply this to the present case. I have kindled no more fire in Dublin than I did in London. It is the Observer and a few other mischiefmakers who fright the people out of their senses; and they must answer to God for the consequence.

11. This is my answer to them that trouble me and will not let my gray hairs go down to the grave in peace. I am not a man of duplicity: I am not an old hypocrite, a double-tongued knave. More than forty years I have frequented Ireland. I have wished to do some good there. I now tell a plain tale that 'the good which is in me may not be evil spoken of.' I have no temporal end to serve. I seek not the honor that cometh of men. It is not for pleasure that at this time of life I travel three or four thousand miles a year. It is not for gain.

No foot of land do I possess,

No cottage in this wilderness;

A poor wayfaring man,

I lodge awhile in tents below,

Or gladly wander to and fro,

Till I my Canaan gain.

PS.--At the desire of a friend I add a few words in answer to one or two other objections.

First. When I said, 'I believe I am a scriptural bishop,' I spoke on Lord King's supposition that bishops and presbyters are essentially one order.

Secondly. I did desire Mr. Myles to assist me in delivering the cup. Now, be this right or wrong, how does it prove the point now in question -- that I leave the Church I ask (2) What law of the Church forbids this and (3) What law of the Primitive Church Did not the priest in the Primitive Church send both the bread and wine to the sick by whom he pleased, though not ordained at all

Thirdly. The Observer affirms, 'To say you will not leave the Church, meaning thereby all the true believers in England, is trifling.' Certainly; but I do not mean so when I say, 'I will not leave the Church.' I mean, unless I see more reason for it than I ever yet saw, I will not leave the Church of England as by law established while the breath of God is in my nostrils.

To Mrs. Crosby [25]

COLERAINE, June 4, 1789.

MY DEAR SISTER, -- You do well to write to me with all freedom. There does not need to be any reserve between you and me. When I broke my rule formerly in favor of Pawson, by letting him stay a third year at Bristol, I did not hear the last of it for several years. I will not, cannot, dare not, break it again, only in favor of a wife near the time of lying-in.

I believe it will be expedient for all the preachers to remove from Leeds. It is a cruel thing for preachers to disparage one another. [A short sentence follows which is illegible.] . . .

I am in better health than when I left Dublin.--I am, dear Sally,

Your affectionate brother.

To George Flamank

PORTAFFERRY, June 9, 1789.

MY DEAR BRETHREN, -- 'Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.' I hope to set out for the West immediately after the Conference, and probably I shall bring with me one or two men of peace, by whom all these misunderstandings will be removed. [See letters of May 21 and July 21 (to Richard Bunt).] In your patience meantime, possess ye your souls. And those that suffer all will surely conquer all. -- I am, my dear brethren,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. George Flamank, Officer of Excise,

In Plymouth.

To Anne Moore [26]

RATHFRILAND, June 11, 1789.

Has my dear Nancy quite forgotten me If you have, I have not forgotten you; and if you think I ever shall, you will be mistaken: I shall remember and love you till we meet in a better place.

To Walter Churchey

DUBLIN, June 20, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- Michael [Fenwick] is an original. He tells lies innumerable, many of them plausible enough. But many talk full as plausibly as he, and they that can believe him may. I do not doubt but some part of your verse as well as prose will reach the hearts of some of the rich.

Dr. Coke made two or three little alterations in the Prayer-Book without my knowledge. [The Sunday Service of the Methodists. A new edition was printed in 1788. See Green's Bibliography, Appendix, pp. vii-ix, and Nos. 376, 390; letter also of Sept. 10, 1784.] I took particular care throughout to alter nothing merely for altering' sake. In religion I am for as few innovations as possible. I love the old wine best. And if it were only on this account, I prefer 'which' before 'who art in heaven.'

Mr. Howard is really an extraordinary man. [Wesley met John Howard on July 28, 1787, in Dublin: 'I think one of the greatest men in Europe.' He called on Wesley in March 1789, but found him away on one of his journeys. See Journal, vii. 295, 472n.] God has raised him up to be a blessing to many nations. I do not doubt but there has been something more than natural in his preservation hitherto, and should not wonder if the providence of God should hereafter be still more conspicuous in his favor.

About three weeks hence I expect to embark for England. Peace be with you and yours! -- I am

Your affectionate brother.

To the Publisher of the 'Dublin Chronicle'

June 20, 1789.

Since Mr. Edward Smyth, [See letters of June 2 and June 25 (to Adam Clarke).] as he says, 'has me in his power,' I hope as he is stout he will be merciful; and that he will remember the words of the honest Quaker to him that answered the Ernest Appeal, 'Canst thou not be content with laying John Wesley on his back, but thou wilt tread his guts out too' [See letter of Nov. 4, 1758, 5 (Mr. Potter).]

To Zachariah Yewdull [27]

DUBLIN, June 20, 1789.

DEAR ZACHARY, -- You have chose an admirably good advocate in honest Alexander Mather. I shall blame you if you cannot plead your own cause when you have him at your elbows, especially when you know you have another friend standing behind the curtain. For with regard to circuits to be assigned, or any other assistance you may be assured of anything that is in the power of

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Yewdall, In South Wynd,

In Edinburgh, P. Portpatrick.

To George Holder [28]

DUBLIN, June 24, 1789.

DEAR GEORGE, -- You send me an agreeable account of the work of God in the isle. If He will work who shall stay His hand I should be glad of an opportunity of seeing my friends that are with you once more; but I cannot reasonably expect it. In my last voyage the sea affected me more than ever it did before in my life; so that I perceive my voyages draw toward an end. Brother Smith may bring all the accounts to the Conference, and will be stationed in England the next year. -- I am, dear George,

Your affectionate friend and brother.





To Adam Clarke

NEAR DUBLIN, June 25, 1789.

DEAR ADAM, -- You send me good news with regard to the islands. Who can hurt us, if God is on our side Trials may come, but they are all good. I have not been so tried for many years. Every week and almost every day I am bespattered in the public papers, either by Mr. Smyth or by Mr. Mann, his curate. Smooth but bitter as wormwood are their words; and five or six of our richest members have left the Society, because (they say) 'I have left the Church.' [See letters of June 20 (to the publisher of the Dublin Chronicle) and July 1.] Many were in tears on that occasion, many terribly frightened, and crying out, 'Oh, what will the end be' What will it be Why, 'Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, and goodwill among men.'

But meantime what is to be done What will be the most effectual means to stem this furious torrent I have just visited the classes, and find still in the Society upwards of a thousand members; and among these many as deep Christians as any I have met with in Europe, But who is able to watch over them that they may not be moved from their steadfastness I know none more proper than Adam Clarke and his wife. [He was appointed to Bristol and Thomas Rutherford to Dublin.] Indeed, it may seem hard for them to go into a strange land again. Well, you may come to me at Leeds, at the latter end of next month; and if you can show me any that are more proper, I will send them in your stead. That God may be glorified is all that is desired by, dear Adam,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Arthur Keene

DUBLIN, June 25, 1789.

Alas, Arthur, is this possible Can a few well-meaning but ill-judging men still throw dust into your eyes, and tear you away from an old, tried friend And while they cry out, Conscience! Conscience! will they deny liberty of conscience to

Your affectionate brother.

I am ready to talk with you alone at any time and place. Suppose Mr. D'Olier's.

To President Heath [29]

ROXANNA, NEAR WICKLOW, June 26, 1789.

DEAR SIR, -- I exceedingly wanted to hear from you. I thought Mrs. Heath and you had not forgotten me, although it would not be strange if you had, as (in youth especially) '.... thought.' .... [Five lines erased.] If that had been the case, if you had taken no care to fulfill the engagement, I should have judged the engagement between you and Dr. Coke would have stood good. But if (as I suppose) you was able and willing to teach, did in fact teach the children, then I should judge the engagement between him and you should be let fall on both sides. To which (I will take upon me to say) Dr. Coke will very willingly consent.

I would go a good way to take you and your dear family by the hand; but the price of traveling by sea is now.... When I crossed the Atlantic, a cabin passenger paid five pounds for his passage. Now they have swelled it to above twice as much. I should willingly give fifty pounds toward your passage; and

Eternal Providence, exceeding thought,

When none appears, can make itself a way.

I am glad of the information you gave me concerning the state of things in America. I shall be better able to understand the accounts which Dr. Coke will probably give me. O what a comfort it is to think that the Lord reigneth and will order all things well! I commit you and dear Mrs. Heath (how I love her 1) to His keeping and arms. -- Dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

The Rev. Mr. Heath, At Burlington,

New Jersey.

To Anna and Maria Heath [30]

June 26, 1789.

MY DEAR ANNA AND MARIA, -- I love to see your names, and I . . . the paper. Perhaps I may live to see those that wrote them. If not, I shall see you in a better place. -- My dear children, adieu!

To Mrs. Ingram

DUBLIN, June 28, 1789.

MY DEAR MADAM, -- Your letter gave me much satisfaction. I am obliged to you for taking the trouble of writing. Indeed, when I saw your name, I was afraid of finding a fresh accusation; therefore I was the more agreeably surprised when I read what you had written. I shall not easily do anything that would give you pain; but whatever would be agreeable to you will be so to, [See next letter.] dear Madam, Your affectionate servant,

To Rebecca Ingram

DUBLIN, June 28, 1789.

MY DEAR BECKY, -- I will tell you my thoughts without the least reserve. These are the rules in the Large Minutes of Conference, -- that 'no Methodist (and least of all a preacher) ought to marry a woman without the consent of her parents'; and the same thing is insisted upon in one of the sermons in the Arminian Magazine. Therefore I cannot commend Mr. Brown for saying anything to you on that head without the consent of your father. [See letters of April 9 and July 5 to her.] But I exceedingly approve of your present temper and behavior. I commend your resignation to the will of God. Keep there! Beware of murmuring; beware of fretting; beware of the sorrow which worketh death! I commend you to Him who can save you to the utmost; and am, my dear Becky,

Yours.

To Robert Dall [31]

DUBLIN, June 29, 1780.

DEAR ROBERT, -- Why do not all you Scots direct to Dublin by Portpatrick, to save five hundred miles Brother Cole and Barber have done well: so will all whose hearts are in their work. I have referred to honest Joseph Cownley to determine what preachers should come from Scotland to the Conference. It seems to me you may come and John Barber another. Either Charles Atmore must return to Scotland, or he and I shall not agree. I was not at all satisfied at his going to England. It was using me extremely ill. I hope his future behaviour will be different and make amends for what is past. From the account you give of Jonathan Thompson there is reason to hope he will be an useful labourer in our Lord's vineyard. We have already had some useful ones from North Britain, and I trust shall have more. Dr. Coke has raised a storm almost in every part of this kingdom by talking of 'leaving the Church.' It would be well if they would leave these sins. -- I am, dear Robert,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Arthur Keene [32]

DUBLIN, July 1, 1789.

If we do not meet till we reach a better world, you will suffer me to tell you, I love you dearly, and shall do so till our earthly course is run. And permit me to give you one advice more (you once valued my advice)--leave off disputing. Call off your thoughts as far as possible from all controverted points. You have one only point to attend to -- Immanuel, God with us; to secure that single point -- Christ in us, the hope of glory! What is all besides in comparison of that O let it engage your whole soul. Yet a little while and all the rest will pass away like a shadow! It is [probable] you are likely to spend a few more days upon earth when I am no more seen. But those days in comparison will vanish away like a dream when one awaketh. The wisdom from above meantime be the portion of you and yours! So prays

Your ever affectionate brother.

To Henry Moore

DUBLIN, July 1, 1789.

DEAR HENRY, -- It is well you can keep out of debt. I am glad Brother Graham and the poor stewards stand their ground. I shall not easily send four children to Bristol. I can't tell what you can do for James -----, [Name illegible.] though I take him to be an honest man. I wonder what should come into the head of Mr. Reed to send money to poor John Bull! [See letter of Sept. 30, 1787.] He is just gone [out] of prison, [now] in hopes he will find means to live.

We had very hot work in Dublin for some time, occasioned by Mr. Smyth's and Mr. Mann's [letters] [See letter of June 25 to Adam Clarke.] in the newspapers. But I say nothing, and go straight on my way. Charles [Can this be his brother, whose views about the Church may have been quoted against him] is nothing to me. I serve God; and am, dear Henry,

Your affectionate friend and brother.





To Mrs. Ingram

DUBLIN, July 5, 1789.

MY DEAR MADAM, -- After the fair and candid account that Miss Ingram [See letter of June 28 to her.] and you had given of the transaction, there was no fear that I should be much prejudiced by anything which had occurred. I advise my dear Becky and you to say as little as possible of what is past. It will then pass away like a dream; while you both forget the things that are behind, and press towards the prize of your high calling in Christ Jesus. -- I am, dear madam,

Yours most affectionately,

To Rebecca Ingram

DUBLIN, July 5, 1789.

MY DEAR BECKY, -- You mistake me. All I mean is this: it is a general rule with us, 'No one ought to propose marriage to a woman till he has the consent of her parents.' So you fear where no fear is. You say, 'Marriage was not proposed [See previous letter.] to' you; and I believe you. Therefore it is your wisdom to think of past things as little as possible. You have something better to employ your thoughts. The prize and the crown are before you. Look unto Jesus! He is altogether lovely; but how little have you loved Him! Let all the springs of your happiness be in Him. -- My dear Becky,

Yours very affectionately.

To Arthur Keene

DUBLIN, July 6, 1789.

I acknowledge the hand of James Deaves in your letter. [See letter of May 20. The opposition to service in church hours continued till the time was changed from ten to two. See Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, i. 452.] I cannot dispute with him, for he has ten words to my one.

You have run away from me, not I from you. I stand where I have stood these fifty years. I no more leave the Church than I leave the body.

But I have done. The Lord God judge between him and you and

Your much injured friend. [See letter of April 28, 1790, to him.]

To Henry Moore

CHESTER, July 14, 1789.

DEAR HENRY, -- After a very agreeable voyage, wherein I was not sick a moment, [Compare letter of June 24.] I landed at Parkgate this morning. I propose spending Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday at Manchester, and the next week hiding myself at Otley.

Not anything which Dr. Coke has said or done, but the vile, willful misrepresentation of it, had set all Ireland in a flame. But I am in hope it is now in a great measure quenched. It has brought a flood of obloquy upon me. [See letter of July 1.] But it is all well. We now fear greater danger from honor than dishonor. God will surely exalt us if we do not exalt ourselves.

I do not know that any of our clergymen can be spared from London. But I expect to see Brother Rankin, Whitfield, and you at the Conference, or at Otley a day or two before it. We shall have some points of deep importance to consider. -- I am, with love to my Nancy, dear Henry,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

Let T. Rankin and you write down what is on your mind.

To John Dickins [33]

CHESTER, July 15, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- It was a concern to me likewise that you should have so little employment in the work of God, as it was your real desire to be of use to the world before you are called to a better. Therefore I am glad to find Providence has pointed out a way wherein you may be of general use, and the more so as in some of the extracts from late authors the inattention of my corrector inserted some sentences which I had blotted out, two or three of which assert Universal Restitution. The numerous errata likewise I doubt not you will carefully correct, which sometimes spoil the sense. [See letter of Aug. 15.] Wishing you much of the favor and of the presence of God, I am, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To the Rev. John Dickins, Market Street,

Philadelphia, Pa.

To Henry Eames

CHESTER, July 15, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- After the many proofs which you have already had both of the power and goodness of God, particularly in giving you your heart's desire in the change wrought in several of your children, you can have no reason to doubt but that He will give you your mother also if you continue earnest in prayer. [See letter of Aug. 3, 1772.] The great hindrance to the inward work of God is Antinomianism, wherever it breaks in. I am glad you are aware of it. Show your faith by your works. Fight the good fight of faith and lay hold on eternal life. Peace be with you and yours. -- I am

Yours affectionately.

To Freeborn Garrettson

CHESTER, July 15, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- You are entirely in the right. There can be no manner of doubt that it was the enemy of souls that hindered your sending me your experience. Many parts both of your inward and outward experience ought by no means to be suppressed. But if you are minded to send anything to me, you have no time to lose. [See letters of Jan. 24, 1789, and Feb. 3, 1790, to him.] Whatever you do for me you must do quickly, lest death have quicker wings than love. A great man observes that there is a threefold leading of the Spirit: some He leads by giving them on every occasion apposite texts of Scripture; some by suggesting reasons for every step they take -- the way by which He chiefly leads me; and some by impressions. But He judges the last to be the least desirable way, as it is often impossible to distinguish dark impressions from divine or even diabolical.

I hope you will not long delay to write more particularly to

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Henry Moore [34]

MANCHESTZR, July 17, 1789.

DEAR HENRY, -- I came hither yesterday, and purpose to spend most of the next week at Otley. I had forgot, when I wrote last, that our dear friend Mr. Allay was in London. If he is there still, you cannot be so unkind as to leave him behind you; so that you can only send T. Rankin and George Whitfield to bear us company at Leeds. But if he is gone to Yorkshire you may go thither to. -- I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Samuel Bardsley

OTLEY, July 21, 1789.

MY DEAR BROTHER, -- I am glad to hear so good an account of the work of God at Bideford. [See next letter and that of Nov. 25.] That town had held out long and seemed to bid defiance to the gospel. But if we are not weary of well-doing we shall reap in due time. I should hardly have expected any increase of the work of God in Launceston; but probably it will be enlarged by your preaching in the Town Hall, for many will come thither who would not come to our preaching-house.

As long as you and your fellow laborers converse freely together and act by united counsels the work of the Lord will prosper in your hands. And continue instant in prayer, particularly in your closet. -- I am, dear Sammy,

Your affectionate brother.

To Richard Bunt

OTLEY, July 21, 1780.

Regard no one who tells you that idle tale of the Mayor and Corporation moving the Court of King's Bench against a man for speaking such words. The whole Court would laugh a man to scorn that pretended to any such thing. And your Corporation is not so weak as to think of any such thing. If ever anything of the kind should be moved, send me word (I hope to be in Plymouth in two or three weeks [He was at Plymouth on Aug. 13.]), and I will make them sick of the King's Bench as long as they live. [See letters of June 9, 1789, and Jan. 13, 1790.] - I am

Your affectionate servant.

To Mr. Richard Bunt, In Bideford,

Devon.