To Arthur Keene
Date: LONDON, July 31, 1785.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1785)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR ARTHUR, - Yours of the 23rd instant gave me great satisfaction. I am glad that Mr. Featherstone has wrote to Mr. Beardmore, [See letter of July 16.] who will easily concur in his judgment that it is very imprudent to sue a man for what he is not able to pay. I suppose it was some ill-minded man who informed Mr. Beardmore that Mr. Neill was in so flourishing circumstances; which was not likely to be the case while he was only a common clerk to a person in business. And it showed great honesty and generosity in Mr. Featherstone to give so impartial advice. I hope he is diligently engaged in the little affair you entrusted him with in respect of Sister Jaques's legacy. If that be pressed in earnest, it may turn out well; otherwise it will drop into nothing.

I must charge you with another little business. At the Conference it was judged proper that the married preacher should live in our preaching-house at Athlone. But our brother William Rayner writes me word 'He has convinced Brother Joyce [Matthias Joyce was a Papist in early life. He was remarkably loving, and his memory was precious to all who knew him; he was now Assistant at Athlone, and died in 1814. Walter Griffith, who had been appointed to Waterford at the Irish Conference in July, was by Wesley's wish moved to Athlone. See Arminian Mug. 1786, p. 132; Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, i. 404.] that it cannot be.' Be so kind as to write a line to Brother Joyce and inquire how this matter stands; and desire him to tell Brother Rayner at the same time that I thank him for his letter.

You give me pleasure by talking of my dear Isabella. I love to see her, and I love to hear of her. I love likewise to hear of her twin soul, my precious Amelia. [See letter of July 16.] I was afraid she would grieve too much when I went away, especially as she did not shed a tear - I mean while I was in the room. I rejoice so much the more to hear that our blessed Lord undertook her cause and sent her help in time of need. It would give me pain, indeed, if one that is as my own soul should receive hurt from me. O may we always meet for the better and not for the worse. May we always' love one another with a pure heart fervently.'

I hope both she and you and my Isabella will not forget to pray for, dear Arthur,

Yours most affectionately.

Amelia does well in spending a little time in the country. Nothing will restore her like air and exercise. When is Mrs. Blachford [See letter of Oct. 15, 1777.] to come hither

I had forgot to mention that that excellent woman Sister Cox desired, when there is room, to be admitted to the Widows' House [See Journal, v. 406, vii. 484. It had about twenty-four inmates.]; I think no one is more worthy.