To his Mother
Date: UTPH, July 6, 1738.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1738)
Author: John Wesley
---
DEAR MOTHER, -- Soon after I had finished my last to you, we left Colen in the passage-boat, and traveled slowly four days upon the Rhine, through a double range of rocks and mountains, diversified with more variety than ever painter could imagine: some were smooth, as if polished by art; some rough, abrupt, and ragged, as if torn by a fresh earthquake; some, again, were quite bare, others clothed with grass, others with trees, corn, or vines. On Sunday in the evening we came to Mentz; and on Monday before noon to Frankfort, where the father of Peter Bhler (lately with me at London and Oxon) received us with all kindness. About one o'clock on Tuesday we came safe to Marienborn, a small village seven hours from Frankfort, where Count Zinzendorf has hired for three years (till one is built a few miles off on his own land, which is already begun) a large house, and tolerably convenient, which lodges the greatest part of the small congregation here.

The Count received us in a manner I was quite unacquainted with, and therefore know not. how to express. I believe his behavior was not unlike that of his Master (if we may compare human with divine) when He took the lit fie children in His arms and blessed them. We should have been much amazed at him, but that we saw ourselves encompassed with a cloud of those who were all followers of him, as he is of Christ. Eighty-eight of them praise God with one heart and one mouth at Marienborn; another little company at Runnerburg, [Ronneburg.] an hour off; another at Bdingen, an hour from thence; and yet another at Frankfort.

I now understand those words of poor Julian, [‘The progress of Atheism has been principally owing to the humanity evinced by Christians toward strangers. The impious Galileans provide not only for those of their own party who are in want, but also for those who hold with us.’ (Julian to Arsacius, Sozomen's Ecc. Hist. chap. xvi.) The saying ‘See how these Christians love one another’ seems to be found first in Tertullian (Apologeticus, chap. xxxix).] ‘See how these Christians love one another.’ Yea, how they love all who have the faintest desire to love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity! Oh may He sanctify to us their holy conversation, that we may be partakers of the spirit which is in them--of their faith unfeigned, and meekness of wisdom, and love which never faileth!

Dear mother, forget not often to desire this for

Your dutiful and affectionate Son.