To Mr. Hopper, At the Preaching-house,
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1777)
Author: John Wesley
---
In Manchester.



Hester Ann Roe

LONDON, February 11, 1777.

MY DEAR HETTY,--The papers of one [Charles Perronet, who died on Aug. 12, 1776. See Atmore's Memorial, pp. 327-35; and letter of April 26.] who lately went to God are fallen into my hands. I will transcribe a few particulars. His experience is uncommon; and you may simply tell me how far your experience does or does not agree with it. But beware of hurting yourself upon the occasion, beware of unprofitable reasonings. God may have wrought the same work in you, though not in the same manner.

'Just after my uniting with the Methodists, the Father was revealed to me the first time; soon after, the whole Trinity. I beheld the distinct persons of the Godhead, and worshipped one undivided Jehovah and each Person separately. After this I had equal intercourse with the Son, and afterwards with the Spirit, the same as with the Father and the Son. After some years my communion was with Christ only, though at times with the Father, and not wholly without the Spirit. Of late I have found the same access to the Triune God. When I approach Jesus, the Father and the Spirit commune with me. Whatever I receive now centers in taking leave of earth and hasting to another place. I am as one that is no more. I stand and look on what God has done---His calls, helps, mercies, forbearances, deliverance’s from sorrows, rescue out of evils; and adore and devote myself to Him with new ardour. If it be asked how or in what manner I beheld the Triune God, it is above all description. He that has seen this light of God can no more describe it than he that has not. In two of those divine interviews the Father spoke while I was in an agony of prayer for perfect conformity to Himself, twice more when I was in the depth of sorrow, and each time in Scripture words. It may be asked, 'Was the appearance glorious? ' It was all divine, it was glory. I had no conception of it. It was God. The first time the glory of Him I saw reached even to me. I was overwhelmed with it; body and soul were penetrated through with the rays of Deity.'

Tell me, my dear maid, if you have ever experienced anything like these things; but do not puzzle yourself about them, only speak in simplicity. You cannot speak of these things to many; but you may say anything without reserve to, my dear Hetty,

Yours in tender affection.