To Ann Granville
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1731)
Author: John Wesley
---
August 14 [1731].

I have neither time nor skill to thank Selima as I would for her repeated condescension to me, which nothing can excel, and that for which I am so deeply indebted to good Mrs. Granville. Both hers and your partiality toward me I cannot but observe with wondering gratitude; and hope it will continue to plead in my behalf, and to excuse my many faults and infirmities: and my observing this makes me the less surprised that, notwithstanding all my failings, you still have so favorable an opinion of me as to think me worth your correspondence.

Perhaps 'tis one of these failings that even now I intend to speak the plain sense of my [mind]. I do it in so unhappy a manner as to make even sincerity look like flattery: a fault I desire as carefully to avoid as stabbing my friend with a smile. For doubtless those words that inspire vanity, if they ' be smooth as oil, yet be very swords.' God forbid that mine should ever be such to Selima, or Selima's to me. I trust they will not, but that I shall always be enabled to consider them in the true light as a picture of what you are and what I perhaps shall be, if your friendship has its perfect work.

What you write with so generous a view as this justly claims the best return I can make: especially when it informs me 'that there is one particular wherein I may possibly be of some service to Selima. I had, indeed, spent many thoughts on the necessity of method to a considerable progress either in knowledge or virtue, and am still persuaded that they who have but a day to live are not wise if they waste a moment, and are therefore concerned to take the shortest way to every' point they desire to arrive at.

The method of or shortest way to knowledge seems to be this: (1) to consider what knowledge you desire to attain to; (2) to read no book which does not some way tend to the attainment of that knowledge; {3) to read no book which does tend to the attainment of it, unless it be the best in its kind; (4) to finish one before you begin another; and (5) to read them all in such an order that every subsequent book may illustrate and confirm the preceding. The knowledge which you would probably desire to attain to is a knowledge of divinity, philosophy, history, and poetry. If you will be so good as to direct me how I can be of use to you in any of these, it will give me a very particular pleasure. [See letters of June 17 and Dec. 1.]

I am glad you passed your time so agreeably in the country, [Mrs. Pendarves writes to her sister on Sept. 10: ' I suppose by this time you are returned from Stanton.] and doubt not but Sappho would have made it yet more agreeable. Surely you are very just in observing that a country life is in many respects preferable to any other; particularly in its abounding with those beauties of nature that

so easily raise our thoughts to the Author of them. Methinks, whenever

about us round we see

Hill, dale, and shady wood and sunny plain,

And liquid lapse of murm'ring stream, [Paradise Lost, viii. 261-3, v. 153.]

'tis scarce possible to stop that obvious reflection:

These are Thy glorious works, Parent of good. [Paradise Lost, viii. 261-3, v. 153.]

Nor is it hard here, where the busy varieties of a great town do not flutter about us and break our attention, to fix that reflection so deep upon our souls that it may not pass away, like the objects that occasioned it.

I hope to retain some of the reflections which the smooth turf on which we sat, the trees overshadowing and surrounding us, the fields and meadows beneath, and the opposite hills, with the setting sun just glimmering over their brows, assisted Aspasia and Selima in inspiring; till I have the happiness of meeting part, at least, of the same company on Horrel again. Perhaps Aspasia may be there too; though, if it should be long before we meet, we may trust her with Him in whose hands she is: what seems best to Him is best both for her and us. 'Tis a cheerful thought that even the winds and seas can only fulfill His word! Why is it, then, that our hearts are troubled for her Why does tenderness prevail over faith Because faith is not yet made perfect; because we yet walk partly by sight; because we have not yet proved the whole armor of God, and therefore still lie open to this suggestion of the enemy, ' Some things are out of the reach of God's care; in some cases His arm is shortened and cannot save.' Nay, but where is the darkness that covers from His eye, where is the place where His right hand doth not hold us As well, therefore, may we be shipwrecked on the dry land as shipwrecked on the sea unless He command it. And if He does command any of us 'to arise and go hence,' what signifies it where the command finds us As means can do nothing without His word, so when that is passed they are never wanting:

Since when obedient nature knows His will,

A fly, a grapestone, or an hair can kill. [Prior's Ode to Memory of Colonel Villiers.]

Whether it be in my power or no to do anything for Selima that will either make that summons, whenever it comes, less unpleasing, or in the meantime contribute to your ease and satisfaction and the conquest of those enemies that so easily beset us all, you will assure yourself of the best endearours

of

Your most friendly and most obedient CYRUS.

The best service of Araspes as well as Cyrus attends

Mrs. Granville and Selima. Adieu.