1785

To Dean D-- [1]

[1785.]

REVEREND SIR, - When Dr. Bentley published his Greek Testament, one remarked, 'Pity but he would publish the Old; then we should have two New Testaments! [Dr. Richard Bentley, the great classical scholar, issued in 1720 proposals for a new edition of the New Testament in Greek with the Latin Version of Jerome.] It is done. Those who receive Mr. Hutchinson's emendations certainly have two New Testaments! But I stumble at the threshold. Can we believe that God left His whole Church so ignorant of the Scripture till yesterday And if He was pleased to reveal the sense of it' now, to whom may we suppose He would reveal it 'All Scripture,' says Kempis, 'must be understood by the same Spirit whereby it was written.' [Robert Spearman, a pupil of John Hutchinson, published An Enquiry after, Philosophy and Theology in 1755. For William Jones's Catholic Doctrine of the Trinity, see letter of April 17, 1776.] And a greater than he says, 'Them that are meek will He guide in judgment, and them that are gentle will He learn His way.' But was Mr. Hutchinson eminently meek and gentle

However, in order to learn all I could from his Works, after first consulting them, I carefully read over Mr. Spearman, [Book I, chap. v.] Mr. Jones's ingenious book, and the Glasgow [Edinburgh] Abridgement. I read the last with Mr. Thomas Walsh, the best Hebraean I ever knew. I never asked him the meaning of an Hebrew word but he would immediately tell me how often it occurred in the Bible and what it meant in each place! We then both observed that Mr. Hutchinson's whole scheme is built upon etymologies; the most uncertain foundation in the world, and the least to be depended upon. We observed, secondly, that if the points be allowed, all his building sinks at once; and, thirdly, that, setting them aside, many of his etymologies are forced and unnatural. He frequently, to find the etymology of one word, squeezes two radices together; a liberty never to be taken where a word may fairly be derived from a single radix.

But may I hazard a few words on the points Mr. H. affirms they were invented by the Masorites, only thirteen or fourteen hundred years ago, in order to destroy the sense of Scripture. I doubt this: who can prove it Who can prove they were not as old as Ezra, if not co-eval with the language Let any one give a fair reading only to what Dr. Cornelius Bayley [For Dr. Bayley, see letter of Oct. 12, 1778.] has offered in the Preface to his Hebrew Grammar, and he will be as sick of reading without points as I am - at least, till he can answer the Doctor's arguments he will not be so positive upon the question.

As to his theology, I first stumble at his profuse encomiums on the Hebrew language. But it may be said, Is it not the language which God Himself used And is not Greek too the language which God Himself used And did He not use it in delivering to man a far more perfect dispensation than that which He delivered in Hebrew Who can deny it And does not even this consideration give us reason at least to suspect that the Greek language is as far superior to the Hebrew as the New Testament is to the Old And, indeed, if we set prejudice aside and consider both with attention and candor, can we help seeing that the Greek excels the Hebrew as much in beauty and strength as it does in copiousness I suppose no one from the beginning of the world wrote better Hebrew than Moses. But does not the language of St. Paul excel the language of Moses as much as the knowledge of St. Paul excelled his

I speak this, even on supposition that you read the Hebrew, as I believe Ezra if not Moses did, with points; for if we read it in the modern way, without points, I appeal to every competent judge whether it be not the most equivocal.

To Mrs. Gait

LONDON. January 5, 1785.

My DEAR SISTER, - You did well to write. Although I have not much time, yet I am always well pleased to hear from a friend. If outward losses be a means of stirring you up to gain more inward holiness, you will never have need to repent of that loss but rather to praise God for it. How soon will the moment of life be gone! It is enough if we secure an happy eternity. Let Brother Gait and you earnestly seek to be wholly devoted to God; and all things else will be added to you.-I am, dear Becky,

Your affectionate brother.

To John Johnson [2]

LONDON, January 26, 1785.

My DEAR BROTHER, - It is plain the time is come for God to lift up the light of His countenance upon poor Lisburn; this is the answer of many prayers offered up by good Sister Gardner and many others. His providence brought both you and Sister Johnson thither in good time; she was more wanted now in Lisburn than even in Dublin, as Hetty Rogers was enabled in a great measure to supply her place there. You will prevail upon more and more to meet in band and more and more backsliders will be healed, I expect; you will in a little time have a Select Society also. If my life and health are continued, I hope to cross the sea about the beginning of April; but how many blessings may you receive before that time! - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mrs. Johnson [3]

LONDON, January 16, 1785.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I nothing doubt but the death of that young man will be a means of life to many souls. How admirably was it timed! Just when Brother Johnson and you were returning to Lisburn - here was a divine preparation for your coming, and work ready prepared for you. I hope my poor dear Harriet will run away from us no more. She was unspeakably happy when she was young; but she may be happier now than ever she was. I am in hopes you now will have full employment. But you need not confine yourself altogether to Lisburn; you are a debtor also to our sisters in the neighboring Societies. Go on and prosper! - I am, my dear sister,

Your affectionate brother.

To James Barry

February 1785.

... I am in the enjoyment of such health as I have never had before. Mr. Henry said, 'I bless God that I am never tired of my work, yet I am often tired in my work.' By the blessing of God I can say more: I am never tired in my work. From the beginning of the day or the week or the year to the end I do not know what weariness means. I am never weary of writing or preaching or traveling; but am just as fresh at the end as at the beginning. Thus it is with me to-day, and I take no thought for to-morrow. I am in hopes Dr. Coke will come to you. [See letter of July 3, 1784.]

To Mr. Barry, Shelburne,

Nova Scotia.

To Mrs. Freeman [4]

LONDON, February 1, 1785.

MY DEAR SISTER, - So strange things come to pass I I did not expect to hear of Mr. Smyth's 'living in lodgings.' I do not remember the person who is so kind as to offer me a lodging; and I know no reason why I should not accept of it if I live to see Dublin again.'

It gives me pleasure to hear that the work of God flourishes among you. I did not doubt but it would when He sent that earnest couple [Mr. and Mrs. James Rogers.] to Dublin. He will send a blessing with them wherever they go. And that you and yours may partake of it more and more is the wish of, my dear sister,

Yours affectionately.

To Samuel Bardsley [5]

LONDON, February 12, 1785.

DEAR BROTHER, - Mr. Wesley desires me to inform you that he is glad to find that you go on so well in your circuit, and hopes that the work of the Lord will prosper more and more. Mr. Wesley cannot say anything positive respecting his coming into your circuit, but does intend to contrive to pay you a visit, though his usual way, you know, is but once in two years. I suppose you will know in time before he comes. Peace be with your spirit! - I am

Yours affectionately,

To Adam Clarke [6]

LONDON, February 12, 1785.

DEAR ADAM, - I do not remember ever to have seen that letter from Norwich, else I should certainly have answered it. If you build at St. Austell, take care that you do not make the house too small. And pray let those directions be observed which are given in the Large Minutes of the Conference.

It gives me pleasure to hear that the work of the Lord so prospers in your hands. It will do so as long as you do not shun to declare the whole counsel of God. There is one part of it which seems to be almost forgotten by the Methodists throughout the three kingdoms-that is, the Christian duty of fasting; and yet our Lord annexes a peculiar promise even to secret fasting: 'The Father that seeth in secret, He shall reward thee openly.' You might begin to recommend this by reading to every Society the sermon concerning fasting. [See Works, v. 344-60.] The blessing would soon follow. - I am, dear Adam,

Yours affectionately.

To Robert Carr Brackenbury

LONDON, February 15, 1785.

DEAR SIR, - Your having the opportunity of giving them a few discourses in Dover, and then traveling with so pious and friendly a person as Mr. Ireland, I could not but look upon as clear instances of a gracious Providence. [Brackenbury spent some weeks in France in the autumn of 1784 and the following spring in order to perfect his French for the work in Jersey. James Ireland, of Brislington, Bristol, was Fletcher's and Wesley's friend.] I cannot doubt but the mild air which you now breathe will greatly tend to the re-establishment of your health; and so will the suspension of your public labors till you are better able to bear them. With regard to perfecting yourself in the French language, it is certain this may be done more speedily and effectually in a family where only French is spoken. And undoubtedly you may learn the purity of the language far better in Languedoc than in Normandy. It is clear that you are not called at present to any public labors. But should not you be so much the more diligent in private to redeem the time to buy up every opportunity Should not you be instant 'in season and out of season' - that is, to make the opportunities which you cannot find Surely the all-wise and all-merciful Savior did not send you into France for nothing! Oh no! you are at least to pluck one brand (perhaps several) out of the burning. May the Lord whom you serve in all things direct your paths I So prays, dear sir,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Captain Richard Williams

LONDON, February 15, 1785.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I am exceeding glad at your going to Plymouth Dock. [He had moved from Poldice, near Truro. See letter of Dec. 10, 1783.] I am persuaded that God has sent you. And I should not wonder if you find a greater blessing upon your labors than ever you found before. I pray stay there as long as you can; and send a particular account of what occurs there to, dear Richard,

Your affectionate brother.

To Arthur Keene

LONDON, February 17, 1785.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I thank you for the pains you have taken on behalf of poor Robert Hide, [See letter of July 23, 1784.] and am sincerely glad you have at length succeeded. Now, if he continue honest and industrious, he will not want either employment or food. Want of either of the one or the other must have exposed him to a thousand temptations.

When several disapproved of my sending Mr. Rogers and his wife to Dublin, supposing them unequal to the task, I was determined to overrule, believing myself to be a competent judge both of their gifts and grace. And the event has answered my expectations. I am not disappointed of my hope; and I am persuaded neither they nor you will ever be weary of well-doing.

You have great reason to bless God for the good state of your temporal affairs also. And, indeed, I have always observed whenever the work of God goes on He withholds no manner of thing that is good.

It was impossible to keep the present schoolmaster unless his spirit had been entirely changed. He is extremely unfair. But I am afraid another is recommended to you that is likely to prove no better. I have known him from a child, and give you fair warning. Take care what you do. If you are wise, secure Mr. Fox at any price. That man is sterling gold. [For the school, see letter of March 3, 1784, to Keene. Patrick Fox became master.] But you will have no blessing from God and no praise from wise men if you take that vile sordid measure (especially at this time!) of so reducing the salary. You must give 40 a year at the least.

As soon after the 10th of April as I can I purpose (God willing) to embark for Dublin. I should be glad to accept of your kind invitation. But it is a great way to go, particularly at night. Otherwise I should be more at home with you than anywhere else. [He stayed at the preachers' house. See letters of Feb. 1 and April 11.] I commend you and yours to the divine protection; and am, dear Arthur,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

I abhor the thought of our master's keeping an evening school. It would swallow up the time he ought to have for his own improvement. Give him enough to live comfortably upon without this drudgery.

Feb. 20. - Pray tell Mr. Rogers I hope to see him before the middle of April and to visit the classes. I am glad he has written to Mr. Fox; but I have told you my mind about the salary.

To Mr. Arthur Keene, Miltown Road,

Near Dublin.

To John Broadbent

LONDON, February 23, 1785.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - Take care you do not scream again, unless you would murder yourself outright.

It is very probable we must take in some married preachers if we live to see another Conference. The week after next I set [out] for Bristol. From thence (after stopping there a few days) I must make the best of my way to Ireland.

Concerning dividing the circuit, [Dewsbury was divided from Birstall at the Conference of 1785. See letter of March 4, 1786, to Samuel Bardsley about division of circuits.] I may answer you and our brother together. I like the proposal well, especially as it would give our preachers a little more walking. But I very rarely divide circuits, unless at a Conference; because I am willing to hear what can be said on both sides. - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Broadbent, At the Preaching-house,

In Birstall, Near Leeds.

To John Baxendale

LONDON, February 25, 1785.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - You send me an agreeable account of the work of God in and near Wigan. Indeed, His work will flourish in every place where full sanctification is dearly and strongly preached. This year I only call on a few Societies on my way. My business is with the Societies in Ireland. hope to call at Manchester on Saturday, April 2; at Bolton, the 4th; Wigan, Tuesday, the 5th. Perhaps I might preach at Wingates on my way thither. [On April 5 at noon he 'preached at Wingates, in the open air. The congregation were quite ripe for all the Gospel blessings, devouring every word.' See Journal, vii. 65; and letters of Feb. 19, 1784, and April 3, 1787.] - I am

Your affectionate brother.

To Jonathan Coussins [7]

LONDON, February 25, 1785.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - The Lord will work; and who shall hinder Him Only let us against hope believe in hope and walk in all His appointed ways, whether we see present fruit or not. Now encourage all believers to meet in band and to observe the Band rules exactly. In one thing Dr. Hunt and his people shame us; I mean in fasting, which we have well-nigh forgotten! Let us begin again! - I am, with love to Sister Coussins,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Coussins, At the Preaching-house,

In Norwich.

To John Stretton [8]

LONDON, February 25, 1785.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - You did well in breaking through that needless diffidence; if you had wrote sooner, you would have heard from me sooner. Although I have not been at Limerick for some years, yet I remember your father and mother well. They truly feared God when I conversed with them. Be a follower of them, as they were of Christ.

The last time I saw Mr. Coughlan he was ill in body but in a blessed state of mind. He was utterly broken in pieces, full of tears and contrition for his past unfaithfulness. Not long after I went out of town God removed him to a better place.

If that deadly enemy of true religion, Popery, is breaking in upon you, there is indeed no time to be lost; for it is far easier to prevent the plague than to stop it. Last autumn Dr. Coke sailed from England, and is now visiting the flock in the Midland Provinces of America, and settling them on the New Testament plan, to which they all willingly and joyfully conform, being all united, as by one Spirit, so in one body. I trust they will no more want such pastors as are after God's own heart. After he has gone through these parts, he intends, if God permit, to see the brethren in Nova Scotia, probably attended with one or two able preachers who will be willing to abide there. A day or two ago I wrote and desired him before he returns to England to call upon our brethren also in Newfoundland and perhaps leave a preacher there likewise. About food and raiment we take no thought. Our heavenly Father knoweth that we, need these things, and He will provide. Only let us be faithful and diligent in feeding His flock. Your preacher will be ordained. Go on in the name of the Lord and in the power of His might I You shall want no assistance that is in the power of

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. John Stretton, In Harbour Grace,

Newfoundland.

To Zechariah Yewdell

LONDON, February 25, 1785.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I am glad to hear that the work of God goes on at Sheerness, [Sheerness appears in the Minutes for 1785 as one of the houses to be built that year. Compare letter of March 21, 1784.] and that there is such a noble spirit among the people with regard to building. But as we are yet early in the year, I do not advise you to begin till two hundred pounds are subscribed. Try first what you can do in Kent and at Norwich, after keeping a day of fasting and prayer.-I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To his Brother Charles

BRISTOL, March 17, 1785.

DEAR BROTHER, - I am just setting out on my northern journey; but must snatch time to write two or three lines. I stand and admire the wise and gracious dispensations of Divine Providence! Never was there before so loud a call to all that are under your roof. If they have not hitherto sufficiently regarded either you or the God of their fathers, what is more calculated to convince them than to see you so long hovering upon the borders of the grave [Charles Wesley lived three years longer.] And I verily believe, if they receive the admonition, God will raise you up again. I know you have the sentence of death in yourself; so had I more than twelve years ago. I know nature is utterly exhausted; but is not nature subject to His word I do not depend upon physicians, but upon Him that raiseth the dead. Only let your whole family stir themselves up and be instant in prayer; then I have only to say to each, 'If thou canst believe, thou shalt see the glory of God.' 'Be strong in the Lord and in the power of His might.'

Adieu.

To Barnabas Thomas [9]

BIRMINGHAM, March 25, 1785.

DEAR BARNABAS, - I have neither inclination nor leisure to draw the saw of controversy; but I will tell you my mind in a few words.

I am now as firmly attached to the Church of England as I ever was since you knew me. But meantime I know myself to be as real a Christian bishop as the Archbishop of Canterbury. Yet I was always resolved, and am so still, never to act as such except in case of necessity. Such a case does not (perhaps never will) exist in England. In America it did exist. This I made known to the Bishop of London and desired his help. But he peremptorily refused it. All the other bishops were of the same mind; the rather because (they said) they had nothing to do with America. Then I saw my way clear, and was fully convinced what it was my duty to do. [See letter of June 14, 1786.] As to the persons amongst those who offered themselves I chose those whom I judged most worthy, and I positively refuse to be judged herein by any man's conscience but my own. - I am, dear Barnabas,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mrs. Wren [10]

BIRMINGHAM, March 26, 1785.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I thank you for the clear and circumstantial account you have given me of the manner when God wrought upon your soul. As tie wrought the work both of justification and sanctification so distinctly, you have the less temptation to cast away your confidence. But you cannot keep it unless you are zealous of good works. Be fruitful, therefore, in every good work, and God shall renew you in His whole image. - I am

Yours affectionately.

To Ann Bolton

WEDNESBURY, March 28, 1785.

MY DEAR SISTER, - You are in danger of falling into both extremes - of making light of as well as fainting under His chastening. This you do whenever you look at any circumstance without seeing the hand of God in it, without seeing at the same instant, this unkindness, this reproach, this returning evil for good, as well as this faintness, this weariness, this pain, is the cup which my Father hath given me. And shall I not drink it Why does He give it me Only for my profit, that I 'may be a partaker of His holiness.'

I have often found an aptness both in myself and others to connect events that have no real relation to each other. So one says, 'I am as sure this is the will of God as that I am justified.' Another says, 'God as surely spake this to my heart as ever He spoke to me at all.' This is an exceedingly dangerous way of thinking or speaking. We know not what it may lead us to. It may sap the very foundation of our religion. It may insensibly draw us into Deism or Atheism. My dear Nancy, my sister, my friend, beware of this! The grace of God is sufficient for you! And, whatever clouds may interpose between His banner over you is love. Look to yourself that you lose not the things that you have gained, but that you may receive a full reward.

Adieu!

To Mrs. Fletcher [11]

MANCHESTER, April 2, 1755.

MY DEAR SISTER, - I have nothing to do with Yorkshire this year. After a swift journey through Bolton, Wigan, and Liverpool, I must hasten by Chester to Holyhead in order to take the first packet for Dublin. The spring is already so far spent that I shall have much ado to go through all the provinces of Ireland before the end of June.

It is well if that inconstant man has not destroyed poor Miss L. body and soul. I am afraid he had long since stole her heart from God. And she had so long persuaded others that their union was the will of God, that it is well if the disappointment does not quite unsettle her and make her turn back to the world. I wish you would write a letter to her on this head. Who knows but it may save a soul alive.

The account of Michael Onions is very remarkable and may be of use to the public.

Yours most affectionately.

To John Fletcher [12]

MANCHESTER, April 3, 1785.

DEAR SIR, - Our Dublin Conference is appointed to begin the first Tuesday in July, our London Conference the last Tuesday in that month. I am afraid there will be very little time to spare between the one and the other.

I have very little hopes of doing any good to either Deists or Socinians. But it's worth all our labor to prevent their doing mischief - at least, more than they have done already. For this reason I look upon everything with a jealous eye which prevents your answering Dr. Priestley. He is certainly one of the most dangerous enemies of Christianity that is now in the world. And I verily think you are the man whom God has prepared to abate his confidence. Dr. Horseley has good matter; but he is an heavy writer; and perhaps sometimes a little too severe. I believe you will be enabled to speak home, and yet to keep your temper.

I really hope the Sunday Schools will be productive of great good to the nation. They spread wider and wider, and are likely to reach every part of the kingdom.

It seems to be a great happiness, not a misfortune, that those turbulent men have taken themselves away. Jo. Hampson, jun., is going to the University. He may be an useful clergyman.

I hope, if we live, you will not fail to be present at the Conference in London. Do not you stay at home too much Wishing you both to be more and more happy and useful, I am, dear sir,

Ever yours.

To the Methodist Conference [13]

CHESTER, April 7, 1785.

MY DEAR BRETHREN, - Some of our traveling preachers have expressed a fear that after my decease you would exclude them either from preaching in connection with you or from some other privileges which they now enjoy. I know no other way to prevent any such inconvenience than to leave these my last words with you.

I beseech you by the mercies of God that you never avail yourselves of the Deed of Declaration to assume any superiority over your brethren, but let all things go on among those itinerants who choose to remain together exactly in the same manner as when I was with you so far as circumstances will permit.

'In particular, I beseech you, if you ever loved me and if you now love God and your brethren, to have no respect of persons in stationing the preachers, in choosing children for Kingswood School, in disposing of the Yearly Contribution and the Preachers' Fund or any other public money. But do all things with a single eye, as I have done from the beginning. Go on thus, doing all things without prejudice or partiality, and God will be with you even to the end.'

To Joseph Taylor

LIVBRPOOL, April 7, 1785.

DEAR JOSEPH, - I do not see that I can in conscience employ Brother Thomas [Taylor was the Assistant at Gloucester, with Barnabas Thomas as his colleague. Thomas went to Oxfordshire next Conference. See letter of March 25.] as a traveling preacher. Do not you know what I have often said I would not employ an apostle as such if he could not preach in the morning. And this he cannot do. Neither is he able, if he was willing, regularly to keep a circuit. Be faithful to God and the people, and your own soul! And keep an active, zealous man, Mr. McGeary, [See letters of Feb. 25, 1785 (heading to John Stretton), and Feb. 20, 1787.] while you have him. Else there is want of a preacher in the Canterbury Circuit. I thank you for the account of Brother Tregellas ['Some Account of the Death of Mr. John Tregellas, of St. Agnes, in Cornwall,' who died on April 28, 1784, at the age of twenty-one, appeared in the Arminian Magazine, 1786, pp. 149-50, signed 'Joseph Taylor, Gretton, April 2, 1785.']; and am, dear Joseph,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Roger Crane [14]

CONWAY, April 9, 1785.

DEAR ROGER,-What you observe is true. The new places ought not to be neglected. Therefore it is not expedient to remove William Bramwell yet. So I have sent to Derbyshire, and hope Nathaniel Ward will speedily remove to Chester to assist Mr. Wright. Meantime take care that you be not weary of well-doing. In due time you shall reap if you faint not. - I am, dear Roger,

Your affectionate brother.

To George Gibbon [15]

HOLYHEAD, April 9, 1785.

DEAR GEORGE, - What you said was exactly right, the work of God is undoubtedly instantaneous with regard to sanctification as well as justification, and it is no objection at all that the work is gradual also. Whatever others do, it is our duty strongly and explicitly to exhort the believers to go on to perfection, and encourage them to expect perfect love by simple faith, and consequently to expect it now. This is the preaching which God always has blessed, and which He always will bless to those that are upright of heart.

With God's leave we shall set sail to-night. [For Dublin. See next letter.] - I am, dear George,

Your affectionate brother.

To Mr. Gibbon, At the Preaching-house, Sheffield.

To his Brother Charles

DUBLIN, April 11, 1785.

DEAR BROTHER, - I just write a line to let you know that we came to Holyhead on Saturday afternoon, and went on board about ten at night; but we had a dead calm till between ten and eleven in the morning, at which time I began the public service. After sermon I prayed that God would give us a moderate wind, with a safe, easy, and speedy passage. While I was speaking the wind sprung up, and carried us at an average five miles an hour; so that we sailed from Holy-well Bay to Dublin Bay in exactly twelve hours. [See Journal, vii. 66; and letter of Feb. 17.] The sea meantime was as smooth as a looking-glass; so that no creature in the ship was sick a moment. Does not God hear the prayer All is quiet here. Love to all. Adieu!

To Thomas Carlill [16]

CORK, May 6, 1785.

DEAR TOMMY, - I desire you and no other preacher out of the Gainsborough Circuit to attend the Conference. I will pay the two guineas to Robert Armstrong. You may take Brother Fish in the place of Samuel Botts. Simon Kilham must in no wise be removed from Epworth. Encourage James Christie to read, and his gifts will increase.

We cannot allow a baker to remain in our Society if he sells bread on the Lord's Day. But if he only bakes pies, as they call it, we do not exclude him; although we are convinced that to abstain even from this is the more excellent way. - I am, dear Tommy,

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Jasper Winscom [17]

CORK, May 9, 1785.

DEAR JASPER, - You are in the right: that ground would be too small. Either have a proper place or none at all.

If you have any magistrate that is resolved to do justice, he will soon make those rioters afraid to move a finger; and those that support them will soon be weary of the expense. The Justice will quickly make an end of your valorous women; for they may send women rioters to jail as well as men. The law makes no distinctions. But if you have no resolute magistrate you have another way. Let any man that was struck order a King's Bench writ against him that struck him, and arrest him immediately. And he may refuse an insufficient bail. This will soon make them weary of their bad work.

But you must take particular care not to make it up with the rioters till they have made good all the damage which has been done by any person whatever from the beginning and given sufficient security for their future good behavior. Unless you do that, you do nothing at all.' Prosecute them not on the Toleration Act, which allows only twenty pounds' damage, but on the Riot Act, which brings their wishes in question. - I am, dear Jasper,

Your affectionate brother.

To his Brother Charles [18]

CORK, May 12, 1785.

DEAR BROTHER,-Twice I have wrote to Dr. Coke concerning the Journal. I suppose one, if not two, of his letters have miscarried. I will not sentence him till he answers for himself.

All I can say, and all I will say, is, I do not intend ever to publish your picture in the Magazine.

At Dublin I was informed Mr. Barnard, the present Bishop's son, is dead. In the North I may learn more. [See letter of May 2, 1785, to his brother.]

I speak of myself, as of other men, with a single eye. I am glad you have been at Newgate. All we have heard in England of danger from Ireland is pure invention. We have been humbugged by the patriots. There is no more danger from Ireland than from the Isle of Man.

If Sally wants the sinews of war, give me an hint. John Atlay has not complained to me of poverty for above this month,

I am fully persuaded that the measure of peace which enables me to go on cheerfully in my work and to employ all my time and strength therein is not from Satan, nor from nature, but from God.

To save tenpence postage I will write a few lines to Patty in your letter. Peace be with you all!

Adieu.

To Zachariah Yewdall

WHITEHAVEN. May 26, 1785.

DEAR ZACHARY, - You should always write to me without reserve. I observe nothing much amiss in your behavior. Truth and love you may hold fast, and courtesy will increase insensibly.

Godfathers promise only that they will see that a child be taught, as soon as he is able to learn, what he ought to do in order to his soul's health. And this it is certain they may perform. You did not read that little tract [Serious Thoughts concerning Godfathers and Godmothers, 1752. See Works, x. 5o6-9; Green's Bibliography, No. 157.] with sufficient care; otherwise you could not but have seen this.

I commend you for being exceedingly wary with respect to marriage. [See letter of Nov. 11.] St. Paul's direction is full and clear: 'If thou mayest be free, use it rather'; 'Art thou loosed from a wife' 'Seek not a wife.' Two of our small tracts you should read with much prayer: Thoughts on a Single Life and A Word to Whom it may Concern.

You need not be backward to write when you have opportunity. There is no fear of my thinking your letters troublesome. - I am,

Your affectionate brother.

Mr. Zach. Yewdart, At Mr. Colley's,

In Cardiff, South Wales.

To his Brother Charles

KILLRMAN, NEAR ARMAGE, June 2, 1785.

DEAR BROTHER, - So the good man will know pain no more! [The Vicar of Shoreham died on May 9. Charles Wesley buried him on the Sunday and preached twice.] But I suppose he died without disclosing that his son Vincent charged him not to reveal till he came to die! If it had been of any consequence to the cause of God, he could not have died without disclosing it.

Pray talk with as well as inquire concerning the clergyman you mention. [Peard Dickinson, curate to Vincent Perronet, seemed likely to be his successor, but became Wesley's clerical helper at City Road in Aug. 1786. See letter of June 19.] Many times you see further into men than I do. I suppose you have before now received my Journal, [See letter of May 12.] as well as preceding letter. Probably the first ship that sails after the 6th of July will bring me to Holyhead. I hope to see Dr. Coke in London before the end of it.

About once a quarter I hear from Mr. and Mrs. Fletcher. I grudge his sitting still; but who can help it I love ease as well as he does; but I dare not take it while I believe there is another world. [Fletcher died on Aug. 14.]

The patriots here are nobody. [See letter of May 12.] They are quite scattered, and have no design, bad or good. All is still in Ireland; only the work of God flourishes, spreading and deepening on every side. Peace be with all your spirits!

Adieu!

To Alexander Knox [19]

COLERAINE, June 8, 1785.

DEAR ALLECK, - Having now deeply considered your case, I send you my matured thoughts; which I beg you and Mrs. Knox impartially to consider in the presence of God. But beware you do not fix your judgment before you hear the cause; otherwise I shall lose my labor, and you may lose your life, if not your soul.

You say: 'The reason why I do not go out is this, I am afraid of falling in the street; and I do not attend the church or the preaching-house for fear I should fall down there and disturb the congregation.'

This is the clear state of the case. The question is, then, Is this reason sufficient, or is it not

I am fully persuaded it is not For, (1) you are by no means sure that you shall fall down in the church or in the congregation. You have great reason to hope you shall not; although I should not wonder if your fits were now both more frequent and more severe than they are.

But (2) Does not common sense teach us e malls minimum Now, I insist upon it that your falling in the street or the congregation once every month is a less evil than the shutting yourself up: so that - were it pronouncedly a voice from heaven, 'Either shut thyself up, or endure this shame once a month, or even once a week; take thy choice' - it would be wisest to choose the latter, for it is incomparably the less evil of the two.

It is indisputably plain to every impartial person that, by thus cooping yourself up, you hurt your body; by want of air and exercise you weaken it continually. I wonder you have not fits every day. And you hurt your soul by neglecting the ordinances of God, which you have no authority to do unless you were sick in bed.

My dear Alleck, let there be no delay! Break through! at all hazards, break through! Go out this very day, and trust God! If your mother hinders you, she will kill you with kindness; and I am not sure that it will not cost her the life of another child, though God tries milder methods first. I say again, go out to-day, and every day. It will help both your body and your soul, as well as remove a great burthen from the mind of

Yours in tender affection.

To Francis Wrigley

LISBURN, June 11, 1785.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - I am glad you are so far recovered. Do as much as you [can] and no more.

You that are upon the spot are the best judges concerning William Ellis. I refer it wholly to you whether he should preach or no till I come into Cornwall myself.

You cannot suffer any one to preach either at St. Austell or elsewhere that is tainted with Calvinism or Antinomianism. 'Tis far easier to prevent the plague than to cure it. - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Wrigley, At Mr. Flamank's,

In St. Austell, Cornwall.

To his Brother Charles

DUBLIN, June 19, 1785.

DEAR BROTHER,-I came hither (as I proposed when I set out) yesterday. This week I am to meet the classes. Next week we have our little Conference. The week following I hope to cross the Channel. The work of God, almost in every part of the kingdom, is in a prosperous state. Here is a set of excellent young preachers. Nine in ten of them are much devoted to God. I think, number for number, they exceed their fellow laborers in England. These in Dublin particularly are burning and shining lights. [James Rogers and Andrew Blair. See letters of Feb. 1 and June 26 (to Elizabeth Ritchie).]

I am glad you have paid them one more visit at Shoreham. What the poor people will do now I know not; but the Great Shepherd knows, and will order all things well. But what becomes of Betsy Briggs [Miss Briggs stayed at Shoreham for a time, where she was very useful. She then moved to Hoxton Square, and married Peard Dickinson on April 30, 1788. See letter of Sept. 24, 1786; also letters of March 1771, and June 2, 1785.] Would not her shortest way be to marry him But I doubt he hangs back.

The letter from Rome is curious enough. Fine words! And you know the Italians are famous for sincerity.

I should be sorry indeed if Sammy Tooth [See letter of Sept. 27, 1778.] were a sufferer; but surely he knows his own business. Many here know and love you well.

My love to all. Adieu!

To Zachariah Yewdull [20]

NEAR DUBLIN, June 22, 1785.

DEAR ZACHARY, - Let him not be afraid; I will take care that not one word of that affair shall be mentioned at the Conference. Let him come up thither in the name of God, and it will be a blessing to him.

Let Brother Foster likewise come that he may have the advice of Dr. Whitehead. I shall have no objection, unless some particular objection arise, to your going to Sunderland. I think you will do well to bring Brother Adamson with you to the Conference. You will both be acceptable to, dear Zachary,

Your affectionate brother.

To his Brother Charles [21]

ATHLONE, June 23. 1785.

DEAR BROTHER, - Certainly you have heard from me; for I sent you one, and intended to send you two Journals; only George Whitfield [Afterwards his Book Steward.] made a blunder, and directed the second to Henry Moore.

Several months since, I wrote to Dr. Coke concerning the extract he had taken from your Journal. I will write to him again. But he must bring it, not send it by post. My letters to-day cost me eighteen shillings.

I promise you not to publish your picture in the Magazine before midsummer 1785. I think that is long enough to look forward.

Mr. Barnard is dead. [Son of the Bishop of Killaloe.] I know nothing of Miss Freeman. Ireland is full as quiet as England; and our Societies were never so much alive as they are now. I cannot believe that history.

If Sally is ill, why does she not go into the country Peace be with all your spirits!

Adieu!

To Freeborn Garrettson [22]

DUBLIN, June 26, 1785.

MY DEAR BROTHER, - Dr. Coke gives some account of you in one of his Journals; so that, although I have not seen you, I am not a stranger to your character. By all means send me, when you have opportunity, a more particular account of your experiences and travels. It is, though, not improbable that God may find out a way for you to visit England; and it might be a means of your receiving more strength as well as more light. It is a very desirable thing that the children of God should communicate their experience to each other; and it is generally most profitable when they can do it face to face. Till Providence opens a way for you to see Europe do all you can for a good Master in America.

I am glad Brother Cromwell and you have undertaken that labor of love, the visiting Nova Scotia, and doubt not but you act in full concert with the little handful who were almost alone till you came. It will be the wisest way to make all those that desire to join together, thoroughly acquainted with the whole Methodist plan, and to accustom them from the very beginning to the accurate observance of all our rules. Let none of them rest in being half Christian. Whatever they do, let them do it with their might; and it will be best, as soon as any of them find peace with God, to exhort them to go on to perfection. The more strongly and vigilantly you press all believers to aspire after full sanctification as attainable now by simple faith the more the whole work of God will prosper.

I do not expect any great matters from the Bishop. I doubt his eye is not single; and if it be not, he will do little good either to you or anyone else. It may be a comfort to you that you have no need of him. You want nothing what he can give.

It is a noble proposal of Mr. Marchington's; but I doubt it will not take place. You do not know the state of the English Methodists. They do not roll in money, like many of the American Methodists. It is with the utmost difficulty that we can raise five or six hundred pounds a year to supply our own contingent expenses. So that it is utterly impracticable to raise five hundred pounds among them to build houses in America. It is true they might do much; but it is a sad observation that they that have most money have usually least grace.

The peace of God be with all your spirits! - I am

Your affectionate friend and brother.

To Mr. Garrettson, At Mr. Philip Marchington,

Shelburne, Nova Scotia.

To Elizabeth Ritchie

DUBLIN, June 26, 1785.

MY DEAR BETSY, - Our Lord has, indeed, poured out abundance of blessings almost in every part of this kingdom. I have now gone through every province and visited all the chief Societies, and I have found far the greater part of them increasing both in number and strength. Many are convinced of sin, many justified, and not a few perfected in love. One means of which is that several of our young preachers, [See letter of June 19.] of whom we made little account appear to be (contrary to all expectation) men full of faith and of the Holy Ghost; and they are pushing out to the right hand and the left, and wherever they go God prospers their labor. I know not whether Thomas Walsh will not revive in two if not three of them.

Many years ago I was saying, 'I cannot imagine how Mr. Whitefield can keep his soul alive, as he is not now going through honor and dishonor, evil report and good report, having nothing but honor and good report attending him wherever he goes.' It is now my own case: I am just in the condition now that he was then in. I am become, I know not how, an honorable man. The scandal of the Cross is ceased; and all the kingdom, rich and poor, Papists and Protestants, behave with courtesy - nay, and seeming goodwill! It seems as if I had wellnigh finished my course, and our Lord was giving me an honorable discharge.

My dear Betsy, have you not something to do in Dublin If so, the sooner you visit our friends the better. Peace be with your spirit! Adieu!