To Ann Bolton
Date: SUNDERLAND, May 18, 1779.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1779)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR NANCY, - You make me smile. You address me as if you had never seen me. Why so Have I told you that I did not love you as well as ever I did in my life And yet, to say the truth, I was scarce ever more tried about you than I was lately. You was under my own roof for many days. And yet I hardly got an hour's conversation with you. That cruel 'something or other' always interposed and defrauded me of your company. I am glad, however, that others enjoyed it. And your labor with them was not in vain. You was a messenger of good to many souls, who bless God for the consolation. If you suffer a little yourself in conveying help to others, so much the better; this will turn to your account. I can wish nothing better for you than that you may be 'patient in bearing ill and doing well.'

There is little danger of .imputing too much to the good providence of God. It is deeply concerned even in extracting good out of the infirmities, follies, yea and sins of men in general. But it is peculiarly concerned in everything great and small that pertains to the children of God. It disposes all things strongly and sweetly that befall them, perhaps through their own mistake, for their profit, that they may be the more largely partakers of His holiness. He superintends all you do and all you suffer. And it is an invariable rule; 'Whatever you do not choose yourself God chooses for you.' You did not choose the distress of your friend; therefore God chose it for you. And so He did every circumstance consequent upon it which was afflictive to you.

I will tell you, my Nancy, what afflicted me. It seemed to me that you had lost your affection for me, that you was grown cool and indifferent. And yet it may be this was only my own imagination. But I am jealous over you, because I have a tender regard for you, and have had ever since I knew you. This makes me exceeding watchful over you. How is your health at present Have you any particular complaint besides your headache Will not that be eased by cold bathing Write without any reserve to, my dear Nancy,

Yours invariably.

Any time [you write] direct to [London].