To Miss March
Date: CHARLEMONT, June 9, 1775.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1775)
Author: John Wesley
---
Very possibly, if I should live seven years longer, we should be acquainted with each other. I verily think your reserve wears off, though only by an hair's breadth at a time. Quicken your pace. What you do, do quickly. 'Scarce anything important enough to write upon'! Why, could you not say something about yourself And is there anything relating to your welfare which is not important to me Am not I concerned in everything which concerns you which either lessens or increases your happiness I want you to be as happy and (in order thereto) as holy as an angel, that you may do the will of God on earth as angels do in heaven.

I am less careful about your increase in knowledge any farther than it tends to love. There is a danger of your laying more stress on this than sound reason requires. Otherwise you would reap much profit from sermons, which do not improve your knowledge--which do not apply to the understanding so directly as to the heart. I feel more want of heat than light. I value light; but it is nothing compared to love. Aim at this, my dear friend, in all public exercises, and then you will seldom be disappointed. Then you will not stop on the threshold of perfection (I trust you do not now), but will press on to the mark, to the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, till you experimentally know all that love of God which passeth all (speculative) knowledge.

The lengthening of your life and the restoring your health are invaluable blessings. But do you ask how you shall improve them to the glory of the Giver And are you willing to know Then I will tell you how. Go and see the poor and sick in their own poor little hovels. Take up your cross, woman! Remember the faith! Jesus went before you, and will go with you. Put off the gentlewoman; you bear an higher character.

You are an heir of God and joint-heir with Christ ! Are you not going to meet Him in the air with ten thousand of His saints O be ready!