To Various Clergymen
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1764)
Author: John Wesley
---
[5] SCARBOROUGH, April 19, 1764.

REVEREND SIR,--Near two years and an half ago [Thomas Marriott dates it 'Lewisham, 16-19 Nov. 1761.'] I wrote the following letter. You will please to observe (1) that I propose no more therein than is the bounden duty of every Christian; (2) that you may comply with this proposal, whether any other does or not. I myself have endeavoured so to do for many years, though I have been almost alone therein, and although many, the more earnestly I talk of peace, the more zealously make themselves ready for battle.-- I am, reverend sir, Your affectionate brother.[The letter received by John Newton is in print, dated 'Bristol, Oct. 15, 1766'; and this is crossed out, and 'London, Dec. 10,' written in.]

DEAR SIR,--It has pleased God to give you both the will and the power to do many things for His glory; although you are often ashamed you have done so little, and wish you could do a thousand times more. This induces me to mention to you what has been upon my mind for many years, and what I am persuaded would be much for the glory of God if it could once be effected; and I am in great hopes it will be, if you heartily undertake it, trusting in Him alone.

Some years since, God began a great work in England; but the labourers were few. At first those few were of one heart; but it was not so long. First one fell off, then another and another, till no two of us were left together in the work besides my brother and me. This prevented much good, and occasioned much evil. It grieved our spirits and weakened our hands; it gave our common enemies huge occasion to blaspheme. It perplexed and puzzled many sincere Christians; it caused many to draw back to perdition; it grieved the Holy Spirit of God.

As labourers increased, disunion increased. Offences were multiplied; and, instead of coming nearer to, they stood farther and farther off from each other; till at length those who were not only brethren in Christ but fellow labourers in His gospel had no more connexion or fellowship with each other than Protestants have with Papists.

But ought this to be Ought not those who are united to one common Head and employed by Him in one common work to be united to each other I speak now of those labourers who are ministers of the Church of England. These are chiefly: Mr. Perronet, Romaine, Newton, Shirley; Mr. Downing, Jesse, Adam; Mr. Talbot, Riland, Stillingfleet, Fletcher; Mr. Johnson, Baddiley, Andrews, Jane; Mr. Hart, Symes, Brown, Rouquet; Mr. Sellon, [Cooper, Harmer, Gwen]; Mr. Venn, Richardson, Burnett, Furly; Mr. Conyers, Bentley, King; Mr. Berridge, Hicks, John Wesley, Charles Wesley, John Richardson, Benjamin Colley [The first edition includes Mr. Crook, Mr. Eastwood, and 'G. W.' Edward Perronet adds, 'Cooper Harmer, Gwen.' ]: not excluding any other clergyman who agrees in these essentials,-- I. Original Sin. II. Justification by Faith. III. Holiness of Heart and Life, provided their life be answerable to their doctrine.

'But what union would you desire among these' Not an union in opinions: they might agree or disagree touching absolute decrees on the one hand and perfection on the other. Not an union in expressions: these may still speak of the imputed righteousness and those of the merits of Christ. Not an union with regard to outward order: some may still remain quite regular, some quite irregular, and some partly regular and partly irregular. But, these things being as they are, as each is persuaded in his own mind, is it not a most desirable thing that we should

1. Remove hindrances out of the way not judge one another, not despise one another, not envy one another not be displeased at one another's gifts or success, even though greater than our own not wait for one another's halting, much less wish for it or rejoice therein

Never speak disrespectfully, slightly, coldly, or unkindly of each other never repeat each other's faults, mistakes, or infirmities, much less listen for and gather them up never say or do anything to hinder each other's usefulness either directly or indirectly

Is it not a most desirable thing that we should

2. Love as brethren think well of and honour one another wish all good, all grace, all gifts, all success, yea greater than our own, to each other expect God will answer our wish, rejoice in every appearance thereof, and praise Him for it readily believe good of each other, as readily as we once believed evil

Speak respectfully, honourably, kindly of each other defend each other's character speak all the good we can of each other recommend one another where we have influence each help the other on in his work, and enlarge his influence by all the honest means he can

This is the union which I have long sought after; and is it not the duty of every one of us so to do Would it not be far better for ourselves a means of promoting both our holiness and happiness Would it not remove much guilt from those who have been faulty in any of these instances and much pain from those who have kept themselves pure Would it not be far better for the people, who suffer severely from the clashings and contentions of their leaders, which seldom fail to occasion many unprofitable, yea hurtful, disputes among them Would it not be better even for the poor, blind world, robbing them of their sport, 'Oh they cannot agree among themselves' Would it not be better for the whole work of God, which would then deepen and widen on every side

'But it will never be; it is utterly impossible.' Certainly it is with men. Who imagines we can do this that it can be effected by any human power All nature is against it, every infirmity, every wrong temper and passion; love of honour and praise, of power, of pre-eminence; anger, resentment, pride; long-contracted habit, and prejudice lurking in ten thousand forms. The devil and all his angels are against it. For if this takes place, how shall his kingdom stand All the world, all that know not God, are against it, though they may seem to favour it for a season. Let us settle this in our hearts, that we may be utterly cut off from all dependence on our own strength or wisdom.

But surely 'with God all things are possible'; therefore 'all things are possible to him that believeth': and this union is proposed only to them that believe, that show their faith by their works.

When Mr. Conyers was objecting the impossibility of ever effecting such an union, I went upstairs, and after a little prayer opened Kempis on these words: Expecta Dominum: Viriliter age: Noli diffidere: Noli discedere; sed corpus et animam expone constanter pro gloria Dei. [Imitation, 111. xxxv. 3: 'Wait for the Lord. Quit thyself like a man. Yield not to distrust. Be unwilling to depart (desert); but constantly expose body and soul for the glory of God.'] -- I am, dear sir, Your affectionate servant.