To Certain Persons in Dublin
Date: WHITEFRIAR STRERT, DUBLIN, March 31, 1789.
Source: The Letters of John Wesley (1789)
Author: John Wesley
---
MY DEAR BRETHREN, -- I much approve of the manner and spirit wherein you write concerning these tender points. I explained myself upon them in some measure on Sunday; I will do it more fully now.

At present I have nothing to do with Dr. Coke; but I answer for myself. I do not separate from the Church, nor have any intention so to do. Neither do they that meet on Sunday noon separate from the Church any more than they did before; nay less, for they attend the church and sacrament oftener now than they did two years ago.

'But this occasions much strife.' True; but they make the strife who do not attend the service. Let them quietly either come or stay away, and there will be no strife at all.

'But those that attend say those that do not are fallen from grace.' No, they do not give them a bad word; but they surely will fall from grace if they do not let them alone that follow their own consciences.

But you 'fear this will make way for a total separation from the Church.' You have no ground for this fear. There can be no such separation while I live. Leave to God what may come after.

But, to speak plainly, do not you separate from the Church Yea, much more than those you blame Pray, how often have you been at church since Christmas twelve times in twelve weeks And how long have you been so fond of the Church Are you fond of it at all Do not you go oftener to a Dissenting meeting than either to St. Patrick's or your parish church My dear brethren, you and I have but a short time to stay together.

My race of glory's run, and race of shame;

And I shall shortly be with those that rest. [Milton, Samson Agonistes, ll. 597-8.]

Therefore, as one that loves you well and has loved you long, I advise you in the presence and in the fear of God, (1) Either quietly attend the Sunday service or quietly refrain from it; then there will be no strife at all. Now you make the noise of which you complain. (2) Make not this a pretense for being weary of well-doing. Do not for so poor a reason withdraw your subscription from the School or the preachers. What a miserable revenge would this be! Never let it be said that my friend Arthur Keene, that Mr. D'Olier or Boswell, was capable of this! From this hour let this idle strife be buried in eternal oblivion. Talk not of it any more. If it be possible, think not of it any more. Rather think, 'The Judge standeth at the door'; let us prepare to meet our God!